? 2-Glycoprotein I Is a Cofactor for t-PA–Mediated Plasminogen Activation Regulation of the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin by tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) is critical in the control of fibrin deposition. While several plasminogen activators have been described, soluble plasma cofactors that stimulate fibrinolysis have not been characterized. Here, we report that the abundant plasma glycoprotein, ?2-glycoprotein I (?2GPI), stimulates t-PA–dependent plasminogen activation in the fluid phase and within a fibrin gel. The region within ?2GPI responsible for stimulating t-PA activity is at least partially contained within ?2GPI domain V. ?2GPI bound t-PA with high affinity (Kd ~ 20 nM), stimulated t-PA amidolytic activity, and caused an overall 20-fold increase in the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of t-PA–mediated conversion of Glu-plasminogen to plasmin. Moreover, depletion of ?2GPI from plasma led to diminished rates of clot lysis, with restoration of normal lysis rates following ?2GPI repletion. Finally, stimulation of t-PA–mediated plasminogen activity by ?2GPI was inhibited by monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies, as well as by anti-?2GPI antibodies from patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). These findings suggest that ?2GPI may be an endogenous regulator of fibrinolysis. Impairment of ?2GPI-stimulated fibrinolysis by anti-?2GPI antibodies may contribute to the development of thrombosis in patients with APS.  Introduction ?2-glycoprotein I (?2GPI) belongs to the complement control (CCP) superfamily and circulates in plasma at a concentration of ~ 4?M ( 1 ). Like other CCP superfamily members, which contain one or more characteristic short consensus repeats (SCR)( 2 ), ?2GPI contains five SCRs. However, domain V of ?2GPI consists of an atypical SCR containing a lysine-rich sequence (CKNKEKKC) that imparts a positive charge to this domain and mediates the binding of ?2GPI to phospholipid ( 3 ). Plasmin cleavage between Lys317-Thr318 of ?2GPI domain 5 abolishes phospholipid binding ( 4 ). ?2GPI is an important antigen in the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), and anti-?2GPI antibodies are an independent risk factor for thrombosis and recurrent pregnancy loss ( 5 – 7 ). ?2GPI may regulate both procoagulant and anticoagulant activities ( 7 – 9 ). Thrombin generation is impaired in the plasma of ?2GPI-deficient mice ( 10 ). Impaired fibrinolysis may contribute to the development of thrombosis ( 11 ; 12 ). Plasmin plays a central role in lysis of fibrin thrombi, and the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin by tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) and urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA) is precisely regulated ( 13 ). t-PA binds fibrin with high affinity and may be of particular importance for lysis of fibrin thrombi in the vasculature ( 13 ). Several stimulators of fibrinolysis, including insoluble proteins, protein aggregates, microfilaments, fibrin fragments, or collagen IV may stimulate fibrinolysis, primarily by promoting formation of a ternary t-PA–fibrin–plasminogen complex ( 14 ; 15 ). Annexin A2 is an endothelial cell co-receptor for plasminogen and t-PA that accelerates t-PA–dependent plasminogen activation ( 16 ; 17 ), and the annexin A2/S100A10 heterotetramer may be even more potent in this regard ( 18 – 20 ). However, to date there have been no soluble plasma cofactors identified that promote t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. Several studies have examined interactions of ?2GPI with the fibrinolytic system. Lopez-Lira et al ( 21 ) and Yasuda et al ( 22 ) reported low affinity binding of Glu-plasminogen to intact, or plasmin-cleaved ?2GPI, respectively. However, interactions of ?2GPI with t-PA have not been described. Here, we report that ?2GPI binds t-PA with high affinity, and enhances t-PA activity and t-PA–dependent plasminogen activation. Depletion of ?2GPI from plasma impairs the lysis of plasma clots, and anti-?2GPI antibodies inhibit the ability of ?2GPI to stimulate fibrinolysis. Given the abundance of ?2GPI in plasma, these findings suggest that ?2GPI may be an endogenous regulator of fibrinolysis, and that impairment of fibrinolysis by anti-?2GPI antibodies may contribute to APS-associated thrombosis.  Materials and methods Purification of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI from human plasma ?2GPI was purified from human plasma using a modification of previously described methods ( 23 ). Briefly, polyethylene glycol (final concentration 15%) was added to plasma, and the precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 × G for 30 minutes. The precipitate was resuspended, and ?2GPI was isolated by sequential chromatography using heparin-Sepharose CL-6B (Sterogene Bioseparations Inc., Carlsbad, CA) and Source 15S (Amersham-Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). The purity of isolated ?2GPI was confirmed using 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Cloning, expression and purification of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI in mammalian cells Full length ?2GPI cDNA was cloned into pDNR-LIB (Sanying Biotechnology, Beijing, China). For expression of recombinant ?2GPI, the ?2GPI coding sequence was amplified using the primers 5? C ACC ATG GGA CGG ACC TGT CCC AAG 3? and 5?GCA TGG CTT TAC ATC GGA TGC ATC A 3? ( 24 ) and cloned into pcDNA3.1. ?2GPI-pcDNA3.1 was transfected into 293-T cells, and cell extracts prepared 48 hours after transfection were analyzed by immunoblotting using rabbit anti-human ?2GPI and anti-His (C-terminal) antibodies. The 6× His-tagged recombinant ?2GPI was purified using Ni-NTA superflow columns (Amersham-Pharmacia Biotech). Preparation of recombinant ?<sub>2</sub>GPI domain V The sequence encoding ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V) was amplified from ?2GPI-pDNR-LIB using the primers 5? CAC GGA TCC AAA GCA TCT TGT AAA GTA CC 3? and 5? CTG AAG CTT TTA GCA TGG CTT TAC ATC 3?, and the PCR product cloned into vector PQE30 (ZH Xie, Tsinghua University) using Bam HI and Hind III restriction sites (underlined). The domain V construct was transfected into competent E. coli M15 cells grown in 100 ?g/mL ampicillin and 25 ?g/mL kanamycin, and expression was induced by exposure of cells to 1 mM IPTG at 37°C for 4 hours. The 6× His-tagged ?2GPI-V was purified using Ni-NTA superflow, and the purity of the recombinant polypeptide was confirmed using 15% SDS-PAGE. A domain V peptide corresponding to amino acids Gly274-Cys288 (GQKVSFFCKNKEKKC) of ?2GPI was synthesized by Eurogentec (San Diego, CA). Monoclonal anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies The monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibody BD4 was raised against intact ?2GPI, using standard methods ( 25 ). This antibody had an affinity constant for ?2GPI of 2.04 × 107M?1. Murine IgG1 monoclonal antibody 1D2, also raised against intact ?2GPI, was obtained from ABCAM (Cambridge, UK). The epitopes for these antibodies have not been defined. Both antibodies are of the IgG1 subclass. The effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation The effect of ?2GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation was measured using a fluorogenic plasmin substrate (I-1390, H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC; Bachem Bioscience, King of Prussia, PA). Briefly, 10 nM t-PA was incubated with increasing concentrations of native or recombinant ?2GPI, ?2GPI-V, ?2GPI domain V peptide, or 0.5% BSA (as a control) at room temperature for 15 minutes. Fifty microliters of each reaction mixture was then transferred to 96-well microplates, to which 100 nM Glu-plasminogen (Enzyme Research Laboratories, South Bend IN) and 200 ?M H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC was added. After mixing, substrate hydrolysis was measured at regular intervals as relative fluorescence units (I360/465 nm). Initial rates of plasmin generation were determined by linear regression analysis of plots of I360/465 nm versus time2 using Prism 4.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) ( 17 ). Parallel studies were performed using an identical approach, but substituting urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA) for t-PA. The effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation in a fibrin gel Fibrin-agarose gels were prepared by mixing 4 mL of agarose (1%, 55° C), 4 mL fibrinogen (3 mg/mL), 320 ?L Glu-plasminogen (500 nM) and 320 ?L thrombin (1 U/ml) in 10 mL polypropylene tubes. The contents of each tube were added to 90 mm plates and allowed to gel. After incubation at 4 C for 1 hour, 10 ?l of reaction mixtures containing 10 nM t-PA alone or in the presence of ?2GPI, ?2GPI-V, ?2GPI domain V peptide or 0.5% BSA, were placed in individual wells prepared in the gels using glass pipettes. After 28 hours at 37 C, the area of lysis caused by each sample was measured. Effect of plasma ?<sub>2</sub>GPI depletion on clot lysis The fibrinolytic activity of control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma from three normal donors was compared. First, rabbit preimmune or anti-human ?2GPI IgG was conjugated to Affigel-10 (Bio-Rad) at a concentration of 5 mg IgG per ml of beads. The beads were placed in separate columns, and 2 ml of plasma was passed through each. ?2GPI was not detectable by immunoblotting of plasma passed through the anti-?2GPI column, and the first 1 ml flow-through fraction from this column was used for subsequent studies. The corresponding flow-through fraction from the column containing preimmune IgG was used as a control. The fibrinolytic activity of control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma was determined using a 96-well microplate clot lysis assay described by Nagashima et al ( 26 ). Briefly, 15 ?l of ?2GPI-depleted or control plasma was mixed with 3 ?l of 2 ?M thrombomodulin and 60 ?l of 0.04 M HEPES, pH 7.0, containing 0.15 M NaCl and 0.01% Tween-80. This mixture was added to another well containing 4 ?l of 75 U/ml thrombin, 2 ?l of 1 M CaCl2 and 4 ?l of 0.5 ?g/ml t-PA. The total volume was adjusted to 120 ?l with water. The absorbance of the clotted sample at 405 nm (A405) was monitored every 15 minutes for 180 minutes. Maximal absorbance occurred at 30 minutes, and the extent of lysis was defined as the difference between A405 at 30 minutes (T = 30), and 180 minutes (T = 180). To confirm that any difference in clot lysis between control and ?2GPI-depleted plasmas was actually due to ?2GPI depletion, a ?2GPI-depleted plasma sample was replenished with 100 nM or 200 nM (final concentrations) purified human ?2GPI. Clot lysis rates were then determined using the protocol described in the preceding paragraph. The effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA amidolytic activity t-PA activity was determined in the absence or presence of ?2GPI using a fluorogenic t-PA substrate (I-1195, Glutaryl-Gly-Arg-AMC; Bachem). Assays were performed in 96-well plates containing mixtures of t-PA (10 nM) and increasing concentrations of ?2GPI (0–5 ?M), or 0.5% BSA. Reaction mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes, at which point 200 ?M I-1195 was added and substrate hydrolysis measured at regular intervals (I360/465 nm). Initial rates of hydrolysis were calculated by linear regression of plots of I360/465 nm versus time2 (K) using Prism 4.0 ( 17 ). Binding of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI to t-PA Binding of ?2GPI to t-PA was initially analyzed using a microplate binding assay. High-binding ELISA plates (Costar, Cambridge, MA) were coated with 10 ?g/mL single chain t-PA by overnight incubation at 4° C. After washing, wells were incubated with 100 ?L of increasing concentrations of ?2GPI at 25° C for 4 hours. Bound ?2GPI was detected using rabbit anti-human ?2GPI (0.33 ?g/mL) followed by peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG and tetramethylbenzidine. Binding specificity was determined by assessing the ability of fluid phase t-PA to inhibit the binding of 40 nM ?2GPI. We also analyzed the binding of ?2GPI to t-PA in real time using an IAsys plus biosensor system (Affinity Sensors, Paramus, NJ). ?2GPI was immobilized on a carboxymethyl dextran biosensor using amine coupling, and the amount of ligand bound to the ?2GPI-coated surface was assessed following injection of t-PA(0–14 nM). Iasys FASTfit software was used to determine the association and dissociation rate constant (Kass and Kdiss). The binding of plasminogen to ?2GPI was assessed using an identical approach. Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit plasminogen activation IgG fractions were purified from 83 plasma samples (supplied by the Guangdong Family Planning Science and Technology Institute) using protein G agarose. These samples were from 40 healthy controls and 43 patients who met Sapporo criteria for definite APS ( 27 ). The 43 patients with APS were positive for either IgG/M anticardiolipin antibody (aCL) (32 patients), IgG/M anti-?2-glycoprotein 1 (?2GP1) antibody (24 patients), and/or or lupus anticoagulant (LA) (11 patients). Twenty-two samples contained anti-?2GPI but not anti-tPA antibodies, while 21 APS samples contained neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-tPA antibodies. We also assessed the effect of affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibodies, isolated from patient plasma as we have previously described ( 28 ), on the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation. The effect of anti-?2GPI antibodies on ?2GPI-dependent enhancement of plasminogen activation was determined by measuring plasmin amidolytic activity following incubation of plasminogen with t-PA and ?2GPI in the absence or presence of monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies, patient-derived anti-?2GPI+/anti-tPA? or anti-?2GPI?/anti-tPA? IgG fractions or affinity-purified anti-?2GPI IgG. Initial rates of plasmin generation were calculated by linear regression analysis of plots of I360/465 nm versus time2 using Prism® 4.0. Statistical analysis Stastical analyses were performed using the Student’s two-tailed T-test or the Mann-Whitney U test. A P value of < 0.05 was considered significant.  Purification of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI from human plasma ?2GPI was purified from human plasma using a modification of previously described methods ( 23 ). Briefly, polyethylene glycol (final concentration 15%) was added to plasma, and the precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 × G for 30 minutes. The precipitate was resuspended, and ?2GPI was isolated by sequential chromatography using heparin-Sepharose CL-6B (Sterogene Bioseparations Inc., Carlsbad, CA) and Source 15S (Amersham-Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). The purity of isolated ?2GPI was confirmed using 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).  Cloning, expression and purification of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI in mammalian cells Full length ?2GPI cDNA was cloned into pDNR-LIB (Sanying Biotechnology, Beijing, China). For expression of recombinant ?2GPI, the ?2GPI coding sequence was amplified using the primers 5? C ACC ATG GGA CGG ACC TGT CCC AAG 3? and 5?GCA TGG CTT TAC ATC GGA TGC ATC A 3? ( 24 ) and cloned into pcDNA3.1. ?2GPI-pcDNA3.1 was transfected into 293-T cells, and cell extracts prepared 48 hours after transfection were analyzed by immunoblotting using rabbit anti-human ?2GPI and anti-His (C-terminal) antibodies. The 6× His-tagged recombinant ?2GPI was purified using Ni-NTA superflow columns (Amersham-Pharmacia Biotech).  Preparation of recombinant ?<sub>2</sub>GPI domain V The sequence encoding ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V) was amplified from ?2GPI-pDNR-LIB using the primers 5? CAC GGA TCC AAA GCA TCT TGT AAA GTA CC 3? and 5? CTG AAG CTT TTA GCA TGG CTT TAC ATC 3?, and the PCR product cloned into vector PQE30 (ZH Xie, Tsinghua University) using Bam HI and Hind III restriction sites (underlined). The domain V construct was transfected into competent E. coli M15 cells grown in 100 ?g/mL ampicillin and 25 ?g/mL kanamycin, and expression was induced by exposure of cells to 1 mM IPTG at 37°C for 4 hours. The 6× His-tagged ?2GPI-V was purified using Ni-NTA superflow, and the purity of the recombinant polypeptide was confirmed using 15% SDS-PAGE. A domain V peptide corresponding to amino acids Gly274-Cys288 (GQKVSFFCKNKEKKC) of ?2GPI was synthesized by Eurogentec (San Diego, CA).  Monoclonal anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies The monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibody BD4 was raised against intact ?2GPI, using standard methods ( 25 ). This antibody had an affinity constant for ?2GPI of 2.04 × 107M?1. Murine IgG1 monoclonal antibody 1D2, also raised against intact ?2GPI, was obtained from ABCAM (Cambridge, UK). The epitopes for these antibodies have not been defined. Both antibodies are of the IgG1 subclass.  The effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation The effect of ?2GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation was measured using a fluorogenic plasmin substrate (I-1390, H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC; Bachem Bioscience, King of Prussia, PA). Briefly, 10 nM t-PA was incubated with increasing concentrations of native or recombinant ?2GPI, ?2GPI-V, ?2GPI domain V peptide, or 0.5% BSA (as a control) at room temperature for 15 minutes. Fifty microliters of each reaction mixture was then transferred to 96-well microplates, to which 100 nM Glu-plasminogen (Enzyme Research Laboratories, South Bend IN) and 200 ?M H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC was added. After mixing, substrate hydrolysis was measured at regular intervals as relative fluorescence units (I360/465 nm). Initial rates of plasmin generation were determined by linear regression analysis of plots of I360/465 nm versus time2 using Prism 4.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) ( 17 ). Parallel studies were performed using an identical approach, but substituting urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA) for t-PA.  The effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation in a fibrin gel Fibrin-agarose gels were prepared by mixing 4 mL of agarose (1%, 55° C), 4 mL fibrinogen (3 mg/mL), 320 ?L Glu-plasminogen (500 nM) and 320 ?L thrombin (1 U/ml) in 10 mL polypropylene tubes. The contents of each tube were added to 90 mm plates and allowed to gel. After incubation at 4 C for 1 hour, 10 ?l of reaction mixtures containing 10 nM t-PA alone or in the presence of ?2GPI, ?2GPI-V, ?2GPI domain V peptide or 0.5% BSA, were placed in individual wells prepared in the gels using glass pipettes. After 28 hours at 37 C, the area of lysis caused by each sample was measured.  Effect of plasma ?<sub>2</sub>GPI depletion on clot lysis The fibrinolytic activity of control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma from three normal donors was compared. First, rabbit preimmune or anti-human ?2GPI IgG was conjugated to Affigel-10 (Bio-Rad) at a concentration of 5 mg IgG per ml of beads. The beads were placed in separate columns, and 2 ml of plasma was passed through each. ?2GPI was not detectable by immunoblotting of plasma passed through the anti-?2GPI column, and the first 1 ml flow-through fraction from this column was used for subsequent studies. The corresponding flow-through fraction from the column containing preimmune IgG was used as a control. The fibrinolytic activity of control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma was determined using a 96-well microplate clot lysis assay described by Nagashima et al ( 26 ). Briefly, 15 ?l of ?2GPI-depleted or control plasma was mixed with 3 ?l of 2 ?M thrombomodulin and 60 ?l of 0.04 M HEPES, pH 7.0, containing 0.15 M NaCl and 0.01% Tween-80. This mixture was added to another well containing 4 ?l of 75 U/ml thrombin, 2 ?l of 1 M CaCl2 and 4 ?l of 0.5 ?g/ml t-PA. The total volume was adjusted to 120 ?l with water. The absorbance of the clotted sample at 405 nm (A405) was monitored every 15 minutes for 180 minutes. Maximal absorbance occurred at 30 minutes, and the extent of lysis was defined as the difference between A405 at 30 minutes (T = 30), and 180 minutes (T = 180). To confirm that any difference in clot lysis between control and ?2GPI-depleted plasmas was actually due to ?2GPI depletion, a ?2GPI-depleted plasma sample was replenished with 100 nM or 200 nM (final concentrations) purified human ?2GPI. Clot lysis rates were then determined using the protocol described in the preceding paragraph.  The effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA amidolytic activity t-PA activity was determined in the absence or presence of ?2GPI using a fluorogenic t-PA substrate (I-1195, Glutaryl-Gly-Arg-AMC; Bachem). Assays were performed in 96-well plates containing mixtures of t-PA (10 nM) and increasing concentrations of ?2GPI (0–5 ?M), or 0.5% BSA. Reaction mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes, at which point 200 ?M I-1195 was added and substrate hydrolysis measured at regular intervals (I360/465 nm). Initial rates of hydrolysis were calculated by linear regression of plots of I360/465 nm versus time2 (K) using Prism 4.0 ( 17 ).  Binding of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI to t-PA Binding of ?2GPI to t-PA was initially analyzed using a microplate binding assay. High-binding ELISA plates (Costar, Cambridge, MA) were coated with 10 ?g/mL single chain t-PA by overnight incubation at 4° C. After washing, wells were incubated with 100 ?L of increasing concentrations of ?2GPI at 25° C for 4 hours. Bound ?2GPI was detected using rabbit anti-human ?2GPI (0.33 ?g/mL) followed by peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG and tetramethylbenzidine. Binding specificity was determined by assessing the ability of fluid phase t-PA to inhibit the binding of 40 nM ?2GPI. We also analyzed the binding of ?2GPI to t-PA in real time using an IAsys plus biosensor system (Affinity Sensors, Paramus, NJ). ?2GPI was immobilized on a carboxymethyl dextran biosensor using amine coupling, and the amount of ligand bound to the ?2GPI-coated surface was assessed following injection of t-PA(0–14 nM). Iasys FASTfit software was used to determine the association and dissociation rate constant (Kass and Kdiss). The binding of plasminogen to ?2GPI was assessed using an identical approach.  Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit plasminogen activation IgG fractions were purified from 83 plasma samples (supplied by the Guangdong Family Planning Science and Technology Institute) using protein G agarose. These samples were from 40 healthy controls and 43 patients who met Sapporo criteria for definite APS ( 27 ). The 43 patients with APS were positive for either IgG/M anticardiolipin antibody (aCL) (32 patients), IgG/M anti-?2-glycoprotein 1 (?2GP1) antibody (24 patients), and/or or lupus anticoagulant (LA) (11 patients). Twenty-two samples contained anti-?2GPI but not anti-tPA antibodies, while 21 APS samples contained neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-tPA antibodies. We also assessed the effect of affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibodies, isolated from patient plasma as we have previously described ( 28 ), on the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation. The effect of anti-?2GPI antibodies on ?2GPI-dependent enhancement of plasminogen activation was determined by measuring plasmin amidolytic activity following incubation of plasminogen with t-PA and ?2GPI in the absence or presence of monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies, patient-derived anti-?2GPI+/anti-tPA? or anti-?2GPI?/anti-tPA? IgG fractions or affinity-purified anti-?2GPI IgG. Initial rates of plasmin generation were calculated by linear regression analysis of plots of I360/465 nm versus time2 using Prism® 4.0.  Statistical analysis Stastical analyses were performed using the Student’s two-tailed T-test or the Mann-Whitney U test. A P value of < 0.05 was considered significant.  Results ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation Native ?2GPI (?2GPI-n), recombinant ?2GPI (?2GPI-r), and ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V) accelerated the initial rate of plasminogen activation by t-PA in a concentration-dependent manner, as measured by cleavage of the plasmin substrate H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC ( Figure 1A, B ). In contrast, the ?2GPI domain V peptide GQKVSFFCKNKEKKC did not significantly enhance plasminogen activation ( Figure 1A ). ?2GPI was similarly effective when a fixed concentration of t-PA (10 nM) was employed to activate increasing concentrations of plasminogen (0–200 nM). Analysis of this data using Lineweaver-Burke plots revealed that ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V conferred a 19.7-fold and 5.9-fold increase, respectively, in the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of t-PA–mediated glu-plasminogen activation ( Table 1 ). The observed increase in catalytic efficiency resulted from a decrease in the Km (9.8-fold) and enhancement of Vmax (2-fold). By comparison, Cesarman et al ( 17 ) reported that annexin A2 caused a 63-fold increase in the catalytic efficiency of t-PA-mediated Glu-plasminogen activation, reflecting a 9-fold decrease in the Km and a 5-fold increase in Vmax ( 17 ). Neither human albumin nor control human IgG affected t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. Parallel studies demonstrated that ?2GPI did not affect the ability of single-chain urokinase to activate plasminogen. ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates fibrinolysis in a fibrin gel ?2GPI caused a 2.6 and 3.1-fold increase in lysis of a fibrin gel at concentrations of 1 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively ( Figure 2 ).?2GPI-V (5 ?M) caused 2.6-fold stimulation of fibrinolysis, though the Gly274-Cys288 ?2GPI-V peptide had no effect. Control proteins, BSA and IgG, also had no activity. While the relative amount of fibrin digestion in this assay seems proportionally small compared to the extent of plasminogen activation in amidolytic assays, the kinetic parameters governing these assays are not comparable. Effect of plasma ?<sub>2</sub>GPI depletion on clot lysis Plasma that had been perfused over an anti-?2GPI column contained no immunologically-detectable ?2GPI, as determined by immunoblotting (not shown). Plasma from the same donors was perfused over a column containing preimmune (control) rabbit IgG, to control for dilution. Both plasma samples were clotted and their clot lysis rates determined as described in Materials and Methods. Table 2 depicts the extent of clot lysis using control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma from three donors. Though the maximal A405 and extent of lysis varied, the decrease in absorbance between 30 and 180 minutes, reflecting clot lysis ( 26 ), was significantly diminished in the absence of ?2GPI (P = 0.0260 when comparing the means of triplicate points). Figure 3A depicts a representative experiment in which endogenous clot lysis rates in control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma is compared. Figure 3B demonstrates that the reconstitution of ?2GPI-depleted plasma with purified ?2GPI (100 and 200 nM final concentrations) led to complete restoration of lytic activity in the ?2GPI-depleted plasmas. ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA amidolytic activity ?2GPI enhanced the t-PA-dependent cleavage of I-1105, a t-PA specific substrate, in a concentration-dependent manner. A concentration of 0.3 ?M ?2GPI caused a 4-fold increase in the rate of substrate hydrolysis ( Figure 4A ). A stimulatory effect of ?2GPI (1 ?M) was also observed in the presence of increasing concentrations of t-PA (0–50 nM) ( Figure 4B ). ?<sub>2</sub>GPI binds to t-PA ?2GPI bound to t-PA–coated microplates in a concentration dependent manner (Figure A) that was competitively inhibited by fluid phase t-PA (IC50 ~ 310 nM) ( Figure 5B ). Binding was not inhibited by the ?2GPI domain V-derived peptide (Gly274-Cys288) previously reported to mediate the binding of?2GPI to anionic phospholipid (not shown), suggesting that different molecular interactions facilitate these binding events. Optical biosensor analysis confirmed a specific interaction between ?2GPI and t-PA ( Figure 5C ). Analysis of real time binding curves yielded a Kass as 1.13 ± 0.07 × 105 M?1S?1 and Kdiss as 6.19 ± 0.10 × 10?3 S?1. Accordingly, KD and KA were determined to be 2.0 × 10?8 M and 5.0 × 107 M?1, respectively. We observed only weak binding between Glu-plasminogen and intact ?2GPI (KD > 1 ?M) using the same optical biosensor system (not shown), consistent with the findings of Lopez-Lira et al ( 21 ). High concentrations of NaCl inhibited the binding between ?2GPI and t-PA, suggesting a strong ionic component to the binding interaction ( Figure 5D ). Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit the stimulatory effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation Two monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies (1D2 and BD4) inhibited t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation to a significantly greater extent than control murine IgG1 (P<0.0001, n=4) ( Figure 6A ). Purified IgG fractions from patients with APS also inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner ( Figure 6A, B ). To determine whether this effect was associated with anti-?2GPI antibodies or anti-t-PA antibodies ( 29 ), we used two approaches. First, we affinity-purified anti-?2GPI IgG from three patients, and tested the ability of the purified anti-?2GPI IgG to inhibit the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. As depicted in Figure 6C , the three affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibody preparations inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner, while a control human IgG preparation (IgG1) had not effect. We subsequently isolated whole IgG fractions from 22 patients with APS whose plasma contained IgG anti-?2GPI but not anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI+/t-PA?), and 21 patients whose plasma contained neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI?/t-PA?), and measured their ability to inhibit ?2GPI-mediated stimulation of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. At a concentration of 80 ?g/ml (533 nM), IgG fractions from ?2GPI+/t-PA? patients caused significantly more inhibition of plasminogen activation than those from anti-?2GPI?/anti-t-PA? patients or normal controls ( Figure 6D ).  Results ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation Native ?2GPI (?2GPI-n), recombinant ?2GPI (?2GPI-r), and ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V) accelerated the initial rate of plasminogen activation by t-PA in a concentration-dependent manner, as measured by cleavage of the plasmin substrate H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC ( Figure 1A, B ). In contrast, the ?2GPI domain V peptide GQKVSFFCKNKEKKC did not significantly enhance plasminogen activation ( Figure 1A ). ?2GPI was similarly effective when a fixed concentration of t-PA (10 nM) was employed to activate increasing concentrations of plasminogen (0–200 nM). Analysis of this data using Lineweaver-Burke plots revealed that ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V conferred a 19.7-fold and 5.9-fold increase, respectively, in the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of t-PA–mediated glu-plasminogen activation ( Table 1 ). The observed increase in catalytic efficiency resulted from a decrease in the Km (9.8-fold) and enhancement of Vmax (2-fold). By comparison, Cesarman et al ( 17 ) reported that annexin A2 caused a 63-fold increase in the catalytic efficiency of t-PA-mediated Glu-plasminogen activation, reflecting a 9-fold decrease in the Km and a 5-fold increase in Vmax ( 17 ). Neither human albumin nor control human IgG affected t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. Parallel studies demonstrated that ?2GPI did not affect the ability of single-chain urokinase to activate plasminogen. ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates fibrinolysis in a fibrin gel ?2GPI caused a 2.6 and 3.1-fold increase in lysis of a fibrin gel at concentrations of 1 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively ( Figure 2 ).?2GPI-V (5 ?M) caused 2.6-fold stimulation of fibrinolysis, though the Gly274-Cys288 ?2GPI-V peptide had no effect. Control proteins, BSA and IgG, also had no activity. While the relative amount of fibrin digestion in this assay seems proportionally small compared to the extent of plasminogen activation in amidolytic assays, the kinetic parameters governing these assays are not comparable. Effect of plasma ?<sub>2</sub>GPI depletion on clot lysis Plasma that had been perfused over an anti-?2GPI column contained no immunologically-detectable ?2GPI, as determined by immunoblotting (not shown). Plasma from the same donors was perfused over a column containing preimmune (control) rabbit IgG, to control for dilution. Both plasma samples were clotted and their clot lysis rates determined as described in Materials and Methods. Table 2 depicts the extent of clot lysis using control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma from three donors. Though the maximal A405 and extent of lysis varied, the decrease in absorbance between 30 and 180 minutes, reflecting clot lysis ( 26 ), was significantly diminished in the absence of ?2GPI (P = 0.0260 when comparing the means of triplicate points). Figure 3A depicts a representative experiment in which endogenous clot lysis rates in control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma is compared. Figure 3B demonstrates that the reconstitution of ?2GPI-depleted plasma with purified ?2GPI (100 and 200 nM final concentrations) led to complete restoration of lytic activity in the ?2GPI-depleted plasmas. ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA amidolytic activity ?2GPI enhanced the t-PA-dependent cleavage of I-1105, a t-PA specific substrate, in a concentration-dependent manner. A concentration of 0.3 ?M ?2GPI caused a 4-fold increase in the rate of substrate hydrolysis ( Figure 4A ). A stimulatory effect of ?2GPI (1 ?M) was also observed in the presence of increasing concentrations of t-PA (0–50 nM) ( Figure 4B ). ?<sub>2</sub>GPI binds to t-PA ?2GPI bound to t-PA–coated microplates in a concentration dependent manner (Figure A) that was competitively inhibited by fluid phase t-PA (IC50 ~ 310 nM) ( Figure 5B ). Binding was not inhibited by the ?2GPI domain V-derived peptide (Gly274-Cys288) previously reported to mediate the binding of?2GPI to anionic phospholipid (not shown), suggesting that different molecular interactions facilitate these binding events. Optical biosensor analysis confirmed a specific interaction between ?2GPI and t-PA ( Figure 5C ). Analysis of real time binding curves yielded a Kass as 1.13 ± 0.07 × 105 M?1S?1 and Kdiss as 6.19 ± 0.10 × 10?3 S?1. Accordingly, KD and KA were determined to be 2.0 × 10?8 M and 5.0 × 107 M?1, respectively. We observed only weak binding between Glu-plasminogen and intact ?2GPI (KD > 1 ?M) using the same optical biosensor system (not shown), consistent with the findings of Lopez-Lira et al ( 21 ). High concentrations of NaCl inhibited the binding between ?2GPI and t-PA, suggesting a strong ionic component to the binding interaction ( Figure 5D ). Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit the stimulatory effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation Two monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies (1D2 and BD4) inhibited t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation to a significantly greater extent than control murine IgG1 (P<0.0001, n=4) ( Figure 6A ). Purified IgG fractions from patients with APS also inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner ( Figure 6A, B ). To determine whether this effect was associated with anti-?2GPI antibodies or anti-t-PA antibodies ( 29 ), we used two approaches. First, we affinity-purified anti-?2GPI IgG from three patients, and tested the ability of the purified anti-?2GPI IgG to inhibit the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. As depicted in Figure 6C , the three affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibody preparations inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner, while a control human IgG preparation (IgG1) had not effect. We subsequently isolated whole IgG fractions from 22 patients with APS whose plasma contained IgG anti-?2GPI but not anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI+/t-PA?), and 21 patients whose plasma contained neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI?/t-PA?), and measured their ability to inhibit ?2GPI-mediated stimulation of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. At a concentration of 80 ?g/ml (533 nM), IgG fractions from ?2GPI+/t-PA? patients caused significantly more inhibition of plasminogen activation than those from anti-?2GPI?/anti-t-PA? patients or normal controls ( Figure 6D ).  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation Native ?2GPI (?2GPI-n), recombinant ?2GPI (?2GPI-r), and ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V) accelerated the initial rate of plasminogen activation by t-PA in a concentration-dependent manner, as measured by cleavage of the plasmin substrate H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC ( Figure 1A, B ). In contrast, the ?2GPI domain V peptide GQKVSFFCKNKEKKC did not significantly enhance plasminogen activation ( Figure 1A ). ?2GPI was similarly effective when a fixed concentration of t-PA (10 nM) was employed to activate increasing concentrations of plasminogen (0–200 nM). Analysis of this data using Lineweaver-Burke plots revealed that ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V conferred a 19.7-fold and 5.9-fold increase, respectively, in the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of t-PA–mediated glu-plasminogen activation ( Table 1 ). The observed increase in catalytic efficiency resulted from a decrease in the Km (9.8-fold) and enhancement of Vmax (2-fold). By comparison, Cesarman et al ( 17 ) reported that annexin A2 caused a 63-fold increase in the catalytic efficiency of t-PA-mediated Glu-plasminogen activation, reflecting a 9-fold decrease in the Km and a 5-fold increase in Vmax ( 17 ). Neither human albumin nor control human IgG affected t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. Parallel studies demonstrated that ?2GPI did not affect the ability of single-chain urokinase to activate plasminogen.  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation Native ?2GPI (?2GPI-n), recombinant ?2GPI (?2GPI-r), and ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V) accelerated the initial rate of plasminogen activation by t-PA in a concentration-dependent manner, as measured by cleavage of the plasmin substrate H-D-Val-Leu-Lys-AMC ( Figure 1A, B ). In contrast, the ?2GPI domain V peptide GQKVSFFCKNKEKKC did not significantly enhance plasminogen activation ( Figure 1A ). ?2GPI was similarly effective when a fixed concentration of t-PA (10 nM) was employed to activate increasing concentrations of plasminogen (0–200 nM). Analysis of this data using Lineweaver-Burke plots revealed that ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V conferred a 19.7-fold and 5.9-fold increase, respectively, in the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of t-PA–mediated glu-plasminogen activation ( Table 1 ). The observed increase in catalytic efficiency resulted from a decrease in the Km (9.8-fold) and enhancement of Vmax (2-fold). By comparison, Cesarman et al ( 17 ) reported that annexin A2 caused a 63-fold increase in the catalytic efficiency of t-PA-mediated Glu-plasminogen activation, reflecting a 9-fold decrease in the Km and a 5-fold increase in Vmax ( 17 ). Neither human albumin nor control human IgG affected t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. Parallel studies demonstrated that ?2GPI did not affect the ability of single-chain urokinase to activate plasminogen.  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates fibrinolysis in a fibrin gel ?2GPI caused a 2.6 and 3.1-fold increase in lysis of a fibrin gel at concentrations of 1 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively ( Figure 2 ).?2GPI-V (5 ?M) caused 2.6-fold stimulation of fibrinolysis, though the Gly274-Cys288 ?2GPI-V peptide had no effect. Control proteins, BSA and IgG, also had no activity. While the relative amount of fibrin digestion in this assay seems proportionally small compared to the extent of plasminogen activation in amidolytic assays, the kinetic parameters governing these assays are not comparable.  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates fibrinolysis in a fibrin gel ?2GPI caused a 2.6 and 3.1-fold increase in lysis of a fibrin gel at concentrations of 1 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively ( Figure 2 ).?2GPI-V (5 ?M) caused 2.6-fold stimulation of fibrinolysis, though the Gly274-Cys288 ?2GPI-V peptide had no effect. Control proteins, BSA and IgG, also had no activity. While the relative amount of fibrin digestion in this assay seems proportionally small compared to the extent of plasminogen activation in amidolytic assays, the kinetic parameters governing these assays are not comparable.  Effect of plasma ?<sub>2</sub>GPI depletion on clot lysis Plasma that had been perfused over an anti-?2GPI column contained no immunologically-detectable ?2GPI, as determined by immunoblotting (not shown). Plasma from the same donors was perfused over a column containing preimmune (control) rabbit IgG, to control for dilution. Both plasma samples were clotted and their clot lysis rates determined as described in Materials and Methods. Table 2 depicts the extent of clot lysis using control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma from three donors. Though the maximal A405 and extent of lysis varied, the decrease in absorbance between 30 and 180 minutes, reflecting clot lysis ( 26 ), was significantly diminished in the absence of ?2GPI (P = 0.0260 when comparing the means of triplicate points). Figure 3A depicts a representative experiment in which endogenous clot lysis rates in control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma is compared. Figure 3B demonstrates that the reconstitution of ?2GPI-depleted plasma with purified ?2GPI (100 and 200 nM final concentrations) led to complete restoration of lytic activity in the ?2GPI-depleted plasmas.  Effect of plasma ?<sub>2</sub>GPI depletion on clot lysis Plasma that had been perfused over an anti-?2GPI column contained no immunologically-detectable ?2GPI, as determined by immunoblotting (not shown). Plasma from the same donors was perfused over a column containing preimmune (control) rabbit IgG, to control for dilution. Both plasma samples were clotted and their clot lysis rates determined as described in Materials and Methods. Table 2 depicts the extent of clot lysis using control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma from three donors. Though the maximal A405 and extent of lysis varied, the decrease in absorbance between 30 and 180 minutes, reflecting clot lysis ( 26 ), was significantly diminished in the absence of ?2GPI (P = 0.0260 when comparing the means of triplicate points). Figure 3A depicts a representative experiment in which endogenous clot lysis rates in control and ?2GPI-depleted plasma is compared. Figure 3B demonstrates that the reconstitution of ?2GPI-depleted plasma with purified ?2GPI (100 and 200 nM final concentrations) led to complete restoration of lytic activity in the ?2GPI-depleted plasmas.  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA amidolytic activity ?2GPI enhanced the t-PA-dependent cleavage of I-1105, a t-PA specific substrate, in a concentration-dependent manner. A concentration of 0.3 ?M ?2GPI caused a 4-fold increase in the rate of substrate hydrolysis ( Figure 4A ). A stimulatory effect of ?2GPI (1 ?M) was also observed in the presence of increasing concentrations of t-PA (0–50 nM) ( Figure 4B ).  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA amidolytic activity ?2GPI enhanced the t-PA-dependent cleavage of I-1105, a t-PA specific substrate, in a concentration-dependent manner. A concentration of 0.3 ?M ?2GPI caused a 4-fold increase in the rate of substrate hydrolysis ( Figure 4A ). A stimulatory effect of ?2GPI (1 ?M) was also observed in the presence of increasing concentrations of t-PA (0–50 nM) ( Figure 4B ).  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI binds to t-PA ?2GPI bound to t-PA–coated microplates in a concentration dependent manner (Figure A) that was competitively inhibited by fluid phase t-PA (IC50 ~ 310 nM) ( Figure 5B ). Binding was not inhibited by the ?2GPI domain V-derived peptide (Gly274-Cys288) previously reported to mediate the binding of?2GPI to anionic phospholipid (not shown), suggesting that different molecular interactions facilitate these binding events. Optical biosensor analysis confirmed a specific interaction between ?2GPI and t-PA ( Figure 5C ). Analysis of real time binding curves yielded a Kass as 1.13 ± 0.07 × 105 M?1S?1 and Kdiss as 6.19 ± 0.10 × 10?3 S?1. Accordingly, KD and KA were determined to be 2.0 × 10?8 M and 5.0 × 107 M?1, respectively. We observed only weak binding between Glu-plasminogen and intact ?2GPI (KD > 1 ?M) using the same optical biosensor system (not shown), consistent with the findings of Lopez-Lira et al ( 21 ). High concentrations of NaCl inhibited the binding between ?2GPI and t-PA, suggesting a strong ionic component to the binding interaction ( Figure 5D ).  ?<sub>2</sub>GPI binds to t-PA ?2GPI bound to t-PA–coated microplates in a concentration dependent manner (Figure A) that was competitively inhibited by fluid phase t-PA (IC50 ~ 310 nM) ( Figure 5B ). Binding was not inhibited by the ?2GPI domain V-derived peptide (Gly274-Cys288) previously reported to mediate the binding of?2GPI to anionic phospholipid (not shown), suggesting that different molecular interactions facilitate these binding events. Optical biosensor analysis confirmed a specific interaction between ?2GPI and t-PA ( Figure 5C ). Analysis of real time binding curves yielded a Kass as 1.13 ± 0.07 × 105 M?1S?1 and Kdiss as 6.19 ± 0.10 × 10?3 S?1. Accordingly, KD and KA were determined to be 2.0 × 10?8 M and 5.0 × 107 M?1, respectively. We observed only weak binding between Glu-plasminogen and intact ?2GPI (KD > 1 ?M) using the same optical biosensor system (not shown), consistent with the findings of Lopez-Lira et al ( 21 ). High concentrations of NaCl inhibited the binding between ?2GPI and t-PA, suggesting a strong ionic component to the binding interaction ( Figure 5D ).  Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit the stimulatory effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation Two monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies (1D2 and BD4) inhibited t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation to a significantly greater extent than control murine IgG1 (P<0.0001, n=4) ( Figure 6A ). Purified IgG fractions from patients with APS also inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner ( Figure 6A, B ). To determine whether this effect was associated with anti-?2GPI antibodies or anti-t-PA antibodies ( 29 ), we used two approaches. First, we affinity-purified anti-?2GPI IgG from three patients, and tested the ability of the purified anti-?2GPI IgG to inhibit the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. As depicted in Figure 6C , the three affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibody preparations inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner, while a control human IgG preparation (IgG1) had not effect. We subsequently isolated whole IgG fractions from 22 patients with APS whose plasma contained IgG anti-?2GPI but not anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI+/t-PA?), and 21 patients whose plasma contained neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI?/t-PA?), and measured their ability to inhibit ?2GPI-mediated stimulation of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. At a concentration of 80 ?g/ml (533 nM), IgG fractions from ?2GPI+/t-PA? patients caused significantly more inhibition of plasminogen activation than those from anti-?2GPI?/anti-t-PA? patients or normal controls ( Figure 6D ).  Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit the stimulatory effect of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation Two monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies (1D2 and BD4) inhibited t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation to a significantly greater extent than control murine IgG1 (P<0.0001, n=4) ( Figure 6A ). Purified IgG fractions from patients with APS also inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner ( Figure 6A, B ). To determine whether this effect was associated with anti-?2GPI antibodies or anti-t-PA antibodies ( 29 ), we used two approaches. First, we affinity-purified anti-?2GPI IgG from three patients, and tested the ability of the purified anti-?2GPI IgG to inhibit the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. As depicted in Figure 6C , the three affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibody preparations inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner, while a control human IgG preparation (IgG1) had not effect. We subsequently isolated whole IgG fractions from 22 patients with APS whose plasma contained IgG anti-?2GPI but not anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI+/t-PA?), and 21 patients whose plasma contained neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-t-PA antibodies (?2GPI?/t-PA?), and measured their ability to inhibit ?2GPI-mediated stimulation of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation. At a concentration of 80 ?g/ml (533 nM), IgG fractions from ?2GPI+/t-PA? patients caused significantly more inhibition of plasminogen activation than those from anti-?2GPI?/anti-t-PA? patients or normal controls ( Figure 6D ).  Discussion Our studies demonstrate that ?2GPI binds t-PA with high affinity and stimulates t-PA–dependent plasminogen activation. ?2GPI enhanced the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation by approximately 20-fold, as a result of a decrease in the Km and an increase in Vmax ( Table 1 ). The enhancement of plasmin generation and stimulation of fibrinolysis by ?2GPI was also demonstrated in a fibrin gel ( Figure 4 ). Moreover, the depletion of plasma ?2GPI led to delayed clot lysis, which was restored upon repletion of purified ?2GPI, suggesting that these findings are relevant in plasma. The activity of full-length recombinant ?2GPI expressed in 293T cells was similar to that of purified plasma ?2GPI ( Figure 1 ), suggesting that isolated plasma ?2GPI was not denatured, and thus that the activity of ?2GPI was not attributable to non-specific effects of denatured protein ( 30 ). The ability of recombinant ?2GPI domain V to stimulate t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation was approximately 50% that of intact ?2GPI, suggesting that?2GPI-V as well as other regions of ?2GPI contribute to this activity. However, the?2GPI Gly274-Cys288 peptide neither enhanced t-PA–dependent plasminogen activation nor significantly inhibited the binding of ?2GPI to immobilized t-PA. Thus, if this region is involved in the interaction of ?2GPI with t-PA, it likely requires conformational restraints imposed in the context of intact ?2GPI. Additional studies employing site-directed mutagenesis and ?2GPI mutants lacking specific ?2GPI domains may be of value in further defining the role of this region, if any, in the interactions of ?2GPI with t-PA. Annexin A2 and the annexin A2-S100A10 heterotetramer are endothelial cell receptors for plasminogen and t-PA ( 16 ; 31 ). Binding of t-PA and plasminogen to annexin A2 enhances plasmin generation by facilitating co-assembly of these reactants, and lowering the KM for their interaction ( 16 ; 17 ). Cesarman-Maus et al. have described anti-annexin A2 antibodies in patients with APS that inhibit the fibrinolytic activity of this complex ( 32 ). While our laboratory has demonstrated a high-affinity interaction between ?2GPI and annexin A2 ( 33 ), we have not yet directly assessed the effects of ?2GPI on the ability of annexin A2 to enhance t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation either in isolation or on cell surfaces. However, Lopez-Lira et al reported an increase in plasmin generation on the surface of a human microvascular endothelial cell line (HMEC-1) following the addition of ?2GPI ( 21 ), and we have observed that fluid-phase annexin A2 and?2GPI stimulate t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation in an additive manner (not shown). Additional studies will clearly be required to better characterize the effects of ?2GPI on cell surface plasminogen activator activity, and better define the roles of specific receptors in these effects. Such studies will require a full consideration of the complex nature of conformation-dependent interactions of ?2GPI with phospholipids and proteins, such as apoER2 ( 34 ), factor XI ( 35 ), annexin A2 ( 33 ) and Lp(a) ( 36 ). Lopez-Lira et al have reported that?2GPI binds glu-plasminogen and stimulates streptokinase-mediated plasminogen activation ( 21 ). Our preliminary studies also suggest low affinity binding (Kd > 1 ?M) between glu-plasminogen and ?2GPI, although the nature of the interactions between these two proteins requires further investigation. However, t-PA was not present in the system of Lopez-Lira, and thus our findings extend this work by demonstrating a direct interaction of ?2GPI with t-PA. Taken together, however, these results suggest that in the presence of fibrin, ?2GPI may potentially promote fibrinolysis through multiple pathways including 1) direct stimulation of t-PA amidolytic activity, 2) lowering of the KM for t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation, and 3) binding to fibrin and providing additional binding sites for plasminogen and t-PA at the fibrin surface ( 21 ). Yasuda et al have reported that nicked ?2GPI, which has been cleaved by plasmin between Lys317-Thr318 in domain 5, but not intact ?2GPI, binds with low affinity to glu-plasminogen (Kd = 0.37 ?M) ( 22 ). These investigators also observed that nicked ?2GPI suppressed plasmin generation in the presence of t-PA, plasminogen and fibrin. Taken together with our findings, these results suggest that intact ?2GPI may stimulate t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation and subsequently undergo cleavage by newly-formed plasmin. In turn, cleaved (“nicked”) ?2GPI, if generated in sufficient concentrations in plasma, might limit additional plasmin generation ( 22 ). The pathogenic effects of many “antiphospholipid” antibodies may be mediated through interactions with ?2GPI. Indeed, Takeuchi et al observed diminished fibrinolysis in euglobulin fractions from APS patients, attributing this effect to impaired factor XII activation and activity ( 11 ).?2GPI has also been reported to protect t-PA from inhibition by plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), an activity blocked by monoclonal antiphospholipid antibodies ( 12 ). In this report, we have demonstrated that monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies and affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibodies from APS patients inhibit the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner. Morevoer, IgG fractions from APS patients containing anti-?2GPI antibodies caused significantly more inhibition of t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation than those from control patients or APS patients without anti-?2GPI antibodies. This activity was not due to anti-t-PA antibodies ( 29 ), and thus appears attributable to anti-?2GPI antibodies, suggesting another potential mechanism by which heterogeneous APL may contribute to the development of thromboembolic disease ( 7 ).  Discussion Our studies demonstrate that ?2GPI binds t-PA with high affinity and stimulates t-PA–dependent plasminogen activation. ?2GPI enhanced the catalytic efficiency (kcat/Km) of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation by approximately 20-fold, as a result of a decrease in the Km and an increase in Vmax ( Table 1 ). The enhancement of plasmin generation and stimulation of fibrinolysis by ?2GPI was also demonstrated in a fibrin gel ( Figure 4 ). Moreover, the depletion of plasma ?2GPI led to delayed clot lysis, which was restored upon repletion of purified ?2GPI, suggesting that these findings are relevant in plasma. The activity of full-length recombinant ?2GPI expressed in 293T cells was similar to that of purified plasma ?2GPI ( Figure 1 ), suggesting that isolated plasma ?2GPI was not denatured, and thus that the activity of ?2GPI was not attributable to non-specific effects of denatured protein ( 30 ). The ability of recombinant ?2GPI domain V to stimulate t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation was approximately 50% that of intact ?2GPI, suggesting that?2GPI-V as well as other regions of ?2GPI contribute to this activity. However, the?2GPI Gly274-Cys288 peptide neither enhanced t-PA–dependent plasminogen activation nor significantly inhibited the binding of ?2GPI to immobilized t-PA. Thus, if this region is involved in the interaction of ?2GPI with t-PA, it likely requires conformational restraints imposed in the context of intact ?2GPI. Additional studies employing site-directed mutagenesis and ?2GPI mutants lacking specific ?2GPI domains may be of value in further defining the role of this region, if any, in the interactions of ?2GPI with t-PA. Annexin A2 and the annexin A2-S100A10 heterotetramer are endothelial cell receptors for plasminogen and t-PA ( 16 ; 31 ). Binding of t-PA and plasminogen to annexin A2 enhances plasmin generation by facilitating co-assembly of these reactants, and lowering the KM for their interaction ( 16 ; 17 ). Cesarman-Maus et al. have described anti-annexin A2 antibodies in patients with APS that inhibit the fibrinolytic activity of this complex ( 32 ). While our laboratory has demonstrated a high-affinity interaction between ?2GPI and annexin A2 ( 33 ), we have not yet directly assessed the effects of ?2GPI on the ability of annexin A2 to enhance t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation either in isolation or on cell surfaces. However, Lopez-Lira et al reported an increase in plasmin generation on the surface of a human microvascular endothelial cell line (HMEC-1) following the addition of ?2GPI ( 21 ), and we have observed that fluid-phase annexin A2 and?2GPI stimulate t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation in an additive manner (not shown). Additional studies will clearly be required to better characterize the effects of ?2GPI on cell surface plasminogen activator activity, and better define the roles of specific receptors in these effects. Such studies will require a full consideration of the complex nature of conformation-dependent interactions of ?2GPI with phospholipids and proteins, such as apoER2 ( 34 ), factor XI ( 35 ), annexin A2 ( 33 ) and Lp(a) ( 36 ). Lopez-Lira et al have reported that?2GPI binds glu-plasminogen and stimulates streptokinase-mediated plasminogen activation ( 21 ). Our preliminary studies also suggest low affinity binding (Kd > 1 ?M) between glu-plasminogen and ?2GPI, although the nature of the interactions between these two proteins requires further investigation. However, t-PA was not present in the system of Lopez-Lira, and thus our findings extend this work by demonstrating a direct interaction of ?2GPI with t-PA. Taken together, however, these results suggest that in the presence of fibrin, ?2GPI may potentially promote fibrinolysis through multiple pathways including 1) direct stimulation of t-PA amidolytic activity, 2) lowering of the KM for t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation, and 3) binding to fibrin and providing additional binding sites for plasminogen and t-PA at the fibrin surface ( 21 ). Yasuda et al have reported that nicked ?2GPI, which has been cleaved by plasmin between Lys317-Thr318 in domain 5, but not intact ?2GPI, binds with low affinity to glu-plasminogen (Kd = 0.37 ?M) ( 22 ). These investigators also observed that nicked ?2GPI suppressed plasmin generation in the presence of t-PA, plasminogen and fibrin. Taken together with our findings, these results suggest that intact ?2GPI may stimulate t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation and subsequently undergo cleavage by newly-formed plasmin. In turn, cleaved (“nicked”) ?2GPI, if generated in sufficient concentrations in plasma, might limit additional plasmin generation ( 22 ). The pathogenic effects of many “antiphospholipid” antibodies may be mediated through interactions with ?2GPI. Indeed, Takeuchi et al observed diminished fibrinolysis in euglobulin fractions from APS patients, attributing this effect to impaired factor XII activation and activity ( 11 ).?2GPI has also been reported to protect t-PA from inhibition by plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1), an activity blocked by monoclonal antiphospholipid antibodies ( 12 ). In this report, we have demonstrated that monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies and affinity-purified anti-?2GPI antibodies from APS patients inhibit the ability of ?2GPI to enhance t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner. Morevoer, IgG fractions from APS patients containing anti-?2GPI antibodies caused significantly more inhibition of t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation than those from control patients or APS patients without anti-?2GPI antibodies. This activity was not due to anti-t-PA antibodies ( 29 ), and thus appears attributable to anti-?2GPI antibodies, suggesting another potential mechanism by which heterogeneous APL may contribute to the development of thromboembolic disease ( 7 ).  Figures and Tables Figure 1 ?<sub>2</sub>GPI enhances t-PA–dependent Glu-plasminogen activation (A) t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation was measured either alone (in the presence of BSA) or in the presence of 1 ?M human ?2GPI (?2GPI-n), recombinant ?2GPI (?2GPI-r), ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V), or ?2GPI domain V peptide (?2GPI-p). Substrate hydrolysis was measured as relative fluorescence units (I360/465 nm) as a function of time2 (T)2 ( 37 ). (B) Initial rates of plasmin generation were determined as in (A) in the presence of increasing concentrations of ?2GPI-n, ?2GPI-r, ?2GPI-V, or BSA. Figure 2 Native ?<sub>2</sub>GPI and ?<sub>2</sub>GPI domain V enhance fibrinolysis in fibrin gels Lysis of fibrin gels was assessed as described in Materials and Methods. (A) A representative experiment: ( 1 ) 10 nM t-PA + BSA; ( 2 ) 10 nM t-PA + 5 ?M ?2GPI-V; ( 3 ) 10 nM t-PA + 5 ?M native ?2GPI. (B) t-PA activity (U/ml) (as determined from the size of lytic areas) in the absence or presence of increasing amounts of native ?2GPI-n, ?2GPI-V, or ?2GPI peptide (?2GPI-p), calculated from a standard curve. Figure 3 Clot formation and lysis in the absence and presence of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI (A) Plasma from a normal donor was divided into equal aliquots and subjected to chromatography on a column to which either anti-?2GPI antibodies or preimmune-rabbit IgG had been conjugated. After passing through the former column, plasma was completely immunodepleted of ?2GPI as determined by immunoblotting. The flow-through from both columns was placed in 96 well microplates and clotted as described in Materials and Methods. Clots were monitored by measurement of A405. Clotting led to an increase in A405 which was maximal at approximately 30 minutes, followed by a progressive decrease as clots lysed. Normal plasma (black diamonds) did not undergo chromatography. (B) The identical experiment as depicted in (A) was performed, but ?2GPI-depleted plasma was analyzed either directly (squares, solid lines) or after the addition of 100 ?M ?2GPI (triangles) or 200 ?M ?2GPI (inverted triangles). The addition of ?2GPI to the ?2GPI-depleted plasma restored its fibrinolytic activity. Figure 4 ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA amidolytic activity (A) t-PA amidolytic activity in the presence of increasing amounts of native ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V. (B) The effect of 1 ?M?2GPI on t-PA amidolytic activity in the presence of increasing concentrations of t-PA. Figure 5 Binding of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI to t-PA (A) Binding of ?2GPI to t-PA using a microplate assay was performed as described in Materials and Methods. (B) Inhibition of the binding of 40 nM ?2GPI to immobilized t-PA by fluid phase t-PA. ?2GPI binding is expressed as the percentage of ?2GPI bound in the presence of fluid-phase t-PA relative to that bound in its absence. (C) Binding of t-PA to ?2GPI using an optical biosensor. The concentration of t-PA used is depicted to the right of the curve. (D) Binding of t-PA to ?2GPI was inhibited by increasing concentrations of NaCl. Figure 6 Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit ?<sub>2</sub>GPI-mediated enhancement of plasminogen activation Plasminogen activation was determined as described in Materials and Methods. Percent inhibition by anti-?2GPI antibodies was calculated by comparing initial reaction rates in the absence or presence of antibodies. (A) IgG76, IgGC, IgG35 and IgG58 are anti-?2GPI antibody-containing IgG fractions from patients with APS, BD4 and ID2 are monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies, and IgG1 is normal human IgG. (B) Inhibition of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation by increasing concentrations of anti-?2GPI IgG (IgG76), or control IgG (IgG1). (C) Anti-?2GPI antibodies were affinity purified from the plasma of 3 patients with APS and anti-?2GPI antibodies (abGPI-11, abGPI-17, abGPI-27), and their ability to inhibit ?2GPI-dependent t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation determined. Each of the purified anti-?2GPI antibody preparations inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner. (D) The effect of IgG fractions from 40 normal controls, 22 APS patients with anti-?2GPI, but not anti-t-PA antibodies (anti-?2GPI+/anti-tPA?), or 21 APS patients with neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-t-PA antibodies (anti-?2GPI?/anti-tPA?) on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation in the presence of ?2GPI. One outlying point in which an IgG fraction from a patient with anti-?2GPI caused marked inhibition of plasminogen activation (~60% activity) was removed for this analysis. Table 1 Effects of native ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V kinetics of t-PA – dependent activation of Glu-plasminogen * Km (?M) Kcat (s?1) Kcat/Km (?M?1s?1) Plasminogen + BSA 0.4538 0.1149 0.253 Plasminogen + ?2GPI 0.0464 0.2310 4.983 Plasminogen + ?2GPI-V 0.3148 0.4718 1.499 * Vmax and Km were calculated using nonlinear regression. kcat was calculated as Vmax/E0, where E0 represents the t-PA concentration (10 nM). Vmax was derived from a standard curve of plasmin amidolytic activity. Table 2 Effect of ?2GPI depletion on clot lysis A405 (T = 30) A405 (T = 180) ?A405 % lysis Pt 1 Anti-?2GPI .595 .509 .086 14.4 Control IgG .368 .204 .164 44.5 Pt 2 Anti-?2GPI 1.09 .81 .28 25.6 Control IgG .92 .47 .45 48.9 Pt 3 Anti-?2GPI 1.29 1.30 ?0.01 0 Control IgG 1.19 .70 .49 41.1  Figures and Tables Figure 1 ?<sub>2</sub>GPI enhances t-PA–dependent Glu-plasminogen activation (A) t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation was measured either alone (in the presence of BSA) or in the presence of 1 ?M human ?2GPI (?2GPI-n), recombinant ?2GPI (?2GPI-r), ?2GPI domain V (?2GPI-V), or ?2GPI domain V peptide (?2GPI-p). Substrate hydrolysis was measured as relative fluorescence units (I360/465 nm) as a function of time2 (T)2 ( 37 ). (B) Initial rates of plasmin generation were determined as in (A) in the presence of increasing concentrations of ?2GPI-n, ?2GPI-r, ?2GPI-V, or BSA. Figure 2 Native ?<sub>2</sub>GPI and ?<sub>2</sub>GPI domain V enhance fibrinolysis in fibrin gels Lysis of fibrin gels was assessed as described in Materials and Methods. (A) A representative experiment: ( 1 ) 10 nM t-PA + BSA; ( 2 ) 10 nM t-PA + 5 ?M ?2GPI-V; ( 3 ) 10 nM t-PA + 5 ?M native ?2GPI. (B) t-PA activity (U/ml) (as determined from the size of lytic areas) in the absence or presence of increasing amounts of native ?2GPI-n, ?2GPI-V, or ?2GPI peptide (?2GPI-p), calculated from a standard curve. Figure 3 Clot formation and lysis in the absence and presence of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI (A) Plasma from a normal donor was divided into equal aliquots and subjected to chromatography on a column to which either anti-?2GPI antibodies or preimmune-rabbit IgG had been conjugated. After passing through the former column, plasma was completely immunodepleted of ?2GPI as determined by immunoblotting. The flow-through from both columns was placed in 96 well microplates and clotted as described in Materials and Methods. Clots were monitored by measurement of A405. Clotting led to an increase in A405 which was maximal at approximately 30 minutes, followed by a progressive decrease as clots lysed. Normal plasma (black diamonds) did not undergo chromatography. (B) The identical experiment as depicted in (A) was performed, but ?2GPI-depleted plasma was analyzed either directly (squares, solid lines) or after the addition of 100 ?M ?2GPI (triangles) or 200 ?M ?2GPI (inverted triangles). The addition of ?2GPI to the ?2GPI-depleted plasma restored its fibrinolytic activity. Figure 4 ?<sub>2</sub>GPI stimulates t-PA amidolytic activity (A) t-PA amidolytic activity in the presence of increasing amounts of native ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V. (B) The effect of 1 ?M?2GPI on t-PA amidolytic activity in the presence of increasing concentrations of t-PA. Figure 5 Binding of ?<sub>2</sub>GPI to t-PA (A) Binding of ?2GPI to t-PA using a microplate assay was performed as described in Materials and Methods. (B) Inhibition of the binding of 40 nM ?2GPI to immobilized t-PA by fluid phase t-PA. ?2GPI binding is expressed as the percentage of ?2GPI bound in the presence of fluid-phase t-PA relative to that bound in its absence. (C) Binding of t-PA to ?2GPI using an optical biosensor. The concentration of t-PA used is depicted to the right of the curve. (D) Binding of t-PA to ?2GPI was inhibited by increasing concentrations of NaCl. Figure 6 Anti-?<sub>2</sub>GPI antibodies inhibit ?<sub>2</sub>GPI-mediated enhancement of plasminogen activation Plasminogen activation was determined as described in Materials and Methods. Percent inhibition by anti-?2GPI antibodies was calculated by comparing initial reaction rates in the absence or presence of antibodies. (A) IgG76, IgGC, IgG35 and IgG58 are anti-?2GPI antibody-containing IgG fractions from patients with APS, BD4 and ID2 are monoclonal anti-?2GPI antibodies, and IgG1 is normal human IgG. (B) Inhibition of t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation by increasing concentrations of anti-?2GPI IgG (IgG76), or control IgG (IgG1). (C) Anti-?2GPI antibodies were affinity purified from the plasma of 3 patients with APS and anti-?2GPI antibodies (abGPI-11, abGPI-17, abGPI-27), and their ability to inhibit ?2GPI-dependent t-PA-mediated plasminogen activation determined. Each of the purified anti-?2GPI antibody preparations inhibited plasminogen activation in a concentration-dependent manner. (D) The effect of IgG fractions from 40 normal controls, 22 APS patients with anti-?2GPI, but not anti-t-PA antibodies (anti-?2GPI+/anti-tPA?), or 21 APS patients with neither anti-?2GPI nor anti-t-PA antibodies (anti-?2GPI?/anti-tPA?) on t-PA-dependent plasminogen activation in the presence of ?2GPI. One outlying point in which an IgG fraction from a patient with anti-?2GPI caused marked inhibition of plasminogen activation (~60% activity) was removed for this analysis. Table 1 Effects of native ?2GPI and ?2GPI domain V kinetics of t-PA – dependent activation of Glu-plasminogen * Km (?M) Kcat (s?1) Kcat/Km (?M?1s?1) Plasminogen + BSA 0.4538 0.1149 0.253 Plasminogen + ?2GPI 0.0464 0.2310 4.983 Plasminogen + ?2GPI-V 0.3148 0.4718 1.499 * Vmax and Km were calculated using nonlinear regression. kcat was calculated as Vmax/E0, where E0 represents the t-PA concentration (10 nM). Vmax was derived from a standard curve of plasmin amidolytic activity. Table 2 Effect of ?2GPI depletion on clot lysis A405 (T = 30) A405 (T = 180) ?A405 % lysis Pt 1 Anti-?2GPI .595 .509 .086 14.4 Control IgG .368 .204 .164 44.5 Pt 2 Anti-?2GPI 1.09 .81 .28 25.6 Control IgG .92 .47 .45 48.9 Pt 3 Anti-?2GPI 1.29 1.30 ?0.01 0 Control IgG 1.19 .70 .49 41.1 