The Future of Restorative Neurosciences in Stroke: Driving the Translational Research Pipeline From Basic Science to Rehabilitation of People After Stroke Background Major advances during the past 50 years highlight the immense potential for restoration of function after neural injury, even in the damaged adult human brain. Yet, the translation of these advances into clinically useful treatments is painstakingly slow. Objective Here, we consider why the traditional model of a “translational research pipeline” that transforms basic science into novel clinical practice has failed to improve rehabilitation practice for people after stroke. Results We find that (1) most treatments trialed in vitro and in animal models have not yet resulted in obviously useful functional gains in patients; (2) most clinical trials of restorative treatments after stroke have been limited to small-scale studies; (3) patient recruitment for larger clinical trials is difficult; (4) the determinants of patient outcomes and what patients want remain complex and ill-defined, so that basic scientists have no clear view of the clinical importance of the problems that they are addressing; (5) research in academic neuroscience centers is poorly integrated with practice in front-line hospitals and the community, where the majority of patients are treated; and (6) partnership with both industry stakeholders and patient pressure groups is poorly developed, at least in the United Kingdom where research in the translational restorative neurosciences in stroke depends on public sector research funds and private charities. Conclusions We argue that interaction between patients, front-line clinicians, and clinical and basic scientists is essential so that they can explore their different priorities, skills, and concerns. These interactions can be facilitated by funding research consortia that include basic and clinical scientists, clinicians and patient/carer representatives with funds targeted at those impairments that are major determinants of patient and carer outcomes. Consortia would be instrumental in developing a lexicon of common methods, standardized outcome measures, data sharing and long-term goals. Interactions of this sort would create a research-friendly, rather than only target-led, culture in front-line stroke rehabilitation services.  Conclusions The translational pipeline is a useful model for research in the restorative neurosciences but requires refinement. When both determinants of outcome, and thus treatment targets, and treatments are complex, the pipeline stalls and stagnates. In these circumstances, drivers of the pipeline need to be made more explicit, to funders, researchers, clinicians, and also to patients and their advocates. Patient- and carer-led prioritization of outcome determinants and treatment targets should be used to focus interventions and research funding streams on a few impairment-based translational pipelines. A common language or lexicon is key to better communication and flow of ideas between clinicians and scientists and to the transmission of information in any pipeline. These recommendations are derived from 1 meeting of 1 focus group. We hope they stimulate further discussion that leads to implementation of the translational restorative pipeline after stroke.  Basic Science Evidence from animal experiments, including primates, indicates that acute brain injury leads to local and contralesional increases in proteins associated with neural repair, growth promoting factors, and cellular and synaptic changes including growth of new connections. 31 , 32 There is also evidence that larger changes occur if animals are encouraged to use the paretic limb, 33 , 34 early after injury, 35 suggesting that they may be an important mechanism underlying motor recovery after stroke. Several strategies have been developed to maximize these changes in animal stroke models: (1) pharmacological intervention, using either ( a ) neuromodulators or ( b ) factors promoting neural regrowth; (2) neural (cortical) stimulation; and (3) cell replacement therapies. Pharmacological intervention in animals with neuromodulators has largely focused on noradrenergic stimulation with amphetamine and benefit has been observed in primates, 36 cats, 37 and rats. 38 , 39 Cholinergic stimulation with nicotine has shown benefit in rodents. 40 Intervention with agents promoting neural regrowth has involved neurotrophic factors like BDNF 41 ; other growth promoting factors such as inosine 42 , 43 or recombinant erythropoietin 44 ; inhibitors of myelin and glial scar associated CNS growth-inhibitory factors particularly the protein Nogo-A, 45 and the chondroitin-sulphate proteoglycans (although not after stroke). Direct cortical stimulation has been shown to be beneficial in rodents 46 – 48 and primates, 49 but was not successful in 1 human trial. 50 Finally, cell replacement therapy may in the future become a potential additional treatment option. To date, research has focused largely on pathological rather than functional outcomes. 51 Proposed sources include fetal neural stem cells, embryonic stem cells, neuroteratocarcinoma cells, umbilical cord blood-derived nonhematopoietic stem cells, and bone marrow-derived stem cells. It is as yet unclear if the effectiveness of this approach is through direct tissue replacement or secretion of neurotrophic factors by the transplanted stem cells. Which of these interventions has the greatest potential to revolutionize the treatment of stroke (and other forms of brain injury) is unclear. In animals these techniques appear to be best used in combination with intensive training protocols to synergistically enhance efficacy and drive plasticity toward useful goals 43 , 52 ; this may also be the case in human patients. There are several caveats relevant to the majority of these preclinical studies of restorative treatments, similar to those emphasized by the CAMARADES collaboration in relation to animal studies of candidate drugs for neural protection after stroke, which include: Most are performed in rodent models. The organization of the cortical control of movement in nonprimates is very different to that in higher primates, which makes extrapolation to recovery in human studies difficult. In addition, it is often unclear whether the functional outcome measures in animals (especially rodents that recover very quickly in stroke models) are reliable predictors of the therapeutic response in man and whether they have any relevance to the needs of a typical patient after stroke. Most animal studies have examined small lesions in young animals, rather than the large and complex lesions in elderly humans that occur after a typical stroke. Additionally, highly inbred strains are often used that fail to reflect the diversity of the population affected by stroke.  Proof-of-Principle Studies Movement Rehabilitation Novel interventions focus on “add-on” treatments that could maximize the effects of conventional physical therapies. Currently these include transcranial magnetic and direct current stimulation, somatosensory stimulation, drug therapies, and robot assisted therapy. Transcranial stimulation techniques involve repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS), and paired associative stimulation (PAS). Numerous small-scale studies measuring the effects on hand and arm function have been conducted with all 3 forms but there is a high degree of heterogeneity between the protocols used in different centers. The rTMS technique alone can be subdivided by frequency of stimulation, by intensity of stimulation, 53 by pattern of stimulation, 54 and by site of stimulation 55 and the optimum parameters are still unclear. A more direct approach has been recently trialed for safety: epidural cortical stimulation in a small group of chronic stroke patients. 50 The results have been generally positive, but highly variable. More information is needed to understand which patients might benefit most from which intervention before any larger scale trials are appropriate. These techniques have also been tried in the context of dysphagia: both transcranial direct current stimulation 56 , 57 and rTMS 58 , 59 can modulate excitability of cortical circuits involved in pharyngeal control and improve swallowing in dysphagic patients. 57 , 58 However, as in other proof-of-principle studies, the patient numbers are very small and trials have only involved 1 center. Drug-based interventions have focused on amphetamine due to the early positive effects with amphetamine in animal models. Larger human trials have not shown benefit, 60 , 61 and noradrenergic stimulation may prove not to be the right approach in an patient population at risk of worsening control of hypertension. A dopaminergic approach may be a promising alternative. 62 Robotics adapts a motor learning model toward movement rehabilitation and has been shown in small studies to be beneficial. 63 , 64 It also allows for standardization of therapy and quantification of rehabilitation, which has been a problem dogging conventional therapy trials. 65 However, while robots are useful in a research setting with small patient numbers, current building costs make robots expensive for larger studies. There are 2 main problems in these small-scale studies. (1) There are as many versions of each technique as centers that have used them, creating a “Babel” of intervention protocols and making it impossible for results to be collated across centers. (2) The majority of studies have selected very compliant patients with relatively mild deficits. Even here, there has been only 10% to 20% improvement, often of physiological or nonfunctional behavioral outcomes. In addition, most studies have been in single sessions, rather than examining long-term application in therapeutic settings, dosage effects, or wider patient populations with more severe deficits.  Movement Rehabilitation Novel interventions focus on “add-on” treatments that could maximize the effects of conventional physical therapies. Currently these include transcranial magnetic and direct current stimulation, somatosensory stimulation, drug therapies, and robot assisted therapy. Transcranial stimulation techniques involve repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), transcranial direct current stimulation (TDCS), and paired associative stimulation (PAS). Numerous small-scale studies measuring the effects on hand and arm function have been conducted with all 3 forms but there is a high degree of heterogeneity between the protocols used in different centers. The rTMS technique alone can be subdivided by frequency of stimulation, by intensity of stimulation, 53 by pattern of stimulation, 54 and by site of stimulation 55 and the optimum parameters are still unclear. A more direct approach has been recently trialed for safety: epidural cortical stimulation in a small group of chronic stroke patients. 50 The results have been generally positive, but highly variable. More information is needed to understand which patients might benefit most from which intervention before any larger scale trials are appropriate. These techniques have also been tried in the context of dysphagia: both transcranial direct current stimulation 56 , 57 and rTMS 58 , 59 can modulate excitability of cortical circuits involved in pharyngeal control and improve swallowing in dysphagic patients. 57 , 58 However, as in other proof-of-principle studies, the patient numbers are very small and trials have only involved 1 center. Drug-based interventions have focused on amphetamine due to the early positive effects with amphetamine in animal models. Larger human trials have not shown benefit, 60 , 61 and noradrenergic stimulation may prove not to be the right approach in an patient population at risk of worsening control of hypertension. A dopaminergic approach may be a promising alternative. 62 Robotics adapts a motor learning model toward movement rehabilitation and has been shown in small studies to be beneficial. 63 , 64 It also allows for standardization of therapy and quantification of rehabilitation, which has been a problem dogging conventional therapy trials. 65 However, while robots are useful in a research setting with small patient numbers, current building costs make robots expensive for larger studies. There are 2 main problems in these small-scale studies. (1) There are as many versions of each technique as centers that have used them, creating a “Babel” of intervention protocols and making it impossible for results to be collated across centers. (2) The majority of studies have selected very compliant patients with relatively mild deficits. Even here, there has been only 10% to 20% improvement, often of physiological or nonfunctional behavioral outcomes. In addition, most studies have been in single sessions, rather than examining long-term application in therapeutic settings, dosage effects, or wider patient populations with more severe deficits.  Aphasia and Communication Problems There are 2 major caveats in regard to treatments of aphasia. First, there is no animal model of an equivalent deficit that can be used to inform work in patients. Second, those who actively treat patients believe that, because of the complexity of the distributed system controlling speech and language, the deficit is highly individualized from one patient to the next. In their view this precludes large treatment trials of a standardized therapy. Although meta-analysis of RCTs of aphasia therapy suggests that treatment effects are greater when treatment is more intensive or more prolonged, 66 the studies entered into this meta-analysis are old and the nature of therapy poorly specified; their relevance to current practice remains unclear. Despite these problems, single-case experimental designs and case series with proper controls allow the conclusion that therapy can be effective for the participant(s). 67 , 68 There is also evidence that participants’ response to specific therapies depends on the nature of their language-processing deficits. 69 This evidence, however, is drawn mostly from subjects with chronic aphasia who are willing to participate in such studies. They tend to be younger, more enthusiastic, and have less comorbidity than the population of people with aphasia. Whether findings from these participants can be generalized to a wider range of people with aphasia, and especially those treated soon after onset (the typical pattern in current delivery of services), requires investigation. Some 70 have raised the possibility that different treatment strategies are likely to be appropriate in acute and chronic aphasia. In the acute stage, treatments that optimize natural recovery and psychosocial adjustment may be most appropriate. In chronic aphasia treatment can concentrate on re-learning and development of compensatory strategies. There is an urgent need for further trials of well-specified therapies, with designs that allow a proper comparison of the way in which the outcome relates to the nature of the language processing impairment. Equally, we need trials comparing different treatments for the same underlying disorder to establish which is more effective and for whom. Imaging evidence suggests that during recovery there are increases in rCBF during language tasks in both perilesional regions in the affected hemisphere and homologous regions in the unaffected right hemisphere. However, changes in perilesional regions in the affected hemisphere appear to be the most important component for functional recovery. 71 Preliminary reports suggest that rTMS to the unimpaired right hemisphere in people with aphasia due to left hemisphere lesions may enhance the benefit from behavioral treatment. 72 , 73 There are also some studies suggesting small benefits from drug treatments in combination with therapy. 74  Neglect and Attention These often combine a disorder of spatial perception with a more general disorder of attention or vigilance. 26 Because patients are unaware of the nature of their deficits, “top-down” retraining strategies self-initiated by the patient are of limited use because they may operate only in specific contexts, but not at an intrinsic “automated” level. Two novel “bottom-up” therapies are available: prism adaptation and drug therapy. Prism adaptation provides a biasing visual input to rotate visual perception toward the side of the lesion in an attempt to induce a contralesional visuomotor adaptation. In contrast, some types of drug therapy (eg, guanfacine, an alpha-adrenergic receptor agonist) may enhance vigilance by an action on preserved frontal areas of cortex. 75 Other drug studies have used dopaminergic compounds with varying success. 76 The latter approach has proved successful in small-scale “proof-of-principle” trials, but there are no large-scale trials on a general population of neglect patients. Prism adaptation has been explored in several different centers with repeated sessions leading to lasting improvement on several spatial tests. Nevertheless, there are no studies of the most effective “dosage” (ie, prism angle, time worn, days of treatment) or how usefully they improve “real-world” functional activities. Future studies might usefully combine behavioral and drug interventions to investigate potential synergies between these approaches. 76  Clinical Trials of Restorative Treatments The EXCITE trial, for constraint-induced movement therapy (CIMT) is one of the few multicenter randomized trials for any physiotherapeutic intervention. 19 This trial on over 200 patients concluded that the therapy could improve arm and hand function in patients 3 to 9 months poststroke. However, despite this clear beneficial effect, CIMT has yet to become a part of routine care. One significant problem is cost: the treatment dosage is high, requiring several hours of treatment daily for 2 weeks. Applied to an estimated 30% of patients who might benefit, this would place an enormous burden on therapy services. Further trials are being conducted to examine dosage effects and extension to other groups of patients.  Health Service Delivery A very considerable evidence base has shown that patients who receive organized acute and early unit-based inpatient rehabilitation after stroke rather than an alternative service, usually in a general medical or geriatric ward with or without a visiting stroke team, do not stay longer in hospital and are more likely to be alive, independent, and living at home 1 year after the stroke, regardless of gender, age, and stroke severity. 18 Unit-based care is more cost-effective and delivers many aspects of care not delivered by a peripatetic specialist stroke team or conventional care. 77 , 78 Remarkably, the differences between unit-based and alternative care persist for 5 and even 10 years. 79 Early supported discharge of medically stable patients with support by carers and a multidisciplinary domiciliary therapy team after mild and moderate stroke, with an admission Barthel Index (BI) of >9/20, adds to initial SU gains, and compared with conventional care showed a reduced risk of death or dependency, a hospital stay shortened by 8 days ( P < .0001), a significant improvement in domestic and extended activities of daily living, and better life quality, 80 which may still be evident after 5 years. 81 Once in the community, patients are known to be at risk of deteriorating after stroke as a result of multiple health problems, and health-related quality of life has been shown to decline significantly in the 6 months after discharge. 82 Deterioration and readmission are prevented and independence in personal, extended, and leisure-based activities of daily living improved by outpatient or domiciliary rehabilitation , delivered by either a multidisciplinary team or by a physiotherapist or, particularly, by an occupational therapist. 83 , 84 Informal carers should be recognized as an important resource: they enable patients to remain in the community, 85 and their support is likely to facilitate patient outcomes and reduce depression. 86 Formal support for carers, is difficult to obtain in many countries, but Kalra and colleagues 87 have shown that training informal carers in basic nursing skills and facilitation of personal care techniques reduced costs and caregiver burden, and improved psychosocial outcomes in the carer and patient, although there was still no change in patients’ mortality, institutionalization, and disability.  Prognostic Markers and Measures of Progress There are 3 different categories of measure: (1) Neuroscientific measures; (2) Behavioral measures; (3) Measures of function and life quality. Neuroscientific (surrogate) measures are correlational rather than causal, and thus do not substitute for other types of measures, even though they may be more objective and quantifiable. They include functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). They have helped develop the concept of a “residual functional architecture” particularly in relation to hand motor function, 88 – 91 but also after aphasic and dysphagic stroke. 92 , 93 The premise is that the brain uses existing undamaged modules in neighboring cortical regions as well as functionally related regions in the contralateral hemisphere for compensation and adaptation after injury, and that the modules used change over time after a stroke. 93 – 95 The hypothesis is that although each stroke may be highly specific to each individual, certain patterns of functional residual architecture may be useful predictors of outcome and therapy needs. However, this has yet to be tested. Behavioral measures try to determine how a specific behavior or performance of a task changes after an intervention or over time. They often adopt a reductionist approach to break down a task to measurable chunks. In relation to hand function this may consist of measuring force production, force control, reaction speed, muscle stiffness, or kinematics of a movement. Outcomes in studies of dysphagia can be separated into lingual and pharyngeal phases, and then further subdivided into sensory and motor components of each aspect of the task. This can identify the nature of the recovery process, how change in different impairments contributes to recovery of a behavioral task, and whether recovery is the result of reduced impairment or a compensatory strategy. For example, recovery of leg function due to increased muscle tone that allows a joint to be stabilized, is a compensatory strategy that improves function without enhancing voluntary motor output or reducing impairment. Robotics offers an attractive method for measuring many behavioral outcomes simultaneously and objectively. Measures of function and life quality reflect the objective and subjective impact of behavioral changes on care needs, independence, and involvement in social roles after stroke. Measures of focal function, such as the Jebsen-Taylor hand function test, the Wolf Motor Function Test, and the Fugl-Meyer scale are often useful in translational research. Generic measures of general function and life quality, for example the Barthel Index, modified Rankin Scale (mRS), and Short Form 36 (SF-36), are commonly used after stroke 96 , 97 but may poorly represent the impact of stroke, for example as a result of dysphasia; exhibit ceiling or floor effects in different study populations; and are relatively insensitive to change over time. These difficulties are less evident with specific measures of outcome, which after stroke include the Stroke Impact Scales and Stroke Specific Quality of Life (SS-QOL) scale, 98 , 99 although concerns remain that the impact of neuropsychological and linguistic impairments are poorly represented. 