Cigarette Smoking Induces Overexpression of a Fat Depleting Gene AZGP1 in the Human Airway Epithelium * Background Smokers weigh less and have less body fat than nonsmokers. Increased body fat and weight gain are observed following smoking cessation. To assess a possible molecular mechanism underlying the inverse association between smoking and body weight, we hypothesized that smoking may induce the expression of a fat depleting gene in the airway epithelium, the cell population that takes the brunt of the stress of cigarette smoke. Methods To assess if smoking up-regulates expression in the airway epithelium of genes associated with weight loss, microarray analysis was used to evaluate genes associated with fat-depletion in large airway epithelial samples obtained by fiberoptic bronchoscopy from normal smokers and normal nonsmokers. As a candidate gene we further evaluated the expression of alpha2-zinc-glycoprotein1 (AZGP1), a soluble protein that stimulates lipolysis, induces a reduction in body fat in mice, is associated with the cachexia related to cancer, and is known to be expressed in secretory cells of lung epithelium. AZGP1 protein expression was assessed by Western analysis and localization in the large airway epithelium by immunohistochemistry. Results Both microarray and TaqMan analysis demonstrated that AZGP1 mRNA levels were higher in the large airway epithelium of normal smokers compared to normal nonsmokers (p<0.05, all comparisons). Western analysis of airway biopsies of smokers compared with non-smokers demonstrated upregulation of AZGP1 at the protein level, and immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated upregulation of AZGP1 in secretory as well as neuroendocrine cells of smokers. Conclusions In the context that AZGP1 is involved in lipolysis and fat loss, its overexpression in the airway epithelium of chronic smokers may represent one mechanism for the weight difference in smokers vs nonsmokers.  Introduction Cigarette smoking is associated with lower body mass index and cessation of smoking is associated with weight gain 1 , 2 . Cross-sectional studies show that smokers weigh less than age-matched nonsmokers 1 , 3 – 7 , while longitudinal data show that most smokers gain weight after smoking cessation 2 , 8 – 16 . The mechanisms underlying the lower weight of smokers are undoubtedly complex, and a variety of studies have linked it to decreased food intake, increased metabolic rate, increased physical activity, and the metabolic effects of nicotine 1 , 17 – 27 . In the present study we propose an additional mechanism that may contribute to the smoking-associated weight loss, based on the hypothesis that smoking may induce the up-regulation in the respiratory epithelium of genes that code for proteins associated with weight loss 28 , 29 . To evaluate this concept, we assessed our microarray data of airway epithelial gene expression in healthy smokers and healthy nonsmokers for genes that have been reported to be associated with mediating weight loss 28 , 29 . Strikingly, the data showed that smoking markedly up-regulated the airway epithelial expression of alpha2-zinc-glycoprotein 1 (AZGP1), a gene associated with the up-regulation of uncoupling proteins that have been implicated in regulating energy balance and body weight 28 – 32 . AZGP1, a 38 to 41 kDa peptide normally found in body fluids, functions as a lipid mobilizing factor 29 , 33 – 36 . AZGP1 is found in the urine of cancer patients with cachexia 36 , is overexpressed in carcinomas associated with fat loss 34 , 37 , and mice treated with AZGP1 have a significant decrease in body fat, without a change in food or water intake 35 . AZGP1 is known to be normally expressed in the secretory epithelia of the liver, breast, gastrointestinal tract, sweat glands, and of interest to the present study, the lung 38 , 39 . The name AZGP1 is based on the knowledge that it precipitates with zinc salts and has electrophoretic mobility similar to that of alpha2 globulins 33 . The mechanisms of AZGP1 are not fully understood, but it is believed to regulate lipid degradation through activation of guanosine triphosphate-dependent adenylate cyclase activity mediated through the ?3-adrenoreceptor 35 , 40 . Based on the knowledge that increased body fat and weight gain are observed following smoking cessation, lower body mass index is associated with cigarette smoking, adipose tissue metabolism appears to be altered in smokers, and our preliminary observations, we further investigated whether cigarette smokers upregulated the expression of AZGP1 in the human airway epithelium? The analysis included assessment of AZGP1 gene expression of large airway epithelium obtained by fiberoptic bronchoscopy and brushings from healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers using microarrays with TaqMan PCR confirmation. The data demonstrate that the expression of AZGP1 is significantly upregulated in healthy smokers. Western analysis of large airway biopsies confirmed the upregulation of AZGP1 in smokers compared to non-smokers at the protein level. Interestingly, anti-AZGP1 immunofluorescence assessment of large airway bronchial biopsies and brushed large airway epithelium showed that, in addition to being upregulated in secretory cells of smokers, AZGP1 is expressed in neuroendocrine cells of smokers. In the context that AZGP1 is linked to weight loss, the upregulation of AZGP1 in the airway epithelium of healthy smokers may represent a pathway contributing to the weight loss associated with smoking.  Methods To assess if smoking up-regulates expression in the airway epithelium of genes associated with weight loss, microarray analysis was used to evaluate genes associated with fat-depletion in large airway epithelial samples obtained by fiberoptic bronchoscopy from normal smokers and normal nonsmokers. As a candidate gene we further evaluated the expression of alpha2-zinc-glycoprotein1 (AZGP1), a soluble protein that stimulates lipolysis, induces a reduction in body fat in mice, is associated with the cachexia related to cancer, and is known to be expressed in secretory cells of lung epithelium. AZGP1 protein expression was assessed by Western analysis and localization in the large airway epithelium by immunohistochemistry.  Results Both microarray and TaqMan analysis demonstrated that AZGP1 mRNA levels were higher in the large airway epithelium of normal smokers compared to normal nonsmokers (p<0.05, all comparisons). Western analysis of airway biopsies of smokers compared with non-smokers demonstrated upregulation of AZGP1 at the protein level, and immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated upregulation of AZGP1 in secretory as well as neuroendocrine cells of smokers.  Conclusions In the context that AZGP1 is involved in lipolysis and fat loss, its overexpression in the airway epithelium of chronic smokers may represent one mechanism for the weight difference in smokers vs nonsmokers.  Methods Study Population Healthy nonsmokers and healthy current cigarette smokers were evaluated at the Weill Cornell NIH General Clinical Research Center and Department of Genetic Medicine Clinical Research Facility under protocols approved by the Weill Cornell Medical College Institutional Review Board. Written informed consent was obtained from each individual before enrollment in the study. Nonsmokers and smokers were determined to be phenotypically healthy on the basis of clinical history, physical examination, routine blood screening tests, urinalysis, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram, and pulmonary function testing. No individual in either study group had any evidence of a malignancy. Current smoking status was confirmed by history, venous carboxyhemoglobin levels, and urinalysis for nicotine levels and its derivative cotinine. Individuals who met the inclusion criteria underwent fiberoptic bronchoscopy with brushing and/or endobronchial biopsy. Collection of Airway Epithelial Cells Epithelial cells from the large airways were collected using flexible bronchoscopy. Smokers were asked not to smoke the evening prior to the procedure. After achieving mild sedation and anesthesia of vocal cords, a flexible bronchoscope (Pentax, EB-1530T3) was advanced to the desired bronchus. Large airway epithelial samples were collected by gentle brushing of the 3rd to 4th order bronchi. The epithelial cells were subsequently collected in 5 ml of 4°C LHC8 medium (GIBO, Grand Island, NY). An aliquot of this was used for cytology and differential cell count and the remainder was processed immediately for RNA extraction. Total cell counts were obtained using a hemocytometer while differential cell counts were determined on sedimented cells prepared by centrifugation (Cytospin 11, Shandon Instruments, Pittsburgh, PA) and stained with DiffQuik (Baxter Healthcare, Miami, FL). RNA Extraction and Microarray Processing Analyses were done using three different Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) microarrays, including HuGeneFL (7,000 probe sets), HG-U133A (22,000 probe sets) and HG-U133 Plus 2.0 (54,000 probe sets). The protocols used were as described by the manufacturer. Total RNA was extracted from epithelial cells using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with further cleanup by RNeasy (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). This process yielded 2 to 4 ?g RNA per 106 cells. Samples were processed as previously described using kits and methods from Affymetrix 41 – 44 . Hybridizations to test chips and to the microarrays were done according to Affymetrix protocols, and microarrays were processed by the Affymetrix fluidics station and scanned with an Affymetrix GeneArray 2500 (HuGeneFL) and the Affymetrix GeneChip Scanner 3000 7G (HG-U133A and HG-U133 Plus 2.0). To maintain quality, only samples hybridized to test chips with a GAPDH of 3? to 5? ratio of <3 were deemed satisfactory. Microarray Data Analysis Captured images were analyzed using Microarray Suite version 5.0 algorithm (Affymetrix). These data were normalized using GeneSpring version 7.2 software (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) as follows: (1) per array, by dividing raw data by the 50th percentile of all measurements; and (2) per gene, by dividing the raw data by the median expression level for each gene across all arrays in a data set. TaqMan Reverse Transcription-PCR Confirmation of Microarray Expression Levels TaqMan real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) was done on RNA samples from the large airways of 17 normal nonsmokers and 15 normal smokers that had also been assessed with the HG-U133 Plus 2.0 array. cDNA was synthesized from 2 ?g RNA in a 100 ?l reaction volume, using the TaqMan Reverse Transcriptase Reaction kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), with random hexamers as primers. Dilutions of 1:10 and 1:100 were made from each sample and triplicate wells were run for each dilution. TaqMan PCR reactions were carried out using pre-made gene expression assays for the AZGP1 gene from Applied Biosystems and 2 ?l cDNA were used in each 25 ?l reaction volume. The endogenous control was 18S rRNA and relative expression levels were determined using the ??Ct method (Applied Biosystems) with the average value for the nonsmokers as the calibrator. The PCR reactions were run in an Applied Biosystems Sequence Detection System 7500. Localization of AZGP1 in the Large Airway Epithelium To assess which airway epithelial cells express AZGP1, bronchial biopsies were obtained from the large airways of healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers using conventional methods. Immunohistochemistry was subsequently done on paraffin-embedded endobronchial biopsies. Sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated through a series of xylenes and alcohol. To enhance staining, an antigen recovery step was carried out by microwave treatment at 100°C, 15 min in citrate buffer solution (Labvision, Fremont, CA) followed by cooling at 23°C, 20 min. Endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched using 0.3% H2O2 and normal goat serum was used to reduce background staining. Samples were incubated with the primary antibody rabbit polyclonal anti-AZGP1 (1/5000 dilution, Biovendor, Candler, NC) at 4°C overnight. Rabbit IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch) was used as the isotype control. Vectastain Elite ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and chromogenic substrate 3-amino-9-ethyl-carbazole (AEC; Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA) were used to detect antibody binding. The sections were counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin (Polyscientific, bayshore, NY) and mounted using GVA mounting medium (Zymed, San Francisco, CA). Brightfield microscopy was performed using a Nikon Microphot microscope equipped with a Plan 40X N.A. 0.70 objective lens. Images were captured with an Olympus DP70 CCD camera. Colocalizations of AZGP1 with a neuroendocrine cell marker (chromogranin A) and a secretory cell marker (mucin5AC) were also performed with cytospin preparations of large airway epithelium brushings. The following antibodies were used: AZGP1, rabbit polyclonal anti-AZGP1 (1/5000 dilution, Biovendor, Candler, NC), with rabbit IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch) as the control; for chromogranin A, mouse monoclonal (LK2H10+PHE5) anti-human chromogranin (1/500 dilution; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and mouse IgG as the isotype control (Sigma, St Louis, MO); for mucin 5AC, mouse monoclonal (CLH2) anti-human mucin 5AC (1/50; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and mouse IgG as the isotype control (Sigma, St Louis, MO). Following incubation with the primary antibodies, goat anti-rabbit Cy5 (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was used as a secondary antibody for AZGP1 and goat anti-mouse Cy3 (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was used as a secondary antibody for chromogranin A and mucin 5AC. Nuclei were counter stained with 4?,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, 1/20,00 dilution, Molecular Probes). A total of nine slides were used for each airway epithelial cell sample: (1) AZGP1 alone, (2) rabbit IgG control for AZGP1, (3) chromogranin A alone, (4) mucin 5AC alone, (5) mouse IgG control for chromogranin and mucin 5AC, (6) AZGP1 and chromogranin A colocalization, (7) rabbit IgG control for AZGP1 and mouse IgG control for chromogranin A, (8) AZGP1 and mucin 5AC colocalization, and (9) rabbit IgG control for AZGP1 and mouse IgG control for mucin 5AC. Images were captured using an Olympus IX 70 fluorescence microscope with 60-fold magnification. Images were analyzed using MetaMorph software (Universal Imaging Corporation, Downingtown, PA). Pseudocolor images were formed by encoding Cy5 fluorescence in the green channel, Cy3 fluorescence in the red channel. Quantitation of AZGP1 Positive Cells In order to compare the frequency of AZGP1 positive cells between healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers, cytospin preparations of large airway epithelial cells from 5 nonsmokers and 6 smokers were stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 or rabbit IgG as control. Goat anti-rabbit Cy3 was used as a secondary antibody. Nuclei were counter stained with DAPI. The percentage of AZGP1 positive cells was calculated as (AZGP1 positive cells per field/total number of nuclei per field) in 10 random 60x fields for each subject using Olympus IX 70 fluorescence microscope. Mean AZGP1 positive fractions in ten fields for each subject of the nonsmoking and smoking groups were compared by t test. Western Analysis Western analysis was used to quantitatively assess AZGP1 protein expression in large airway brushing samples from healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. Brushed large airway epithelial cells were obtained as described. Initially, the cells were centrifuged at 600 × g, 5 min, 4°C. The whole cells were lysed with red cell lysis buffer (Cell Lytic Mammalian Tissue Lysis/Extraction reagent, Sigma-Aldrich) followed by whole cell lysis buffer (ACK lysing buffer, Invitrogen), and protease inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the sample. The sample was centrifuged at 10,000 × g and the protein-containing supernatant collected. The protein concentrations were assessed using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein concentration kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Equal concentration of protein (10 ?g) mixed with SDS Sample Loading Buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and reducing agent was loaded on Tris-glycine gels (Invitrogen). Protein electrophoresis was carried out at 100V, 2 hr, 23°C. Sample proteins were transferred (25V, 1hr, 4°C) to a 0.45 ?m thick PVDF membrane (Invitrogen) using a powerpack 300 power source (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and Tris-glycine transfer buffer (Bio-Rad). After transfer the membranes were blocked with 5% milk in PBS for 1 hr, 23°C. The membranes were incubated with primary rabbit polyclonal anti-AZGP1 antibody (Biovendor, Candler NC) at 1:1000 dilution, 2 hr, 4°C. Recombinant AZGP1 protein (Biovendor) was used as a positive control. Detection was performed using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (1:2,000 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and the Enhanced Chemiluminescent reagent (ECL) system (GE, Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) using Hyperfilm ECL (GE Healthcare). To assess the Western analyses quantitatively, the film was digitally imaged, maintaining exposure within the linear range of detection. The contrast was inverted, the pixel intensity of each band determined, and the background pixel intensity for a negative area of the film of identical size subtracted using MetaMorph image analysis software (Universal Imaging, Downingtown, PA). The membrane was subsequently stripped and reincubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-? actin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) as a control for equal protein concentration. Statistical Analysis Average expression values for AZGP1 in large airway samples were calculated from normalized expression levels for healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers and p values for all comparisons were calculated using the two sample unequal variance Welch t-test without correction for multiple testing. Web Deposition of Data All data has been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus site, ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo ), which is curated by the National Center for Bioinformatics. The accession number is GSE10135. Role of the Funding Source The funding source of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report or the decision to submit this report for publication.  Study Population Healthy nonsmokers and healthy current cigarette smokers were evaluated at the Weill Cornell NIH General Clinical Research Center and Department of Genetic Medicine Clinical Research Facility under protocols approved by the Weill Cornell Medical College Institutional Review Board. Written informed consent was obtained from each individual before enrollment in the study. Nonsmokers and smokers were determined to be phenotypically healthy on the basis of clinical history, physical examination, routine blood screening tests, urinalysis, chest X-ray, electrocardiogram, and pulmonary function testing. No individual in either study group had any evidence of a malignancy. Current smoking status was confirmed by history, venous carboxyhemoglobin levels, and urinalysis for nicotine levels and its derivative cotinine. Individuals who met the inclusion criteria underwent fiberoptic bronchoscopy with brushing and/or endobronchial biopsy.  Collection of Airway Epithelial Cells Epithelial cells from the large airways were collected using flexible bronchoscopy. Smokers were asked not to smoke the evening prior to the procedure. After achieving mild sedation and anesthesia of vocal cords, a flexible bronchoscope (Pentax, EB-1530T3) was advanced to the desired bronchus. Large airway epithelial samples were collected by gentle brushing of the 3rd to 4th order bronchi. The epithelial cells were subsequently collected in 5 ml of 4°C LHC8 medium (GIBO, Grand Island, NY). An aliquot of this was used for cytology and differential cell count and the remainder was processed immediately for RNA extraction. Total cell counts were obtained using a hemocytometer while differential cell counts were determined on sedimented cells prepared by centrifugation (Cytospin 11, Shandon Instruments, Pittsburgh, PA) and stained with DiffQuik (Baxter Healthcare, Miami, FL).  RNA Extraction and Microarray Processing Analyses were done using three different Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) microarrays, including HuGeneFL (7,000 probe sets), HG-U133A (22,000 probe sets) and HG-U133 Plus 2.0 (54,000 probe sets). The protocols used were as described by the manufacturer. Total RNA was extracted from epithelial cells using TRIzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with further cleanup by RNeasy (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). This process yielded 2 to 4 ?g RNA per 106 cells. Samples were processed as previously described using kits and methods from Affymetrix 41 – 44 . Hybridizations to test chips and to the microarrays were done according to Affymetrix protocols, and microarrays were processed by the Affymetrix fluidics station and scanned with an Affymetrix GeneArray 2500 (HuGeneFL) and the Affymetrix GeneChip Scanner 3000 7G (HG-U133A and HG-U133 Plus 2.0). To maintain quality, only samples hybridized to test chips with a GAPDH of 3? to 5? ratio of <3 were deemed satisfactory.  Microarray Data Analysis Captured images were analyzed using Microarray Suite version 5.0 algorithm (Affymetrix). These data were normalized using GeneSpring version 7.2 software (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) as follows: (1) per array, by dividing raw data by the 50th percentile of all measurements; and (2) per gene, by dividing the raw data by the median expression level for each gene across all arrays in a data set.  TaqMan Reverse Transcription-PCR Confirmation of Microarray Expression Levels TaqMan real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) was done on RNA samples from the large airways of 17 normal nonsmokers and 15 normal smokers that had also been assessed with the HG-U133 Plus 2.0 array. cDNA was synthesized from 2 ?g RNA in a 100 ?l reaction volume, using the TaqMan Reverse Transcriptase Reaction kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), with random hexamers as primers. Dilutions of 1:10 and 1:100 were made from each sample and triplicate wells were run for each dilution. TaqMan PCR reactions were carried out using pre-made gene expression assays for the AZGP1 gene from Applied Biosystems and 2 ?l cDNA were used in each 25 ?l reaction volume. The endogenous control was 18S rRNA and relative expression levels were determined using the ??Ct method (Applied Biosystems) with the average value for the nonsmokers as the calibrator. The PCR reactions were run in an Applied Biosystems Sequence Detection System 7500.  Localization of AZGP1 in the Large Airway Epithelium To assess which airway epithelial cells express AZGP1, bronchial biopsies were obtained from the large airways of healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers using conventional methods. Immunohistochemistry was subsequently done on paraffin-embedded endobronchial biopsies. Sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated through a series of xylenes and alcohol. To enhance staining, an antigen recovery step was carried out by microwave treatment at 100°C, 15 min in citrate buffer solution (Labvision, Fremont, CA) followed by cooling at 23°C, 20 min. Endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched using 0.3% H2O2 and normal goat serum was used to reduce background staining. Samples were incubated with the primary antibody rabbit polyclonal anti-AZGP1 (1/5000 dilution, Biovendor, Candler, NC) at 4°C overnight. Rabbit IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch) was used as the isotype control. Vectastain Elite ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and chromogenic substrate 3-amino-9-ethyl-carbazole (AEC; Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA) were used to detect antibody binding. The sections were counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin (Polyscientific, bayshore, NY) and mounted using GVA mounting medium (Zymed, San Francisco, CA). Brightfield microscopy was performed using a Nikon Microphot microscope equipped with a Plan 40X N.A. 0.70 objective lens. Images were captured with an Olympus DP70 CCD camera. Colocalizations of AZGP1 with a neuroendocrine cell marker (chromogranin A) and a secretory cell marker (mucin5AC) were also performed with cytospin preparations of large airway epithelium brushings. The following antibodies were used: AZGP1, rabbit polyclonal anti-AZGP1 (1/5000 dilution, Biovendor, Candler, NC), with rabbit IgG (Jackson Immunoresearch) as the control; for chromogranin A, mouse monoclonal (LK2H10+PHE5) anti-human chromogranin (1/500 dilution; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and mouse IgG as the isotype control (Sigma, St Louis, MO); for mucin 5AC, mouse monoclonal (CLH2) anti-human mucin 5AC (1/50; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and mouse IgG as the isotype control (Sigma, St Louis, MO). Following incubation with the primary antibodies, goat anti-rabbit Cy5 (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was used as a secondary antibody for AZGP1 and goat anti-mouse Cy3 (Jackson ImmunoResearch) was used as a secondary antibody for chromogranin A and mucin 5AC. Nuclei were counter stained with 4?,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, 1/20,00 dilution, Molecular Probes). A total of nine slides were used for each airway epithelial cell sample: (1) AZGP1 alone, (2) rabbit IgG control for AZGP1, (3) chromogranin A alone, (4) mucin 5AC alone, (5) mouse IgG control for chromogranin and mucin 5AC, (6) AZGP1 and chromogranin A colocalization, (7) rabbit IgG control for AZGP1 and mouse IgG control for chromogranin A, (8) AZGP1 and mucin 5AC colocalization, and (9) rabbit IgG control for AZGP1 and mouse IgG control for mucin 5AC. Images were captured using an Olympus IX 70 fluorescence microscope with 60-fold magnification. Images were analyzed using MetaMorph software (Universal Imaging Corporation, Downingtown, PA). Pseudocolor images were formed by encoding Cy5 fluorescence in the green channel, Cy3 fluorescence in the red channel.  Quantitation of AZGP1 Positive Cells In order to compare the frequency of AZGP1 positive cells between healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers, cytospin preparations of large airway epithelial cells from 5 nonsmokers and 6 smokers were stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 or rabbit IgG as control. Goat anti-rabbit Cy3 was used as a secondary antibody. Nuclei were counter stained with DAPI. The percentage of AZGP1 positive cells was calculated as (AZGP1 positive cells per field/total number of nuclei per field) in 10 random 60x fields for each subject using Olympus IX 70 fluorescence microscope. Mean AZGP1 positive fractions in ten fields for each subject of the nonsmoking and smoking groups were compared by t test.  Western Analysis Western analysis was used to quantitatively assess AZGP1 protein expression in large airway brushing samples from healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. Brushed large airway epithelial cells were obtained as described. Initially, the cells were centrifuged at 600 × g, 5 min, 4°C. The whole cells were lysed with red cell lysis buffer (Cell Lytic Mammalian Tissue Lysis/Extraction reagent, Sigma-Aldrich) followed by whole cell lysis buffer (ACK lysing buffer, Invitrogen), and protease inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the sample. The sample was centrifuged at 10,000 × g and the protein-containing supernatant collected. The protein concentrations were assessed using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein concentration kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Equal concentration of protein (10 ?g) mixed with SDS Sample Loading Buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and reducing agent was loaded on Tris-glycine gels (Invitrogen). Protein electrophoresis was carried out at 100V, 2 hr, 23°C. Sample proteins were transferred (25V, 1hr, 4°C) to a 0.45 ?m thick PVDF membrane (Invitrogen) using a powerpack 300 power source (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and Tris-glycine transfer buffer (Bio-Rad). After transfer the membranes were blocked with 5% milk in PBS for 1 hr, 23°C. The membranes were incubated with primary rabbit polyclonal anti-AZGP1 antibody (Biovendor, Candler NC) at 1:1000 dilution, 2 hr, 4°C. Recombinant AZGP1 protein (Biovendor) was used as a positive control. Detection was performed using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (1:2,000 dilution, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and the Enhanced Chemiluminescent reagent (ECL) system (GE, Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) using Hyperfilm ECL (GE Healthcare). To assess the Western analyses quantitatively, the film was digitally imaged, maintaining exposure within the linear range of detection. The contrast was inverted, the pixel intensity of each band determined, and the background pixel intensity for a negative area of the film of identical size subtracted using MetaMorph image analysis software (Universal Imaging, Downingtown, PA). The membrane was subsequently stripped and reincubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-? actin antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) as a control for equal protein concentration.  Statistical Analysis Average expression values for AZGP1 in large airway samples were calculated from normalized expression levels for healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers and p values for all comparisons were calculated using the two sample unequal variance Welch t-test without correction for multiple testing.  Web Deposition of Data All data has been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus site, ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo ), which is curated by the National Center for Bioinformatics. The accession number is GSE10135.  Role of the Funding Source The funding source of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report or the decision to submit this report for publication.  Study Population and Biologic Samples A total of 92 individuals, 37 healthy nonsmokers and 55 healthy smokers, were included in microarray assessment of expression profiles of the large airway epithelium. These included 9 healthy nonsmokers and 13 healthy smokers from the HuGeneFL data set, 5 healthy nonsmokers and 6 healthy smokers from the HG-U133A data set, and 23 healthy nonsmokers and 36 healthy smokers from the HG-U133 Plus 2.0 data set ( Table I , Figure 1 , Supplemental Figure 1 ). All individuals had normal general physical examination and no significant prior medical history. There were no differences between groups with regard to gender, race or age (p>0.05). All individuals were HIV negative with blood and urine parameters within normal ranges (p>0.05 for all comparisons). The mean (± standard deviation) body mass index of the 37 healthy nonsmokers and 55 healthy smokers was 25.3 ± 3.6 kg/m2 and 27.7 ± 6.1 kg/m2, respectively, and the values were not significantly different (p> 0.05). Healthy smokers had an average history of smoking of 27 ± 2 pack-yr and venous blood carboxyhemoglobin levels and urine nicotine and cotinine confirmed smoking status of these individuals. Pulmonary function testing revealed normal lung function in healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. ( Table I ). The number of airway epithelial cells recovered ranged from 6.9 to 9.4 × 106 ( Table I ). In all cases, >96% of cells recovered were epithelial cells. The various categories of airway epithelial cells were as expected for large airways 44 .  Expression of AZGP1 in the Large Airway Epithelium Using the criteria of Affymetrix Detection Call of Present (P call) in ?50%, AZGP1 was significantly upregulated in the large airway epithelium of healthy smokers as compared to healthy nonsmokers in every data set ( Figure 1 , Supplemental Figure 1 ). Assessment of GEO deposited microarray data from the independent data set of Spira et al 45 confirmed the significant expression level of AZGP1 in the large airway epithelium smokers ( Figure 2 ). To confirm the results obtained from microarray studies, TaqMan RT-PCR was carried out on RNA samples from the large airways of 17 healthy nonsmokers and 15 healthy smokers ( Figure 3 ). The TaqMan data confirmed the upregulation of AZGP1 mRNA expression in healthy smokers compared to healthy nonsmokers (1.9 ± 0.34 -fold increase, p<0.05). Western analysis was carried out on large airway samples from a total of 10 healthy non-smokers and 10 healthy smokers to quantitatively assess AZGP1 expression. Overall, healthy smokers had increased AZGP1 expression when compared to nonsmokers ( Figure 4A ). Analysis of the digitally imaged film with MetaMorph image analysis software revealed significantly increased AZGP1 protein expression in healthy smokers compared to healthy nonsmokers ( Figure 4B ; p<0.02). Immunohistochemistry of large airway epithelial biopsy specimens obtained from healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers was used to assess the cell specific expression of AZGP1 ( Figure 5 ). Positive staining for AZGP1 was observed in the large airway epithelial cells in both nonsmokers and smokers. Qualitatively, healthy smokers demonstrated stronger staining and in more cells. To detect the cell type that expressing AZGP1, dual immunofluorescence was applied to large airway epithelial cells from a non-smoker prepared by cytospin using cell type specific marker mucin 5AC for secretory cells and chromogranin A for neuroendocrine cells ( Figure 6A–O ). Secretory cells expressing mucin5AC were readily detected and a subset of these also expressed AZGP1 ( Figure 6A–F ). Ciliated cells visible in the same fields never expressed AZGP1. The distinct subcellular distribution of AZGP1 and mucin5AC in conjunction with non-specific antibody controls (not shown) confirmed the specificity of each antibody. However, not all secretory cells expressed AZGP1 ( Figure 6 G–I ). Chromogranin A positive cells were also observed in the cytospin preparation of large airway epithelial cells and all of these expressed AZGP1( Figure 6 J–O ). Controls were performed with matched IgG isotypes to show that the observed signals are attributable to the specific proteins with no cross bleeding between the channels used for detection (not shown). To quantify the AZGP1 positive cells in nonsmokers and smokers, the fraction of AZGP1 positive cells in representative fields of immunofluorescently stained cytospin preparations from 5 nonsmokers and 6 smokers was assessed. Representative low–power views of slides used in the quantitative analysis were shown ( Figure 7A–D ). The percentage positive cells in healthy non-smokers (6.9 ± 0.7) was significantly lower than in healthy smokers (9.9 ± 0.9, p<0.05) ( Figure 7E ).  Results Study Population and Biologic Samples A total of 92 individuals, 37 healthy nonsmokers and 55 healthy smokers, were included in microarray assessment of expression profiles of the large airway epithelium. These included 9 healthy nonsmokers and 13 healthy smokers from the HuGeneFL data set, 5 healthy nonsmokers and 6 healthy smokers from the HG-U133A data set, and 23 healthy nonsmokers and 36 healthy smokers from the HG-U133 Plus 2.0 data set ( Table I , Figure 1 , Supplemental Figure 1 ). All individuals had normal general physical examination and no significant prior medical history. There were no differences between groups with regard to gender, race or age (p>0.05). All individuals were HIV negative with blood and urine parameters within normal ranges (p>0.05 for all comparisons). The mean (± standard deviation) body mass index of the 37 healthy nonsmokers and 55 healthy smokers was 25.3 ± 3.6 kg/m2 and 27.7 ± 6.1 kg/m2, respectively, and the values were not significantly different (p> 0.05). Healthy smokers had an average history of smoking of 27 ± 2 pack-yr and venous blood carboxyhemoglobin levels and urine nicotine and cotinine confirmed smoking status of these individuals. Pulmonary function testing revealed normal lung function in healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. ( Table I ). The number of airway epithelial cells recovered ranged from 6.9 to 9.4 × 106 ( Table I ). In all cases, >96% of cells recovered were epithelial cells. The various categories of airway epithelial cells were as expected for large airways 44 . Expression of AZGP1 in the Large Airway Epithelium Using the criteria of Affymetrix Detection Call of Present (P call) in ?50%, AZGP1 was significantly upregulated in the large airway epithelium of healthy smokers as compared to healthy nonsmokers in every data set ( Figure 1 , Supplemental Figure 1 ). Assessment of GEO deposited microarray data from the independent data set of Spira et al 45 confirmed the significant expression level of AZGP1 in the large airway epithelium smokers ( Figure 2 ). To confirm the results obtained from microarray studies, TaqMan RT-PCR was carried out on RNA samples from the large airways of 17 healthy nonsmokers and 15 healthy smokers ( Figure 3 ). The TaqMan data confirmed the upregulation of AZGP1 mRNA expression in healthy smokers compared to healthy nonsmokers (1.9 ± 0.34 -fold increase, p<0.05). Western analysis was carried out on large airway samples from a total of 10 healthy non-smokers and 10 healthy smokers to quantitatively assess AZGP1 expression. Overall, healthy smokers had increased AZGP1 expression when compared to nonsmokers ( Figure 4A ). Analysis of the digitally imaged film with MetaMorph image analysis software revealed significantly increased AZGP1 protein expression in healthy smokers compared to healthy nonsmokers ( Figure 4B ; p<0.02). Immunohistochemistry of large airway epithelial biopsy specimens obtained from healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers was used to assess the cell specific expression of AZGP1 ( Figure 5 ). Positive staining for AZGP1 was observed in the large airway epithelial cells in both nonsmokers and smokers. Qualitatively, healthy smokers demonstrated stronger staining and in more cells. To detect the cell type that expressing AZGP1, dual immunofluorescence was applied to large airway epithelial cells from a non-smoker prepared by cytospin using cell type specific marker mucin 5AC for secretory cells and chromogranin A for neuroendocrine cells ( Figure 6A–O ). Secretory cells expressing mucin5AC were readily detected and a subset of these also expressed AZGP1 ( Figure 6A–F ). Ciliated cells visible in the same fields never expressed AZGP1. The distinct subcellular distribution of AZGP1 and mucin5AC in conjunction with non-specific antibody controls (not shown) confirmed the specificity of each antibody. However, not all secretory cells expressed AZGP1 ( Figure 6 G–I ). Chromogranin A positive cells were also observed in the cytospin preparation of large airway epithelial cells and all of these expressed AZGP1( Figure 6 J–O ). Controls were performed with matched IgG isotypes to show that the observed signals are attributable to the specific proteins with no cross bleeding between the channels used for detection (not shown). To quantify the AZGP1 positive cells in nonsmokers and smokers, the fraction of AZGP1 positive cells in representative fields of immunofluorescently stained cytospin preparations from 5 nonsmokers and 6 smokers was assessed. Representative low–power views of slides used in the quantitative analysis were shown ( Figure 7A–D ). The percentage positive cells in healthy non-smokers (6.9 ± 0.7) was significantly lower than in healthy smokers (9.9 ± 0.9, p<0.05) ( Figure 7E ).  Results Study Population and Biologic Samples A total of 92 individuals, 37 healthy nonsmokers and 55 healthy smokers, were included in microarray assessment of expression profiles of the large airway epithelium. These included 9 healthy nonsmokers and 13 healthy smokers from the HuGeneFL data set, 5 healthy nonsmokers and 6 healthy smokers from the HG-U133A data set, and 23 healthy nonsmokers and 36 healthy smokers from the HG-U133 Plus 2.0 data set ( Table I , Figure 1 , Supplemental Figure 1 ). All individuals had normal general physical examination and no significant prior medical history. There were no differences between groups with regard to gender, race or age (p>0.05). All individuals were HIV negative with blood and urine parameters within normal ranges (p>0.05 for all comparisons). The mean (± standard deviation) body mass index of the 37 healthy nonsmokers and 55 healthy smokers was 25.3 ± 3.6 kg/m2 and 27.7 ± 6.1 kg/m2, respectively, and the values were not significantly different (p> 0.05). Healthy smokers had an average history of smoking of 27 ± 2 pack-yr and venous blood carboxyhemoglobin levels and urine nicotine and cotinine confirmed smoking status of these individuals. Pulmonary function testing revealed normal lung function in healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. ( Table I ). The number of airway epithelial cells recovered ranged from 6.9 to 9.4 × 106 ( Table I ). In all cases, >96% of cells recovered were epithelial cells. The various categories of airway epithelial cells were as expected for large airways 44 . Expression of AZGP1 in the Large Airway Epithelium Using the criteria of Affymetrix Detection Call of Present (P call) in ?50%, AZGP1 was significantly upregulated in the large airway epithelium of healthy smokers as compared to healthy nonsmokers in every data set ( Figure 1 , Supplemental Figure 1 ). Assessment of GEO deposited microarray data from the independent data set of Spira et al 45 confirmed the significant expression level of AZGP1 in the large airway epithelium smokers ( Figure 2 ). To confirm the results obtained from microarray studies, TaqMan RT-PCR was carried out on RNA samples from the large airways of 17 healthy nonsmokers and 15 healthy smokers ( Figure 3 ). The TaqMan data confirmed the upregulation of AZGP1 mRNA expression in healthy smokers compared to healthy nonsmokers (1.9 ± 0.34 -fold increase, p<0.05). Western analysis was carried out on large airway samples from a total of 10 healthy non-smokers and 10 healthy smokers to quantitatively assess AZGP1 expression. Overall, healthy smokers had increased AZGP1 expression when compared to nonsmokers ( Figure 4A ). Analysis of the digitally imaged film with MetaMorph image analysis software revealed significantly increased AZGP1 protein expression in healthy smokers compared to healthy nonsmokers ( Figure 4B ; p<0.02). Immunohistochemistry of large airway epithelial biopsy specimens obtained from healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers was used to assess the cell specific expression of AZGP1 ( Figure 5 ). Positive staining for AZGP1 was observed in the large airway epithelial cells in both nonsmokers and smokers. Qualitatively, healthy smokers demonstrated stronger staining and in more cells. To detect the cell type that expressing AZGP1, dual immunofluorescence was applied to large airway epithelial cells from a non-smoker prepared by cytospin using cell type specific marker mucin 5AC for secretory cells and chromogranin A for neuroendocrine cells ( Figure 6A–O ). Secretory cells expressing mucin5AC were readily detected and a subset of these also expressed AZGP1 ( Figure 6A–F ). Ciliated cells visible in the same fields never expressed AZGP1. The distinct subcellular distribution of AZGP1 and mucin5AC in conjunction with non-specific antibody controls (not shown) confirmed the specificity of each antibody. However, not all secretory cells expressed AZGP1 ( Figure 6 G–I ). Chromogranin A positive cells were also observed in the cytospin preparation of large airway epithelial cells and all of these expressed AZGP1( Figure 6 J–O ). Controls were performed with matched IgG isotypes to show that the observed signals are attributable to the specific proteins with no cross bleeding between the channels used for detection (not shown). To quantify the AZGP1 positive cells in nonsmokers and smokers, the fraction of AZGP1 positive cells in representative fields of immunofluorescently stained cytospin preparations from 5 nonsmokers and 6 smokers was assessed. Representative low–power views of slides used in the quantitative analysis were shown ( Figure 7A–D ). The percentage positive cells in healthy non-smokers (6.9 ± 0.7) was significantly lower than in healthy smokers (9.9 ± 0.9, p<0.05) ( Figure 7E ).  Discussion Cigarette smoking is linked with decreased body weight in smokers, and when smokers stop smoking, they often gain weight. Based on the knowledge that the airway epithelium takes the brunt of the stress of cigarette smoke 46 , we asked the question: does smoking alter the expression of a gene whose product is linked to weight loss? Using microarray analysis to compare gene expression of the airway epithelium in healthy smokers vs nonsmokers, we identified that AZGP1, a gene linked to weight loss 29 , 33 – 36 , 47 , was upregulated in the airway epithelium of smokers. The microarray data was confirmed at the mRNA level by quantitative TaqMan PCR, and at the protein level by immunohistochemistry and Western analysis. We do not have data demonstrating increased levels of AZGP1 in biologic fluids, and thus we cannot prove that smoking-induced increases in AZGP1 gene expression in airway epithelium is sufficient to mediate weight loss. However, with the background knowledge that smoking is associated with weight loss 1 – 27 , smoking cessation results in significant weight gain from increased body fat 11 – 16 , AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in vitro and in vivo 29 , 35 , 48 , high systemic levels of AZGP1 are linked to cachexia 34 , and administration of AZGP1 to experimental animals is associated with weight loss 29 , 35 , the finding that AZGP1 expression is up-regulated in the airway epithelium in healthy smokers provides another mechanism explaining the weight change that occurs in cigarette smokers. Smoking and Body Weight Cigarette smokers of the same age and gender weigh less in comparison to nonsmokers and anorexia is associated with cigarette smoking 1 – 7 , 25 , 27 . Weight gain is a known deterrent to smoking cessation with an average weight gain of 2.4 to 5 kg 12 – 16 . A primary reason smokers give for not trying to quit smoking and for relapsing after cessation is weight gain 16 , 49 , and the increase in the prevalence of overeating and obesity in the United States has been attributed in part to smoking cessation 50 . Weight gain after smoking cessation is largely because of increased body fat 12 – 16 . Mechanisms that have been investigated include increased energy intake, decreased resting metabolic rate, and decreased physical activity 8 , 14 , 19 , 23 , 51 , 52 . Studies have not consistently shown increased caloric intake as an explanation for the weight gain following smoking cessation 18 , 53 . Nicotine, the major addictive component of tobacco, mediates decreased body weight and food intake in experimental animals and induces lipolysis in smokers 22 , 24 , 27 . This lipolytic effect of smoking is attributed to the effect of nicotine on release of catecholamine, that in turn, mediates lipolysis in adipocytes 1 , 22 , 54 , 55 . Some studies have shown that nicotine, as a potent secretagogue in some cell types, mediates the release of peptides that regulate food intake and energy expenditure such as leptin, neuropeptide Y and orexins 25 , 56 , 57 . AZGP1 AZGP1 was first isolated from human plasma 33 , and later found to be expressed in secretory epithelial cells of the lung, liver, breast, gastrointestinal tract and sweat glands 38 . Consistent with its production by secretory epithelium, AZGP1 is present in most body secretions 58 , 59 . Several types of malignant tumors over-express AZGP1 34 , 60 – 64 , and it has been proposed as a cancer marker 34 , 60 – 64 . Although the biological functions of AZGP1 have not been fully elucidated, it has been demonstrated to act as a lipid mobilizing factor and is associated with the dramatic weight loss seen in many cancer patients 29 , 34 – 36 . AZGP1 is identified as an adipokine since it is secreted by adipocytes 37 , 65 . AZGP1 contains a class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) fold and is the sole soluble member of this superfamily of molecules 66 – 68 . Uncoupling proteins, members of the mitochondrial carrier family which are postulated to be involved in the control of energy metabolism and body fat, are induced by AZGP1 and cigarette smoke 27 , 28 , 30 – 32 , 69 – 71 . Treatment with AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in isolated mouse and human adipocytes, and induces a rapid and selective reduction in body fat both in normal and ob/ob mice 35 , 37 . This lipolytic action is mediated via the ?3-adrenoreceptor on adipocytes with up-regulation of cAMP 40 . Finally, AZGP1 deficient mice have increased body weight when subjected to a standard or high fat diet when compared to wild-type mice 47 . AZGP1, Cigarette Smoking and Expression in the Airway Epithelium Based on the knowledge that smoking is associated with weight loss, smoking cessation results in weight gain largely from increased body fat, and AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in vitro and in vivo , the finding that AZGP1 expression is upregulated in healthy smokers may reflect one mechanism contributing to the weight changes that occur in cigarette smokers. AZGP1 has been known to be expressed in normal lung tissue as evidenced by immunohistochemical staining demonstrating AZGP1 expression in airway secretory cells 38 . A study assessing AZGP1 mRNA levels in lung tissue of patients with primary lung cancer and lung metastases revealed no significant difference in AZGP1 levels among smokers and nonsmokers 39 , but the airway epithelium was not assessed directly, and thus the relationships among lung cancer, smoking and the expression of AZGP1 in airway epithelium is unclear. The blood AZGP1 was identified in the urine of cancer patients with cachexia 34 , 35 , and there are several studies supporting a role for AZGP1 in cancer 72 , 73 . In the present study, the data demonstrates that AZGP1 is significantly upregulated in the large airway epithelium of healthy cigarette smokers. Interestingly, the immunohistochemistry demonstrated not only expression of AZGPI in the secretory cells, but also in neuroendocrine cells of smokers. The observation that AZGP1 is expressed in neuroendocrine cells may be important in the context that hormonal effects resulting in lipolysis are known to be neurohormonally regulated 74 .  Discussion Cigarette smoking is linked with decreased body weight in smokers, and when smokers stop smoking, they often gain weight. Based on the knowledge that the airway epithelium takes the brunt of the stress of cigarette smoke 46 , we asked the question: does smoking alter the expression of a gene whose product is linked to weight loss? Using microarray analysis to compare gene expression of the airway epithelium in healthy smokers vs nonsmokers, we identified that AZGP1, a gene linked to weight loss 29 , 33 – 36 , 47 , was upregulated in the airway epithelium of smokers. The microarray data was confirmed at the mRNA level by quantitative TaqMan PCR, and at the protein level by immunohistochemistry and Western analysis. We do not have data demonstrating increased levels of AZGP1 in biologic fluids, and thus we cannot prove that smoking-induced increases in AZGP1 gene expression in airway epithelium is sufficient to mediate weight loss. However, with the background knowledge that smoking is associated with weight loss 1 – 27 , smoking cessation results in significant weight gain from increased body fat 11 – 16 , AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in vitro and in vivo 29 , 35 , 48 , high systemic levels of AZGP1 are linked to cachexia 34 , and administration of AZGP1 to experimental animals is associated with weight loss 29 , 35 , the finding that AZGP1 expression is up-regulated in the airway epithelium in healthy smokers provides another mechanism explaining the weight change that occurs in cigarette smokers. Smoking and Body Weight Cigarette smokers of the same age and gender weigh less in comparison to nonsmokers and anorexia is associated with cigarette smoking 1 – 7 , 25 , 27 . Weight gain is a known deterrent to smoking cessation with an average weight gain of 2.4 to 5 kg 12 – 16 . A primary reason smokers give for not trying to quit smoking and for relapsing after cessation is weight gain 16 , 49 , and the increase in the prevalence of overeating and obesity in the United States has been attributed in part to smoking cessation 50 . Weight gain after smoking cessation is largely because of increased body fat 12 – 16 . Mechanisms that have been investigated include increased energy intake, decreased resting metabolic rate, and decreased physical activity 8 , 14 , 19 , 23 , 51 , 52 . Studies have not consistently shown increased caloric intake as an explanation for the weight gain following smoking cessation 18 , 53 . Nicotine, the major addictive component of tobacco, mediates decreased body weight and food intake in experimental animals and induces lipolysis in smokers 22 , 24 , 27 . This lipolytic effect of smoking is attributed to the effect of nicotine on release of catecholamine, that in turn, mediates lipolysis in adipocytes 1 , 22 , 54 , 55 . Some studies have shown that nicotine, as a potent secretagogue in some cell types, mediates the release of peptides that regulate food intake and energy expenditure such as leptin, neuropeptide Y and orexins 25 , 56 , 57 . AZGP1 AZGP1 was first isolated from human plasma 33 , and later found to be expressed in secretory epithelial cells of the lung, liver, breast, gastrointestinal tract and sweat glands 38 . Consistent with its production by secretory epithelium, AZGP1 is present in most body secretions 58 , 59 . Several types of malignant tumors over-express AZGP1 34 , 60 – 64 , and it has been proposed as a cancer marker 34 , 60 – 64 . Although the biological functions of AZGP1 have not been fully elucidated, it has been demonstrated to act as a lipid mobilizing factor and is associated with the dramatic weight loss seen in many cancer patients 29 , 34 – 36 . AZGP1 is identified as an adipokine since it is secreted by adipocytes 37 , 65 . AZGP1 contains a class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) fold and is the sole soluble member of this superfamily of molecules 66 – 68 . Uncoupling proteins, members of the mitochondrial carrier family which are postulated to be involved in the control of energy metabolism and body fat, are induced by AZGP1 and cigarette smoke 27 , 28 , 30 – 32 , 69 – 71 . Treatment with AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in isolated mouse and human adipocytes, and induces a rapid and selective reduction in body fat both in normal and ob/ob mice 35 , 37 . This lipolytic action is mediated via the ?3-adrenoreceptor on adipocytes with up-regulation of cAMP 40 . Finally, AZGP1 deficient mice have increased body weight when subjected to a standard or high fat diet when compared to wild-type mice 47 . AZGP1, Cigarette Smoking and Expression in the Airway Epithelium Based on the knowledge that smoking is associated with weight loss, smoking cessation results in weight gain largely from increased body fat, and AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in vitro and in vivo , the finding that AZGP1 expression is upregulated in healthy smokers may reflect one mechanism contributing to the weight changes that occur in cigarette smokers. AZGP1 has been known to be expressed in normal lung tissue as evidenced by immunohistochemical staining demonstrating AZGP1 expression in airway secretory cells 38 . A study assessing AZGP1 mRNA levels in lung tissue of patients with primary lung cancer and lung metastases revealed no significant difference in AZGP1 levels among smokers and nonsmokers 39 , but the airway epithelium was not assessed directly, and thus the relationships among lung cancer, smoking and the expression of AZGP1 in airway epithelium is unclear. The blood AZGP1 was identified in the urine of cancer patients with cachexia 34 , 35 , and there are several studies supporting a role for AZGP1 in cancer 72 , 73 . In the present study, the data demonstrates that AZGP1 is significantly upregulated in the large airway epithelium of healthy cigarette smokers. Interestingly, the immunohistochemistry demonstrated not only expression of AZGPI in the secretory cells, but also in neuroendocrine cells of smokers. The observation that AZGP1 is expressed in neuroendocrine cells may be important in the context that hormonal effects resulting in lipolysis are known to be neurohormonally regulated 74 .  Smoking and Body Weight Cigarette smokers of the same age and gender weigh less in comparison to nonsmokers and anorexia is associated with cigarette smoking 1 – 7 , 25 , 27 . Weight gain is a known deterrent to smoking cessation with an average weight gain of 2.4 to 5 kg 12 – 16 . A primary reason smokers give for not trying to quit smoking and for relapsing after cessation is weight gain 16 , 49 , and the increase in the prevalence of overeating and obesity in the United States has been attributed in part to smoking cessation 50 . Weight gain after smoking cessation is largely because of increased body fat 12 – 16 . Mechanisms that have been investigated include increased energy intake, decreased resting metabolic rate, and decreased physical activity 8 , 14 , 19 , 23 , 51 , 52 . Studies have not consistently shown increased caloric intake as an explanation for the weight gain following smoking cessation 18 , 53 . Nicotine, the major addictive component of tobacco, mediates decreased body weight and food intake in experimental animals and induces lipolysis in smokers 22 , 24 , 27 . This lipolytic effect of smoking is attributed to the effect of nicotine on release of catecholamine, that in turn, mediates lipolysis in adipocytes 1 , 22 , 54 , 55 . Some studies have shown that nicotine, as a potent secretagogue in some cell types, mediates the release of peptides that regulate food intake and energy expenditure such as leptin, neuropeptide Y and orexins 25 , 56 , 57 .  Smoking and Body Weight Cigarette smokers of the same age and gender weigh less in comparison to nonsmokers and anorexia is associated with cigarette smoking 1 – 7 , 25 , 27 . Weight gain is a known deterrent to smoking cessation with an average weight gain of 2.4 to 5 kg 12 – 16 . A primary reason smokers give for not trying to quit smoking and for relapsing after cessation is weight gain 16 , 49 , and the increase in the prevalence of overeating and obesity in the United States has been attributed in part to smoking cessation 50 . Weight gain after smoking cessation is largely because of increased body fat 12 – 16 . Mechanisms that have been investigated include increased energy intake, decreased resting metabolic rate, and decreased physical activity 8 , 14 , 19 , 23 , 51 , 52 . Studies have not consistently shown increased caloric intake as an explanation for the weight gain following smoking cessation 18 , 53 . Nicotine, the major addictive component of tobacco, mediates decreased body weight and food intake in experimental animals and induces lipolysis in smokers 22 , 24 , 27 . This lipolytic effect of smoking is attributed to the effect of nicotine on release of catecholamine, that in turn, mediates lipolysis in adipocytes 1 , 22 , 54 , 55 . Some studies have shown that nicotine, as a potent secretagogue in some cell types, mediates the release of peptides that regulate food intake and energy expenditure such as leptin, neuropeptide Y and orexins 25 , 56 , 57 .  AZGP1 AZGP1 was first isolated from human plasma 33 , and later found to be expressed in secretory epithelial cells of the lung, liver, breast, gastrointestinal tract and sweat glands 38 . Consistent with its production by secretory epithelium, AZGP1 is present in most body secretions 58 , 59 . Several types of malignant tumors over-express AZGP1 34 , 60 – 64 , and it has been proposed as a cancer marker 34 , 60 – 64 . Although the biological functions of AZGP1 have not been fully elucidated, it has been demonstrated to act as a lipid mobilizing factor and is associated with the dramatic weight loss seen in many cancer patients 29 , 34 – 36 . AZGP1 is identified as an adipokine since it is secreted by adipocytes 37 , 65 . AZGP1 contains a class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) fold and is the sole soluble member of this superfamily of molecules 66 – 68 . Uncoupling proteins, members of the mitochondrial carrier family which are postulated to be involved in the control of energy metabolism and body fat, are induced by AZGP1 and cigarette smoke 27 , 28 , 30 – 32 , 69 – 71 . Treatment with AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in isolated mouse and human adipocytes, and induces a rapid and selective reduction in body fat both in normal and ob/ob mice 35 , 37 . This lipolytic action is mediated via the ?3-adrenoreceptor on adipocytes with up-regulation of cAMP 40 . Finally, AZGP1 deficient mice have increased body weight when subjected to a standard or high fat diet when compared to wild-type mice 47 .  AZGP1 AZGP1 was first isolated from human plasma 33 , and later found to be expressed in secretory epithelial cells of the lung, liver, breast, gastrointestinal tract and sweat glands 38 . Consistent with its production by secretory epithelium, AZGP1 is present in most body secretions 58 , 59 . Several types of malignant tumors over-express AZGP1 34 , 60 – 64 , and it has been proposed as a cancer marker 34 , 60 – 64 . Although the biological functions of AZGP1 have not been fully elucidated, it has been demonstrated to act as a lipid mobilizing factor and is associated with the dramatic weight loss seen in many cancer patients 29 , 34 – 36 . AZGP1 is identified as an adipokine since it is secreted by adipocytes 37 , 65 . AZGP1 contains a class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) fold and is the sole soluble member of this superfamily of molecules 66 – 68 . Uncoupling proteins, members of the mitochondrial carrier family which are postulated to be involved in the control of energy metabolism and body fat, are induced by AZGP1 and cigarette smoke 27 , 28 , 30 – 32 , 69 – 71 . Treatment with AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in isolated mouse and human adipocytes, and induces a rapid and selective reduction in body fat both in normal and ob/ob mice 35 , 37 . This lipolytic action is mediated via the ?3-adrenoreceptor on adipocytes with up-regulation of cAMP 40 . Finally, AZGP1 deficient mice have increased body weight when subjected to a standard or high fat diet when compared to wild-type mice 47 .  AZGP1, Cigarette Smoking and Expression in the Airway Epithelium Based on the knowledge that smoking is associated with weight loss, smoking cessation results in weight gain largely from increased body fat, and AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in vitro and in vivo , the finding that AZGP1 expression is upregulated in healthy smokers may reflect one mechanism contributing to the weight changes that occur in cigarette smokers. AZGP1 has been known to be expressed in normal lung tissue as evidenced by immunohistochemical staining demonstrating AZGP1 expression in airway secretory cells 38 . A study assessing AZGP1 mRNA levels in lung tissue of patients with primary lung cancer and lung metastases revealed no significant difference in AZGP1 levels among smokers and nonsmokers 39 , but the airway epithelium was not assessed directly, and thus the relationships among lung cancer, smoking and the expression of AZGP1 in airway epithelium is unclear. The blood AZGP1 was identified in the urine of cancer patients with cachexia 34 , 35 , and there are several studies supporting a role for AZGP1 in cancer 72 , 73 . In the present study, the data demonstrates that AZGP1 is significantly upregulated in the large airway epithelium of healthy cigarette smokers. Interestingly, the immunohistochemistry demonstrated not only expression of AZGPI in the secretory cells, but also in neuroendocrine cells of smokers. The observation that AZGP1 is expressed in neuroendocrine cells may be important in the context that hormonal effects resulting in lipolysis are known to be neurohormonally regulated 74 .  AZGP1, Cigarette Smoking and Expression in the Airway Epithelium Based on the knowledge that smoking is associated with weight loss, smoking cessation results in weight gain largely from increased body fat, and AZGP1 stimulates lipolysis in vitro and in vivo , the finding that AZGP1 expression is upregulated in healthy smokers may reflect one mechanism contributing to the weight changes that occur in cigarette smokers. AZGP1 has been known to be expressed in normal lung tissue as evidenced by immunohistochemical staining demonstrating AZGP1 expression in airway secretory cells 38 . A study assessing AZGP1 mRNA levels in lung tissue of patients with primary lung cancer and lung metastases revealed no significant difference in AZGP1 levels among smokers and nonsmokers 39 , but the airway epithelium was not assessed directly, and thus the relationships among lung cancer, smoking and the expression of AZGP1 in airway epithelium is unclear. The blood AZGP1 was identified in the urine of cancer patients with cachexia 34 , 35 , and there are several studies supporting a role for AZGP1 in cancer 72 , 73 . In the present study, the data demonstrates that AZGP1 is significantly upregulated in the large airway epithelium of healthy cigarette smokers. Interestingly, the immunohistochemistry demonstrated not only expression of AZGPI in the secretory cells, but also in neuroendocrine cells of smokers. The observation that AZGP1 is expressed in neuroendocrine cells may be important in the context that hormonal effects resulting in lipolysis are known to be neurohormonally regulated 74 .  Supplementary Material  Supplementary Material  Figures and Table Figure 1 Normalized expression levels of the fat depleting gene AZGP1 in large airway epithelium of 23 healthy nonsmokers and 36 healthy smokers. Ordinate - normalized gene expression levels for AZGP1 ± SEM. Shown is the data for the HG-U133 Plus 2.0 Gene microarray Figure 2 Normalized gene expression levels of AZGP1 from GEO deposited data of Spira et al 45 of the large airway epithelium with the HG-U133A chip ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo accession number GSE994). Error estimates ± SEM. Figure 3 Confirmation of the microarray results of AZGP1 expression levels in the large airway epithelium of healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers with TaqMan real-time RT-PCR for AZGP1. The data included large airway epithelium from 17 healthy nonsmokers and 15 healthy smokers. Ordinate - expression level normalized to mean for all nonsmokers ± SEM. Figure 4 Western analysis of AZGP1 protein expression in large airway epithelial cells of healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. A. Upper panel - AZGP1 protein expression in non-smokers (lanes 1–3) and smokers (lanes 4–6). Lower panel - same gel probed with anti ?-actin antibody, a control for protein loading. B . Quantification by densitometry of AZGP1 to ?-actin. The ratio for AZGP1 to ? actin is represented on the ordinate for the nonsmoker and smoker bands that are presented in figure 4A . Error bars represent the standard error. Figure 5 Immunohistochemistry assessment of AZGP1 expression (shown in red) in healthy nonsmoker and healthy smoker endobronchial biopsies. A. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy nonsmoker stained with rabbit IgG1 isotype control. B. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy nonsmoker, stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. C. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy nonsmoker stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. D. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy smoker stained with rabbit IgG1 isotype control. E. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy smoker stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. F. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy smoker stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. Bar = 0.01 mm. Figure 6 Immunofluorescence assessment of AZGP1 colocalization with mucin 5AC and chromogranin A. Cytospin preparations of large airway epithelium from a healthy nonsmoker were stained with antibodies against AZGP1, mucin 5AC and Chromogranin A, followed by a Cy5 conjugated secondary antibody for AZGP1 (shown in green) and a Cy3 conjugated antibody for mucin 5AC and chromogranin A (shown in red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (shown in blue); colocalization of AZGP1 with either mucin 5AC or Chromogranin A is shown in yellow. A–I. Colocalization of AZGP1 and mucin 5AC. A. Phase contrast image of a cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker showing large airway epithelial cells. B. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A), but in the Cy5 channel showing AZGP1 staining of large airway epithelial cells. C. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A), but in the Cy3 channel showing mucin 5AC staining. D. Cytospin preparation form a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A) showing colocalization of AZGP1 and mucin 5AC (shown in yellow); nuclei are shown in blue. E. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A) viewed in phase contrast showing colocalization of AZGP1 and mucin 5AC as well as DAPI nuclear staining. F. Cytospin preparation form a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A) demonstrating very minimal to no autofluorescence of large airway epithelial cells. G. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker viewed in phase contrast showing a secretory airway epithelial cell. H. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as G ) viewed with the Cy3 and Cy5 channels (stained with both AZGP1 and mucin 5AC antibodies), showing a secretory airway epithelial cell positive for mucin 5AC, but negative for AZGP1; nuclei are shown in blue. I . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as G ) showing an example of AZGP1 negative mucin 5AC positive secretory airway epithelial cell shown as three channel fluorescent view (including phase view). J–O . Colocalization of AZGP1 and Chromogranin A. J . Phase contrast view of cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker showing airway epithelial cell. K . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as J ) showing an example of colocalization AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell; nucleus is shown in blue. L . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as J ) showing an example of colocalization of AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell shown as three channel fluorescent view (including phase view). M. Phase contrast view of cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker showing airway epithelial cell. N . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as M ) showing an example of colocalization AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell; nucleus is shown in blue. O . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as M ) showing an example of colocalization of AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell shown as three channel fluorescent view (including phase view). Bar = 0.01 mm. Figure 7 Quantification of AZGP1 positive cells in healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. Cytospin preparations of large airway epithelial cells from 5 nonsmokers and 6 smokers were stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 or rabbit IgG as control. Goat anti-rabbit Cy3 was used as a secondary antibody. Nuclei were counter stained with DAPI. The percentage of AZGP1 positive cells was calculated as (AZGP1 positive cells per field/total number of nuclei per field) in 10 random 60x fields for each subject. Representative low-power (20x fields) staining of 1 healthy nonsmoker and 1 healthy smoker were showed ( A – D ). A. Healthy nonsmoker, rabbit IgG1 isotype control. B. Healthy smoker, rabbit IgG1 isotype control. C. Healthy nonsmoker, rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. D. Healthy smoker, rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. Bar = 0.01 mm. E . Quantification of AZGP1 positive cells; the ordinate shows percentage of AZGP1 positive cells; the abscissa shows the different groups (n=5 healthy nonsmokers, n=6 healthy smokers). Error bars represent the standard deviation. Table I Study Population and Large Airway Epithelial Samples 1 HuGeneFL array HG-U133A array HG-U133 Plus 2.0 array Parameter Normal non-smokers Normal smokers Normal non- smokers Normal smokers Normal non- smokers Normal smokers n 9 13 5 6 23 36 Sex (male/female) 7/2 9/4 3/2 4/2 17/6 25/11 Age (yr) 39 ± 4 38 ± 2 34 ± 2 39 ± 2 41 ± 1 43 ± 1 Race (B/W/H/A) 2 5/4/0/0 6/6/1/0 2/2/1/0 2/3/1/0 11/8/3/1 22/8/6/0 Smoking history (pack-yr) 0 21 ± 4 0 24 ± 1 0 27 ± 3 Urine nicotine 3 (ng/ml) 8 ± 7 3493 ± 308 2 ± 5 585 ± 169 Negative 1225 ± 242 Urine cotinine (ng/ml) Negative 1118 ± 204 34 ± 7 1129 ± 206 Negative 1028 ± 123 Venous CO-Hb 4 ND 3 4.0 ± 0.5 0.5 ± 0.05 4.6 ± 0.5 0.7 ± 0.1 2.4 ± 0.4 Pulmonary function parameters 5 ?FVC 102 ± 3 102 ± 3 111 ± 4 109 ± 7 108 ± 2 110 ± 2 ?FEV1 102 ± 2 102 ± 3 107 ± 5 100 ± 7 107 ± 3 110 ± 3 ?FEV1/FVC 81± 5 81 ± 5 81 ± 5 78 ± 9 82 ± 1 83 ± 1 ?TLC 103 ± 3 99 ± 3 100 ± 7 103 ± 6 100 ± 2 103 ± 2 ?DLCO 88 ± 2 85 ± 3 92 ± 5 91 ± 4 101 ± 3 95 ± 2 Cell population Total number recovered (×106) 9.4 ± 3.5 8.5 ± 3.9 6.9 ± 1.6 8.6 ± 3.2 7.2 ± 1.2 8.3 ± 1.2 ?% epithelial 99 ± 1 99 ± 1 98 ± 1 98 ± 1 99 ± 1 98 ± 1 ?% inflammatory 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 Differential cell count ?Ciliated 44 ± 3 46 ± 4 50 ± 2 43 ± 3 50 ± 3 44 ± 3 ?Secretory 9 ± 2 8 ± 2 9 ± 4 10 ± 2 8 ± 1 10 ± 2 ?Basal 25 ± 4 22 ± 4 20 ± 3 27 ± 4 22 ± 1 25 ± 2 ?Undifferentiated 21 ± 6 24 ± 3 21 ± 4 20 ± 2 19 ± 3 20 ± 1 1 Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation. 2 B=Black W=White H=Hispanic A=Asian. 3 Combined urine nicotine and cotinine of < 50 ng/mL is considered negative 4 Venous carboxy hemoglobin, a secondary marker of current smoking; nonsmokers < 1.5%. 5 All data is presented as % predicted except for FEV1/FVC which is presented as % observed.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Normalized expression levels of the fat depleting gene AZGP1 in large airway epithelium of 23 healthy nonsmokers and 36 healthy smokers. Ordinate - normalized gene expression levels for AZGP1 ± SEM. Shown is the data for the HG-U133 Plus 2.0 Gene microarray Figure 2 Normalized gene expression levels of AZGP1 from GEO deposited data of Spira et al 45 of the large airway epithelium with the HG-U133A chip ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo accession number GSE994). Error estimates ± SEM. Figure 3 Confirmation of the microarray results of AZGP1 expression levels in the large airway epithelium of healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers with TaqMan real-time RT-PCR for AZGP1. The data included large airway epithelium from 17 healthy nonsmokers and 15 healthy smokers. Ordinate - expression level normalized to mean for all nonsmokers ± SEM. Figure 4 Western analysis of AZGP1 protein expression in large airway epithelial cells of healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. A. Upper panel - AZGP1 protein expression in non-smokers (lanes 1–3) and smokers (lanes 4–6). Lower panel - same gel probed with anti ?-actin antibody, a control for protein loading. B . Quantification by densitometry of AZGP1 to ?-actin. The ratio for AZGP1 to ? actin is represented on the ordinate for the nonsmoker and smoker bands that are presented in figure 4A . Error bars represent the standard error. Figure 5 Immunohistochemistry assessment of AZGP1 expression (shown in red) in healthy nonsmoker and healthy smoker endobronchial biopsies. A. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy nonsmoker stained with rabbit IgG1 isotype control. B. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy nonsmoker, stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. C. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy nonsmoker stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. D. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy smoker stained with rabbit IgG1 isotype control. E. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy smoker stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. F. Endobronchial biopsy from a healthy smoker stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. Bar = 0.01 mm. Figure 6 Immunofluorescence assessment of AZGP1 colocalization with mucin 5AC and chromogranin A. Cytospin preparations of large airway epithelium from a healthy nonsmoker were stained with antibodies against AZGP1, mucin 5AC and Chromogranin A, followed by a Cy5 conjugated secondary antibody for AZGP1 (shown in green) and a Cy3 conjugated antibody for mucin 5AC and chromogranin A (shown in red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (shown in blue); colocalization of AZGP1 with either mucin 5AC or Chromogranin A is shown in yellow. A–I. Colocalization of AZGP1 and mucin 5AC. A. Phase contrast image of a cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker showing large airway epithelial cells. B. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A), but in the Cy5 channel showing AZGP1 staining of large airway epithelial cells. C. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A), but in the Cy3 channel showing mucin 5AC staining. D. Cytospin preparation form a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A) showing colocalization of AZGP1 and mucin 5AC (shown in yellow); nuclei are shown in blue. E. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A) viewed in phase contrast showing colocalization of AZGP1 and mucin 5AC as well as DAPI nuclear staining. F. Cytospin preparation form a healthy nonsmoker (same field as A) demonstrating very minimal to no autofluorescence of large airway epithelial cells. G. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker viewed in phase contrast showing a secretory airway epithelial cell. H. Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as G ) viewed with the Cy3 and Cy5 channels (stained with both AZGP1 and mucin 5AC antibodies), showing a secretory airway epithelial cell positive for mucin 5AC, but negative for AZGP1; nuclei are shown in blue. I . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as G ) showing an example of AZGP1 negative mucin 5AC positive secretory airway epithelial cell shown as three channel fluorescent view (including phase view). J–O . Colocalization of AZGP1 and Chromogranin A. J . Phase contrast view of cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker showing airway epithelial cell. K . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as J ) showing an example of colocalization AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell; nucleus is shown in blue. L . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as J ) showing an example of colocalization of AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell shown as three channel fluorescent view (including phase view). M. Phase contrast view of cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker showing airway epithelial cell. N . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as M ) showing an example of colocalization AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell; nucleus is shown in blue. O . Cytospin preparation from a healthy nonsmoker (same field as M ) showing an example of colocalization of AZGP1 and Chromogranin A in an airway epithelial cell shown as three channel fluorescent view (including phase view). Bar = 0.01 mm. Figure 7 Quantification of AZGP1 positive cells in healthy nonsmokers and healthy smokers. Cytospin preparations of large airway epithelial cells from 5 nonsmokers and 6 smokers were stained with rabbit anti-human AZGP1 or rabbit IgG as control. Goat anti-rabbit Cy3 was used as a secondary antibody. Nuclei were counter stained with DAPI. The percentage of AZGP1 positive cells was calculated as (AZGP1 positive cells per field/total number of nuclei per field) in 10 random 60x fields for each subject. Representative low-power (20x fields) staining of 1 healthy nonsmoker and 1 healthy smoker were showed ( A – D ). A. Healthy nonsmoker, rabbit IgG1 isotype control. B. Healthy smoker, rabbit IgG1 isotype control. C. Healthy nonsmoker, rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. D. Healthy smoker, rabbit anti-human AZGP1 antibody. Bar = 0.01 mm. E . Quantification of AZGP1 positive cells; the ordinate shows percentage of AZGP1 positive cells; the abscissa shows the different groups (n=5 healthy nonsmokers, n=6 healthy smokers). Error bars represent the standard deviation. Table I Study Population and Large Airway Epithelial Samples 1 HuGeneFL array HG-U133A array HG-U133 Plus 2.0 array Parameter Normal non-smokers Normal smokers Normal non- smokers Normal smokers Normal non- smokers Normal smokers n 9 13 5 6 23 36 Sex (male/female) 7/2 9/4 3/2 4/2 17/6 25/11 Age (yr) 39 ± 4 38 ± 2 34 ± 2 39 ± 2 41 ± 1 43 ± 1 Race (B/W/H/A) 2 5/4/0/0 6/6/1/0 2/2/1/0 2/3/1/0 11/8/3/1 22/8/6/0 Smoking history (pack-yr) 0 21 ± 4 0 24 ± 1 0 27 ± 3 Urine nicotine 3 (ng/ml) 8 ± 7 3493 ± 308 2 ± 5 585 ± 169 Negative 1225 ± 242 Urine cotinine (ng/ml) Negative 1118 ± 204 34 ± 7 1129 ± 206 Negative 1028 ± 123 Venous CO-Hb 4 ND 3 4.0 ± 0.5 0.5 ± 0.05 4.6 ± 0.5 0.7 ± 0.1 2.4 ± 0.4 Pulmonary function parameters 5 ?FVC 102 ± 3 102 ± 3 111 ± 4 109 ± 7 108 ± 2 110 ± 2 ?FEV1 102 ± 2 102 ± 3 107 ± 5 100 ± 7 107 ± 3 110 ± 3 ?FEV1/FVC 81± 5 81 ± 5 81 ± 5 78 ± 9 82 ± 1 83 ± 1 ?TLC 103 ± 3 99 ± 3 100 ± 7 103 ± 6 100 ± 2 103 ± 2 ?DLCO 88 ± 2 85 ± 3 92 ± 5 91 ± 4 101 ± 3 95 ± 2 Cell population Total number recovered (×106) 9.4 ± 3.5 8.5 ± 3.9 6.9 ± 1.6 8.6 ± 3.2 7.2 ± 1.2 8.3 ± 1.2 ?% epithelial 99 ± 1 99 ± 1 98 ± 1 98 ± 1 99 ± 1 98 ± 1 ?% inflammatory 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 1 ± 1 Differential cell count ?Ciliated 44 ± 3 46 ± 4 50 ± 2 43 ± 3 50 ± 3 44 ± 3 ?Secretory 9 ± 2 8 ± 2 9 ± 4 10 ± 2 8 ± 1 10 ± 2 ?Basal 25 ± 4 22 ± 4 20 ± 3 27 ± 4 22 ± 1 25 ± 2 ?Undifferentiated 21 ± 6 24 ± 3 21 ± 4 20 ± 2 19 ± 3 20 ± 1 1 Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation. 2 B=Black W=White H=Hispanic A=Asian. 3 Combined urine nicotine and cotinine of < 50 ng/mL is considered negative 4 Venous carboxy hemoglobin, a secondary marker of current smoking; nonsmokers < 1.5%. 5 All data is presented as % predicted except for FEV1/FVC which is presented as % observed. 