Human-like mouse models for testing the efficacy and safety of anti-? 2-microglobulin monoclonal antibodies to treat myeloma Purpose We recently demonstrated that anti-?2-microglobulin (?2M) mAbs have remarkably strong apoptotic effects on myeloma cells in vitro and in SCID(-hu) mice. However, whether the mAbs will be therapeutic and safe in the treatment of myeloma patients, in whom every tissues express low densities of MHC class I molecules and elevated levels of soluble ?2M are present, remains to be determined. Experimental Design In this study, human-like myeloma mouse models (HLA-A2-transgenic NOD/SCID mice) were developed, which express mature and functional human MHC class I (HLA-A2 and human ?2M) on murine organs and present high levels of circulating human ?2M derived from human myeloma cells. Myeloma-bearing mice were treated intraperitoneally with anti-?2M mAbs, and the distribution and effects of the mAbs on normal organs and established tumors were examined. Results Our results show that anti-?2M mAbs were effective in suppressing myeloma growth in treated mice. The therapeutic efficacy of the mAbs in these mice are comparable to those observed in myeloma-bearing nontransgenic NOD/SCID mice in which no human MHC class I is expressed on murine organs. Furthermore, although the mAbs can be detected on different organs, no tissue damage or cell apoptosis was observed in the mice. Conclusion Based on the antimyeloma efficacy and low toxicity in the mice, our study suggests that anti-?2M mAbs may be safe and the tissue-expressing and soluble ?2M may not compromise their therapeutic effects in myeloma patients. This study provides further support for the future application of the mAbs as therapeutic agents for MM.  Introduction Multiple myeloma (MM) is a B-cell malignancy characterized by accumulation of malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow and association with secretion of a monoclonal immunoglobulin (Ig) in the blood ( 1 , 2 ). Although the application of new therapeutic agents, such as thalidomide, lenalidomide, and bortezomib, has greatly advanced the treatment of MM, this disease remains fatal in the majority of patients ( 3 – 5 ). Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop novel therapeutic agents to treat MM. Targeted monoclonal antibody (mAb)-based therapy has demonstrated to provide clinical benefits to cancer patients ( 5 – 8 ). One of the most successful mAbs is rituximab ( 9 ), a chimeric mAb targeting B-cell surface antigen CD20. Rituximab has been widely and routinely used for the treatment of B-cell malignancies in clinic ( 10 – 14 ). However, only 20% of patients with MM responded to rituximab due to the fact that most myeloma cells do not express CD20 antigen ( 15 – 17 ). There are some potential target candidates for mAb therapy in myeloma, such as CD40 ( 18 – 20 ), HLA-A molecules ( 21 ), TRAIL receptor ( 22 ), insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor ( 23 ), fibroblast growth factor receptor-3 ( 24 ), free human kappa light chains ( 25 ), and interleukin-6 receptor ( 26 , 27 ). Unfortunately, none of the mAbs have been approved for the treatment of MM. Recently, we have shown that anti-?2-microglobulin (?2M) mAbs have remarkably tumoricidal activity on myeloma cells in vitro and in xenograft myeloma SCID and SCID-hu mice without damaging normal cells ( 28 ). The mAbs induce myeloma cell apoptosis via recruiting MHC class I molecules to lipid rafts, activating JNK and inhibiting PI3K/Akt and ERK signaling pathways, leading to caspase-9-dependent caspase activation ( 28 , 29 ). Since normal tissues also express low densities of human ?2M/MHC class I molecules, and elevated levels of circulating ?2M are present in the serum of MM patients, their in vivo tumoricidal efficacy and safety in patients are the major concerns for the future application of these mAbs. In the present study, we developed mouse models mimicking patient situation and examined antimyeloma activity and potential toxicity of the mAbs in the mouse models. Our results show that, despite the wide expression of mature human MHC class I molecules on almost every organs of the mice and the presence of high levels of circulating human ?2M in the serum, anti-?2M mAbs were therapeutic against established human myeloma, including myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma cells isolated from myeloma patients, without damaging normal tissues in the mice. Our study provides further and strong support for the future application of the mAbs as therapeutic agents for the treatment of MM patients.  Materials and methods Mice NOD. B6-Tg(HLA-A2.1)1Enge/DvsJ, which are NOD/SCID mice transgenic for human HLA-A2 ?-chain (A2-NOD/SCID), and NOD/SCID (NOD.CB17- Prkdc SCID /J) mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Balb/c mice were purchased from Harlan (Indianapolis, IN). All mice were maintained in American Association of Laboratory Animal Care-accredited facilities. All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Cell cultures Human myeloma cell lines MM.1S and ARP-1 were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 ?g/mL streptomycin at 37°C. CD138++ primary myeloma cells were isolated from bone marrow aspirates of myeloma patients by using magnetic-bead sorting (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. Generation of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs Generation of anti-?2M mAbs, clones of D1 and E6 (IgG1 isotype), was described in our previous study ( 28 ). Large-scale antibody production was achieved by purifying mAbs from mouse ascites. Flow cytometry analysis Flow cytometry analysis was performed using a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson). Surface expression of HLA-A2, human ?2M and CD138 was determined by using FITC-conjugated antibodies against human HLA-A2 (Serotec), human ?2M (Leinco Technologies, St. Louis, MO), or CD138 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Western blotting Cells were harvested, washed, and lysed with lysis buffer. Cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE, transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membrane, and immunoblotted with antibodies against phosphorylated proteins of the Src-family tyrosine kinases Lyn, Syk and PLC?2 (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Beverly. MA). The membrane was stripped and reprobed with ?-actin specific antibody (Sigma) to ensure equal protein loading. Secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were used, followed by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and autoradiography. Mouse experiments Six to 8 week-old female A2-NOD/SCID or NOD/SCID mice were subcutaneously inoculated in the right flank with 1 × 106 myeloma cells. Three to four weeks later when palpable tumors (?5 mm in diameter) developed, mice (5 per group) were treated with intraperitoneal injections of 500 ?l ascites containing about 1 mg D1 mAb every 3 days for a total of 4 injections. Control mice received equal amounts of mouse IgG1 or PBS. Tumor size was measured every 3 days in 2 dimensions using a caliper, and was calculated using the formula “tumor size (mm3) = 4?/3 × (tumor width/2)2 × (tumor length/2)”. Serum was collected from mice twice a week and used for detection of myeloma-derived M-proteins or their light chains by ELISA. Mice were humanely sacrificed when moribund or when subcutaneous tumors reached 15 mm in diameter. Survival was evaluated from the day of tumor inoculation until death. SCID-hu host was established as described in previous studies ( 30 ) in A2-NOD/SCID mice. Briefly, freshly isolated primary myeloma cells (1 × 106/mouse) were directly injected to implanted human bones. Once myeloma was established (circulating human M-proteins or their light chains reaching 50 ?g/mL), treatment began, which was the same as for A2-NOD/SCID mice. Histology and immunohistochemistry analysis Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of tumors and murine organs from myeloma-bearing mice were deparaffinized with xylene, and rehydrated through a graded alcohol series. For histology analysis, sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and histological examination was performed by pathologist. To perform immunohistochemistry analysis, endogenous peroxidase activity was first quenched with 3% hydrogen peroxide. The ability of anti-?2M mAbs to bind to the surface of tumors and murine tissues was determined using specific antibody against mouse IgG1. Expression of cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9 was detected using specific antibodies. Detection of signal was achieved using secondary biotinylated antibodies and streptavidin/horseradish peroxidase. Chromagen 3,3-diaminobenzidine/H2O2 was used and slides were counterstained with hematoxylin. In situ TUNEL assay was performed for cell apoptosis of tumors or murine tissues according to manufacturer’s instructions. To quantify cells with caspase activation or undergoing apoptosis induced by the mAbs in tumors and murine tissues, caspase-9- or -3-expressing cells or apoptotic cells detected by TUNEL assay were counted against unstained cells under a microscope. Cell counting in each slide was done in four randomly selected fields, with at least 200 cells per field by using a ×40 objective. Statistical analysis All data are shown as means ± standard deviation. The Student t test was used to compare various experimental groups. In mouse experiments, overall survival was measured using the Kaplan-Meier method. Significance was set at P < .05.  Mice NOD. B6-Tg(HLA-A2.1)1Enge/DvsJ, which are NOD/SCID mice transgenic for human HLA-A2 ?-chain (A2-NOD/SCID), and NOD/SCID (NOD.CB17- Prkdc SCID /J) mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Balb/c mice were purchased from Harlan (Indianapolis, IN). All mice were maintained in American Association of Laboratory Animal Care-accredited facilities. All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center.  Cell cultures Human myeloma cell lines MM.1S and ARP-1 were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 ?g/mL streptomycin at 37°C. CD138++ primary myeloma cells were isolated from bone marrow aspirates of myeloma patients by using magnetic-bead sorting (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center.  Generation of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs Generation of anti-?2M mAbs, clones of D1 and E6 (IgG1 isotype), was described in our previous study ( 28 ). Large-scale antibody production was achieved by purifying mAbs from mouse ascites.  Flow cytometry analysis Flow cytometry analysis was performed using a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson). Surface expression of HLA-A2, human ?2M and CD138 was determined by using FITC-conjugated antibodies against human HLA-A2 (Serotec), human ?2M (Leinco Technologies, St. Louis, MO), or CD138 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).  Western blotting Cells were harvested, washed, and lysed with lysis buffer. Cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE, transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membrane, and immunoblotted with antibodies against phosphorylated proteins of the Src-family tyrosine kinases Lyn, Syk and PLC?2 (Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Beverly. MA). The membrane was stripped and reprobed with ?-actin specific antibody (Sigma) to ensure equal protein loading. Secondary antibodies conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were used, followed by enhanced chemiluminescence (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and autoradiography.  Mouse experiments Six to 8 week-old female A2-NOD/SCID or NOD/SCID mice were subcutaneously inoculated in the right flank with 1 × 106 myeloma cells. Three to four weeks later when palpable tumors (?5 mm in diameter) developed, mice (5 per group) were treated with intraperitoneal injections of 500 ?l ascites containing about 1 mg D1 mAb every 3 days for a total of 4 injections. Control mice received equal amounts of mouse IgG1 or PBS. Tumor size was measured every 3 days in 2 dimensions using a caliper, and was calculated using the formula “tumor size (mm3) = 4?/3 × (tumor width/2)2 × (tumor length/2)”. Serum was collected from mice twice a week and used for detection of myeloma-derived M-proteins or their light chains by ELISA. Mice were humanely sacrificed when moribund or when subcutaneous tumors reached 15 mm in diameter. Survival was evaluated from the day of tumor inoculation until death. SCID-hu host was established as described in previous studies ( 30 ) in A2-NOD/SCID mice. Briefly, freshly isolated primary myeloma cells (1 × 106/mouse) were directly injected to implanted human bones. Once myeloma was established (circulating human M-proteins or their light chains reaching 50 ?g/mL), treatment began, which was the same as for A2-NOD/SCID mice.  Histology and immunohistochemistry analysis Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of tumors and murine organs from myeloma-bearing mice were deparaffinized with xylene, and rehydrated through a graded alcohol series. For histology analysis, sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and histological examination was performed by pathologist. To perform immunohistochemistry analysis, endogenous peroxidase activity was first quenched with 3% hydrogen peroxide. The ability of anti-?2M mAbs to bind to the surface of tumors and murine tissues was determined using specific antibody against mouse IgG1. Expression of cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9 was detected using specific antibodies. Detection of signal was achieved using secondary biotinylated antibodies and streptavidin/horseradish peroxidase. Chromagen 3,3-diaminobenzidine/H2O2 was used and slides were counterstained with hematoxylin. In situ TUNEL assay was performed for cell apoptosis of tumors or murine tissues according to manufacturer’s instructions. To quantify cells with caspase activation or undergoing apoptosis induced by the mAbs in tumors and murine tissues, caspase-9- or -3-expressing cells or apoptotic cells detected by TUNEL assay were counted against unstained cells under a microscope. Cell counting in each slide was done in four randomly selected fields, with at least 200 cells per field by using a ×40 objective.  Statistical analysis All data are shown as means ± standard deviation. The Student t test was used to compare various experimental groups. In mouse experiments, overall survival was measured using the Kaplan-Meier method. Significance was set at P < .05.  Results Myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse models Although our previous studies demonstrated that anti-?2M mAbs selectively killed myeloma cells in vitro and were therapeutic in vivo in myeloma-bearing SCID and SCID-hu mice, concerns are raised whether the mAbs can effectively eradicate established myeloma without causing tissue damage in patients with MM in whom every tissues express low density of ?2M/MHC class I and elevated levels of circulating ?2M are present in serum. To address these concerns, human-like mouse models are required. In this study we chose to use the A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish our mouse models. We reasoned that, although the mice are transgenic for HLA-A2 ?-chain, high levels of myeloma-derived human ?2M, which were detected in the serum of myeloma-bearing SCID mice in our previous studies ( 28 ), could bind with the ?-chain and form mature human MHC class I molecules. To examine this hypothesis, A2-NOD/SCID and nontransgenic NOD/SCID mice were injected with human myeloma cell lines (ARP-1 or MM.1S) and, after palpable tumors (? 5 mm) developed, mice were sacrificed. Serum and tissues were collected and single cell suspensions were prepared from the tissues. By using flow cytometry analysis for detection of surface human HLA-A2 (?-chain specific), ?2M and CD138 (a myeloma surface marker), we show that all tissues, including the brain, from myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M, but not CD138 molecules. Myeloma cells (ARP-1) from both mice express human ?2M and CD138 but not HLA-A2 (ARP-1 cells are HLA-A2?). Fig. 1A shows representative histograms of the expression of these molecules on APR-1 myeloma cells, on the spleen, liver and bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, and on bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice. The levels (mean fluorescence intensity) of these molecules on the tissues and tumors of the mice are shown in Fig. 1B . As expected, tumor-free A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express HLA-A2 ?-chain but not human ?2M or CD138 ( Fig. 1C ). Similar results were obtained from A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice inoculated with myeloma cells MM.1S (data not shown). These results support our hypothesis and indicate that, after establishment of myeloma, A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I (HLA-A2 and human ?2M) molecules on various normal tissue cells. Similar to patients, the levels of tissue-expressing HLA-A2 and human ?2M molecules are significantly lower than those of tumor cells. We also quantified the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating human ?2M and M-protein in these mice. As shown in Fig. 1D , high levels (2 ?g/mL) of circulating human ?2M can be detected in both mice bearing palpable tumors (? 5 mm in diameters for subcutaneously injected cell lines; or M-protein ? 50 ?g/ml for intra-bone injected primary myeloma cells in SCID-hu mice) but not in tumor-free mice. The levels of circulating ?2M were the same in the mice, comparable to those seen in myeloma patients (3.1 ?g/mL as mean value, with a range of 0.1–28.5 ?g/mL) ( 3 ), and further elevated along with tumor growth in the mice (data not shown). Fig. 1E shows the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating M-proteins in the mice. Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice (data not shown). Taken together, these findings indicate that myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice are a suitable model for our study because they express human mature MHC class I molecules on almost all tissues and present high levels of circulating human ?2M in serum. In vivo distribution of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs in the mice Next we examined the distribution of anti-?2M mAbs on normal murine tissues and established tumors in these two mouse models. After palpable myeloma was established, mice were injected intraperitoneally with 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1. Two days after the injection, mice were sacrificed, tumors and murine organs were removed, and tissue sections were stained with specific antibodies against mouse IgG1 conjugated with HRP. As shown in Fig 2A , the mAb was found on the surface of tumors and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver but not brain in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. No mAb was found in the organs of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice except the tumors ( Fig. 2B ). Similar results were obtained from the mice injected with mAb E6 and in MM.1S-bearing mice injected with D1 mAb (data not shown). These results confirm our previous findings that the normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M and indicate that the mAbs bind with human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells in A2-NOD/SCID mice in vivo. Human MHC class I molecules on normal tissue cells of A2-NOD/SCID mice are functional Although we have shown that normal tissues of A2-NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I molecules, a question remains whether these molecules are functional and able to transduce signals. Splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice were obtained and incubated with 10 ?g/mL of soluble human ?2M overnight to form HLA-A2/human ?2M complex. As shown in Fig. 3A , human ?2M could be detected on splenocytes pretreated with soluble human ?2M. Fig. 3B shows surface expression of HLA-A2 and it is evident that pretreatment with soluble human ?2M upregulated the expression of HLA-A2 on splenocytes. As previous studies showed that cross-linking MHC class I on lymphocytes, such as T- and B-cells, activated the Src family kinase-dependent signaling pathways ( 31 , 32 ), we focused on the Src family kinases Lyn, Syk and their downstream protein PLC?2. Human ?2M-pretreated mouse splenocytes were cultured in 24-well plates pre-coated with 100 ?g/mL of mAb W6/32 specific for mature human MHC class I for various times, and cell lysates were used for Western blotting analysis. Using specific antibodies against the kinases, our results show that cross-linking human MHC class I by W6/32 mAb triggered phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 in murine splenocytes ( Fig. 3C ). As a positive control, human CD3+ lymphocytes isolated from blood of healthy donors were treated in the same way by immobilized mAb W6/32 and show similarly upregulated phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 upon cross-linking of surface MHC class I molecules ( Fig. 3D ). These findings indicate that the mature MHC class I complexes on normal murine cells were functional. In vivo efficacy of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs to treat established myeloma in A2-NOD/SCID mice After confirming that A2-NOD/SCID mice are suited for our study, we proceeded to examine the efficacy and toxicity of the mAbs to treat established myeloma in these models. Mice were subcutaneously inoculated with myeloma cells ARP-1. When palpable tumors developed, treatment was initiated, which was intraperitoneal injections of 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1 twice a week for a total of 4 injections. Control mice received injections of equal amounts of mouse IgG1 or PBS. Tumor burdens were measured as tumor volumes. As expected, myeloma cells grew more aggressively in NOD/SCID mice than SCID mice (data not shown), since NOD/SCID mice have very few NK cells, while SCID mice have normal numbers of NK cells. Our results show that, although all myeloma-bearing mice have elevated levels of circulating human ?2M and A2-NOD/SCID mice express human MHC class I on almost every tissues, treatment with mAb D1 significantly reduced tumor burdens ( Fig. 4A ) and prolonged survival ( Fig. 4B ) in A2-NOD/SCID ( P < 0.005, compared with controls) and in NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 4C and Fig. 4D ; P < 0.005, compared with controls). Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing mice treated with D1 mAb (data not shown). Taken together, these results clearly show that the anti-?2M mAbs were therapeutic against established myeloma in human-like mouse models. To evaluate the effects of anti-?2M mAbs on established primary myeloma in the mice, we used A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish SCID-hu hosts as described previously ( 30 ). This model offers the best representation of clinical myeloma ( 30 , 33 ). A2-NOD/SCID mice were first implanted subcutaneously with fetal human bone chips and 4–6 weeks later, primary myeloma cells were injected directly into the human bones. Tumor burdens were measured as levels of circulating human IgG (M-proteins). After myeloma established (circulating human M-protein reaches ? 50 ?g/mL), treatment with mAb D1 started, which was the same as for myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. As shown in Fig. 4E , treatment with the mAb significantly reduced the tumor burdens in primary myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID-hu mice. Treatment with mouse IgG1 or PBS had no effects on myeloma growth. Together, these results indicated that the mAbs have high therapeutic efficacy on both myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma cells in vivo in human-like mouse models. In vivo validation of mAb-induced apoptosis in tumor cells Since our previous studies demonstrated that the mAbs induced myeloma cell apoptosis via a caspase-dependent pathway, we wanted to validate the antimyeloma mechanism of the mAbs in the mouse models. Tumor-bearing mice were sacrificed after treatment, and tumors were removed for examining caspase-9 and caspase–3 activities by immunohistochemistry analysis, and for detecting tumor cell apoptosis by in situ TUNEL assay. Injections of the mAbs activated and cleaved caspase-9 and caspase-3 and induced apoptosis in myeloma cells in both treated A2-NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5A ) and in NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5B ) mice. In tumor sections, around 50% of cells had activated caspase-9 or -3, or were apoptotic in mice treated with the mAbs ( Fig. 5D ). _No caspase activation or cell apoptosis were detected in tumor cells of mice treated with mouse IgG1 ( Fig. 5C ). Thus, anti-?2M mAb-induced tumoricidal activity in the mice was also dependent on mAb-induced, caspase-mediated apoptosis in myeloma cells in vivo. Anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs did not damage ?<sub>2</sub>M/MHC class I-expressing normal tissues in treated mice The potential toxicity of anti-?2M mAbs is another major concern for their future application to treat patients. Using the myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse model, we examined whether the mAbs damaged human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells and tissues in vivo. After treatment with four intraperitoneal injections of the mAbs, mice were sacrificed and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver, and kidney were removed for histological examination. Although the mAbs bind with the organs of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, all of the organs examined display normal histology ( Fig. 6A , upper panel). As expected, no tissue damage was observed in mAb-treated myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice in which no human ?2M or MHC class I molecules are expressed ( Fig. 6A , lower panel). We also examined whether the treatment with mAbs induced caspase activation and cell apoptosis in normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 6B ). Using specific antibodies for cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9, we show that treatment with the mAbs did not induce obvious caspase-9 or caspase-3 activation in different organs ( Fig. 5D ). Furthermore, only fewer apoptotic cells were detected in these normal tissues by using TUNEL assay ( Fig. 5D ). Thus, these findings indicate that, although anti-?2M mAbs bind with normal cells and their surface human MHC class I molecules are functional, the mAbs did not induce apoptosis in normal cells or damage the organs in vivo.  Results Myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse models Although our previous studies demonstrated that anti-?2M mAbs selectively killed myeloma cells in vitro and were therapeutic in vivo in myeloma-bearing SCID and SCID-hu mice, concerns are raised whether the mAbs can effectively eradicate established myeloma without causing tissue damage in patients with MM in whom every tissues express low density of ?2M/MHC class I and elevated levels of circulating ?2M are present in serum. To address these concerns, human-like mouse models are required. In this study we chose to use the A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish our mouse models. We reasoned that, although the mice are transgenic for HLA-A2 ?-chain, high levels of myeloma-derived human ?2M, which were detected in the serum of myeloma-bearing SCID mice in our previous studies ( 28 ), could bind with the ?-chain and form mature human MHC class I molecules. To examine this hypothesis, A2-NOD/SCID and nontransgenic NOD/SCID mice were injected with human myeloma cell lines (ARP-1 or MM.1S) and, after palpable tumors (? 5 mm) developed, mice were sacrificed. Serum and tissues were collected and single cell suspensions were prepared from the tissues. By using flow cytometry analysis for detection of surface human HLA-A2 (?-chain specific), ?2M and CD138 (a myeloma surface marker), we show that all tissues, including the brain, from myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M, but not CD138 molecules. Myeloma cells (ARP-1) from both mice express human ?2M and CD138 but not HLA-A2 (ARP-1 cells are HLA-A2?). Fig. 1A shows representative histograms of the expression of these molecules on APR-1 myeloma cells, on the spleen, liver and bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, and on bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice. The levels (mean fluorescence intensity) of these molecules on the tissues and tumors of the mice are shown in Fig. 1B . As expected, tumor-free A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express HLA-A2 ?-chain but not human ?2M or CD138 ( Fig. 1C ). Similar results were obtained from A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice inoculated with myeloma cells MM.1S (data not shown). These results support our hypothesis and indicate that, after establishment of myeloma, A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I (HLA-A2 and human ?2M) molecules on various normal tissue cells. Similar to patients, the levels of tissue-expressing HLA-A2 and human ?2M molecules are significantly lower than those of tumor cells. We also quantified the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating human ?2M and M-protein in these mice. As shown in Fig. 1D , high levels (2 ?g/mL) of circulating human ?2M can be detected in both mice bearing palpable tumors (? 5 mm in diameters for subcutaneously injected cell lines; or M-protein ? 50 ?g/ml for intra-bone injected primary myeloma cells in SCID-hu mice) but not in tumor-free mice. The levels of circulating ?2M were the same in the mice, comparable to those seen in myeloma patients (3.1 ?g/mL as mean value, with a range of 0.1–28.5 ?g/mL) ( 3 ), and further elevated along with tumor growth in the mice (data not shown). Fig. 1E shows the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating M-proteins in the mice. Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice (data not shown). Taken together, these findings indicate that myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice are a suitable model for our study because they express human mature MHC class I molecules on almost all tissues and present high levels of circulating human ?2M in serum. In vivo distribution of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs in the mice Next we examined the distribution of anti-?2M mAbs on normal murine tissues and established tumors in these two mouse models. After palpable myeloma was established, mice were injected intraperitoneally with 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1. Two days after the injection, mice were sacrificed, tumors and murine organs were removed, and tissue sections were stained with specific antibodies against mouse IgG1 conjugated with HRP. As shown in Fig 2A , the mAb was found on the surface of tumors and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver but not brain in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. No mAb was found in the organs of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice except the tumors ( Fig. 2B ). Similar results were obtained from the mice injected with mAb E6 and in MM.1S-bearing mice injected with D1 mAb (data not shown). These results confirm our previous findings that the normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M and indicate that the mAbs bind with human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells in A2-NOD/SCID mice in vivo. Human MHC class I molecules on normal tissue cells of A2-NOD/SCID mice are functional Although we have shown that normal tissues of A2-NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I molecules, a question remains whether these molecules are functional and able to transduce signals. Splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice were obtained and incubated with 10 ?g/mL of soluble human ?2M overnight to form HLA-A2/human ?2M complex. As shown in Fig. 3A , human ?2M could be detected on splenocytes pretreated with soluble human ?2M. Fig. 3B shows surface expression of HLA-A2 and it is evident that pretreatment with soluble human ?2M upregulated the expression of HLA-A2 on splenocytes. As previous studies showed that cross-linking MHC class I on lymphocytes, such as T- and B-cells, activated the Src family kinase-dependent signaling pathways ( 31 , 32 ), we focused on the Src family kinases Lyn, Syk and their downstream protein PLC?2. Human ?2M-pretreated mouse splenocytes were cultured in 24-well plates pre-coated with 100 ?g/mL of mAb W6/32 specific for mature human MHC class I for various times, and cell lysates were used for Western blotting analysis. Using specific antibodies against the kinases, our results show that cross-linking human MHC class I by W6/32 mAb triggered phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 in murine splenocytes ( Fig. 3C ). As a positive control, human CD3+ lymphocytes isolated from blood of healthy donors were treated in the same way by immobilized mAb W6/32 and show similarly upregulated phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 upon cross-linking of surface MHC class I molecules ( Fig. 3D ). These findings indicate that the mature MHC class I complexes on normal murine cells were functional. In vivo efficacy of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs to treat established myeloma in A2-NOD/SCID mice After confirming that A2-NOD/SCID mice are suited for our study, we proceeded to examine the efficacy and toxicity of the mAbs to treat established myeloma in these models. Mice were subcutaneously inoculated with myeloma cells ARP-1. When palpable tumors developed, treatment was initiated, which was intraperitoneal injections of 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1 twice a week for a total of 4 injections. Control mice received injections of equal amounts of mouse IgG1 or PBS. Tumor burdens were measured as tumor volumes. As expected, myeloma cells grew more aggressively in NOD/SCID mice than SCID mice (data not shown), since NOD/SCID mice have very few NK cells, while SCID mice have normal numbers of NK cells. Our results show that, although all myeloma-bearing mice have elevated levels of circulating human ?2M and A2-NOD/SCID mice express human MHC class I on almost every tissues, treatment with mAb D1 significantly reduced tumor burdens ( Fig. 4A ) and prolonged survival ( Fig. 4B ) in A2-NOD/SCID ( P < 0.005, compared with controls) and in NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 4C and Fig. 4D ; P < 0.005, compared with controls). Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing mice treated with D1 mAb (data not shown). Taken together, these results clearly show that the anti-?2M mAbs were therapeutic against established myeloma in human-like mouse models. To evaluate the effects of anti-?2M mAbs on established primary myeloma in the mice, we used A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish SCID-hu hosts as described previously ( 30 ). This model offers the best representation of clinical myeloma ( 30 , 33 ). A2-NOD/SCID mice were first implanted subcutaneously with fetal human bone chips and 4–6 weeks later, primary myeloma cells were injected directly into the human bones. Tumor burdens were measured as levels of circulating human IgG (M-proteins). After myeloma established (circulating human M-protein reaches ? 50 ?g/mL), treatment with mAb D1 started, which was the same as for myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. As shown in Fig. 4E , treatment with the mAb significantly reduced the tumor burdens in primary myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID-hu mice. Treatment with mouse IgG1 or PBS had no effects on myeloma growth. Together, these results indicated that the mAbs have high therapeutic efficacy on both myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma cells in vivo in human-like mouse models. In vivo validation of mAb-induced apoptosis in tumor cells Since our previous studies demonstrated that the mAbs induced myeloma cell apoptosis via a caspase-dependent pathway, we wanted to validate the antimyeloma mechanism of the mAbs in the mouse models. Tumor-bearing mice were sacrificed after treatment, and tumors were removed for examining caspase-9 and caspase–3 activities by immunohistochemistry analysis, and for detecting tumor cell apoptosis by in situ TUNEL assay. Injections of the mAbs activated and cleaved caspase-9 and caspase-3 and induced apoptosis in myeloma cells in both treated A2-NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5A ) and in NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5B ) mice. In tumor sections, around 50% of cells had activated caspase-9 or -3, or were apoptotic in mice treated with the mAbs ( Fig. 5D ). _No caspase activation or cell apoptosis were detected in tumor cells of mice treated with mouse IgG1 ( Fig. 5C ). Thus, anti-?2M mAb-induced tumoricidal activity in the mice was also dependent on mAb-induced, caspase-mediated apoptosis in myeloma cells in vivo. Anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs did not damage ?<sub>2</sub>M/MHC class I-expressing normal tissues in treated mice The potential toxicity of anti-?2M mAbs is another major concern for their future application to treat patients. Using the myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse model, we examined whether the mAbs damaged human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells and tissues in vivo. After treatment with four intraperitoneal injections of the mAbs, mice were sacrificed and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver, and kidney were removed for histological examination. Although the mAbs bind with the organs of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, all of the organs examined display normal histology ( Fig. 6A , upper panel). As expected, no tissue damage was observed in mAb-treated myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice in which no human ?2M or MHC class I molecules are expressed ( Fig. 6A , lower panel). We also examined whether the treatment with mAbs induced caspase activation and cell apoptosis in normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 6B ). Using specific antibodies for cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9, we show that treatment with the mAbs did not induce obvious caspase-9 or caspase-3 activation in different organs ( Fig. 5D ). Furthermore, only fewer apoptotic cells were detected in these normal tissues by using TUNEL assay ( Fig. 5D ). Thus, these findings indicate that, although anti-?2M mAbs bind with normal cells and their surface human MHC class I molecules are functional, the mAbs did not induce apoptosis in normal cells or damage the organs in vivo.  Myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse models Although our previous studies demonstrated that anti-?2M mAbs selectively killed myeloma cells in vitro and were therapeutic in vivo in myeloma-bearing SCID and SCID-hu mice, concerns are raised whether the mAbs can effectively eradicate established myeloma without causing tissue damage in patients with MM in whom every tissues express low density of ?2M/MHC class I and elevated levels of circulating ?2M are present in serum. To address these concerns, human-like mouse models are required. In this study we chose to use the A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish our mouse models. We reasoned that, although the mice are transgenic for HLA-A2 ?-chain, high levels of myeloma-derived human ?2M, which were detected in the serum of myeloma-bearing SCID mice in our previous studies ( 28 ), could bind with the ?-chain and form mature human MHC class I molecules. To examine this hypothesis, A2-NOD/SCID and nontransgenic NOD/SCID mice were injected with human myeloma cell lines (ARP-1 or MM.1S) and, after palpable tumors (? 5 mm) developed, mice were sacrificed. Serum and tissues were collected and single cell suspensions were prepared from the tissues. By using flow cytometry analysis for detection of surface human HLA-A2 (?-chain specific), ?2M and CD138 (a myeloma surface marker), we show that all tissues, including the brain, from myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M, but not CD138 molecules. Myeloma cells (ARP-1) from both mice express human ?2M and CD138 but not HLA-A2 (ARP-1 cells are HLA-A2?). Fig. 1A shows representative histograms of the expression of these molecules on APR-1 myeloma cells, on the spleen, liver and bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, and on bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice. The levels (mean fluorescence intensity) of these molecules on the tissues and tumors of the mice are shown in Fig. 1B . As expected, tumor-free A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express HLA-A2 ?-chain but not human ?2M or CD138 ( Fig. 1C ). Similar results were obtained from A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice inoculated with myeloma cells MM.1S (data not shown). These results support our hypothesis and indicate that, after establishment of myeloma, A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I (HLA-A2 and human ?2M) molecules on various normal tissue cells. Similar to patients, the levels of tissue-expressing HLA-A2 and human ?2M molecules are significantly lower than those of tumor cells. We also quantified the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating human ?2M and M-protein in these mice. As shown in Fig. 1D , high levels (2 ?g/mL) of circulating human ?2M can be detected in both mice bearing palpable tumors (? 5 mm in diameters for subcutaneously injected cell lines; or M-protein ? 50 ?g/ml for intra-bone injected primary myeloma cells in SCID-hu mice) but not in tumor-free mice. The levels of circulating ?2M were the same in the mice, comparable to those seen in myeloma patients (3.1 ?g/mL as mean value, with a range of 0.1–28.5 ?g/mL) ( 3 ), and further elevated along with tumor growth in the mice (data not shown). Fig. 1E shows the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating M-proteins in the mice. Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice (data not shown). Taken together, these findings indicate that myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice are a suitable model for our study because they express human mature MHC class I molecules on almost all tissues and present high levels of circulating human ?2M in serum.  Myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse models Although our previous studies demonstrated that anti-?2M mAbs selectively killed myeloma cells in vitro and were therapeutic in vivo in myeloma-bearing SCID and SCID-hu mice, concerns are raised whether the mAbs can effectively eradicate established myeloma without causing tissue damage in patients with MM in whom every tissues express low density of ?2M/MHC class I and elevated levels of circulating ?2M are present in serum. To address these concerns, human-like mouse models are required. In this study we chose to use the A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish our mouse models. We reasoned that, although the mice are transgenic for HLA-A2 ?-chain, high levels of myeloma-derived human ?2M, which were detected in the serum of myeloma-bearing SCID mice in our previous studies ( 28 ), could bind with the ?-chain and form mature human MHC class I molecules. To examine this hypothesis, A2-NOD/SCID and nontransgenic NOD/SCID mice were injected with human myeloma cell lines (ARP-1 or MM.1S) and, after palpable tumors (? 5 mm) developed, mice were sacrificed. Serum and tissues were collected and single cell suspensions were prepared from the tissues. By using flow cytometry analysis for detection of surface human HLA-A2 (?-chain specific), ?2M and CD138 (a myeloma surface marker), we show that all tissues, including the brain, from myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M, but not CD138 molecules. Myeloma cells (ARP-1) from both mice express human ?2M and CD138 but not HLA-A2 (ARP-1 cells are HLA-A2?). Fig. 1A shows representative histograms of the expression of these molecules on APR-1 myeloma cells, on the spleen, liver and bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, and on bone marrow cells of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice. The levels (mean fluorescence intensity) of these molecules on the tissues and tumors of the mice are shown in Fig. 1B . As expected, tumor-free A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express HLA-A2 ?-chain but not human ?2M or CD138 ( Fig. 1C ). Similar results were obtained from A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice inoculated with myeloma cells MM.1S (data not shown). These results support our hypothesis and indicate that, after establishment of myeloma, A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I (HLA-A2 and human ?2M) molecules on various normal tissue cells. Similar to patients, the levels of tissue-expressing HLA-A2 and human ?2M molecules are significantly lower than those of tumor cells. We also quantified the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating human ?2M and M-protein in these mice. As shown in Fig. 1D , high levels (2 ?g/mL) of circulating human ?2M can be detected in both mice bearing palpable tumors (? 5 mm in diameters for subcutaneously injected cell lines; or M-protein ? 50 ?g/ml for intra-bone injected primary myeloma cells in SCID-hu mice) but not in tumor-free mice. The levels of circulating ?2M were the same in the mice, comparable to those seen in myeloma patients (3.1 ?g/mL as mean value, with a range of 0.1–28.5 ?g/mL) ( 3 ), and further elevated along with tumor growth in the mice (data not shown). Fig. 1E shows the levels of myeloma-derived, circulating M-proteins in the mice. Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice (data not shown). Taken together, these findings indicate that myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice are a suitable model for our study because they express human mature MHC class I molecules on almost all tissues and present high levels of circulating human ?2M in serum.  In vivo distribution of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs in the mice Next we examined the distribution of anti-?2M mAbs on normal murine tissues and established tumors in these two mouse models. After palpable myeloma was established, mice were injected intraperitoneally with 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1. Two days after the injection, mice were sacrificed, tumors and murine organs were removed, and tissue sections were stained with specific antibodies against mouse IgG1 conjugated with HRP. As shown in Fig 2A , the mAb was found on the surface of tumors and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver but not brain in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. No mAb was found in the organs of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice except the tumors ( Fig. 2B ). Similar results were obtained from the mice injected with mAb E6 and in MM.1S-bearing mice injected with D1 mAb (data not shown). These results confirm our previous findings that the normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M and indicate that the mAbs bind with human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells in A2-NOD/SCID mice in vivo.  In vivo distribution of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs in the mice Next we examined the distribution of anti-?2M mAbs on normal murine tissues and established tumors in these two mouse models. After palpable myeloma was established, mice were injected intraperitoneally with 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1. Two days after the injection, mice were sacrificed, tumors and murine organs were removed, and tissue sections were stained with specific antibodies against mouse IgG1 conjugated with HRP. As shown in Fig 2A , the mAb was found on the surface of tumors and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver but not brain in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. No mAb was found in the organs of myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice except the tumors ( Fig. 2B ). Similar results were obtained from the mice injected with mAb E6 and in MM.1S-bearing mice injected with D1 mAb (data not shown). These results confirm our previous findings that the normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID but not NOD/SCID mice express human HLA-A2 and ?2M and indicate that the mAbs bind with human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells in A2-NOD/SCID mice in vivo.  Human MHC class I molecules on normal tissue cells of A2-NOD/SCID mice are functional Although we have shown that normal tissues of A2-NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I molecules, a question remains whether these molecules are functional and able to transduce signals. Splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice were obtained and incubated with 10 ?g/mL of soluble human ?2M overnight to form HLA-A2/human ?2M complex. As shown in Fig. 3A , human ?2M could be detected on splenocytes pretreated with soluble human ?2M. Fig. 3B shows surface expression of HLA-A2 and it is evident that pretreatment with soluble human ?2M upregulated the expression of HLA-A2 on splenocytes. As previous studies showed that cross-linking MHC class I on lymphocytes, such as T- and B-cells, activated the Src family kinase-dependent signaling pathways ( 31 , 32 ), we focused on the Src family kinases Lyn, Syk and their downstream protein PLC?2. Human ?2M-pretreated mouse splenocytes were cultured in 24-well plates pre-coated with 100 ?g/mL of mAb W6/32 specific for mature human MHC class I for various times, and cell lysates were used for Western blotting analysis. Using specific antibodies against the kinases, our results show that cross-linking human MHC class I by W6/32 mAb triggered phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 in murine splenocytes ( Fig. 3C ). As a positive control, human CD3+ lymphocytes isolated from blood of healthy donors were treated in the same way by immobilized mAb W6/32 and show similarly upregulated phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 upon cross-linking of surface MHC class I molecules ( Fig. 3D ). These findings indicate that the mature MHC class I complexes on normal murine cells were functional.  Human MHC class I molecules on normal tissue cells of A2-NOD/SCID mice are functional Although we have shown that normal tissues of A2-NOD/SCID mice express mature human MHC class I molecules, a question remains whether these molecules are functional and able to transduce signals. Splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice were obtained and incubated with 10 ?g/mL of soluble human ?2M overnight to form HLA-A2/human ?2M complex. As shown in Fig. 3A , human ?2M could be detected on splenocytes pretreated with soluble human ?2M. Fig. 3B shows surface expression of HLA-A2 and it is evident that pretreatment with soluble human ?2M upregulated the expression of HLA-A2 on splenocytes. As previous studies showed that cross-linking MHC class I on lymphocytes, such as T- and B-cells, activated the Src family kinase-dependent signaling pathways ( 31 , 32 ), we focused on the Src family kinases Lyn, Syk and their downstream protein PLC?2. Human ?2M-pretreated mouse splenocytes were cultured in 24-well plates pre-coated with 100 ?g/mL of mAb W6/32 specific for mature human MHC class I for various times, and cell lysates were used for Western blotting analysis. Using specific antibodies against the kinases, our results show that cross-linking human MHC class I by W6/32 mAb triggered phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 in murine splenocytes ( Fig. 3C ). As a positive control, human CD3+ lymphocytes isolated from blood of healthy donors were treated in the same way by immobilized mAb W6/32 and show similarly upregulated phosphorylation of Lyn, Syk and PLC-?2 upon cross-linking of surface MHC class I molecules ( Fig. 3D ). These findings indicate that the mature MHC class I complexes on normal murine cells were functional.  In vivo efficacy of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs to treat established myeloma in A2-NOD/SCID mice After confirming that A2-NOD/SCID mice are suited for our study, we proceeded to examine the efficacy and toxicity of the mAbs to treat established myeloma in these models. Mice were subcutaneously inoculated with myeloma cells ARP-1. When palpable tumors developed, treatment was initiated, which was intraperitoneal injections of 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1 twice a week for a total of 4 injections. Control mice received injections of equal amounts of mouse IgG1 or PBS. Tumor burdens were measured as tumor volumes. As expected, myeloma cells grew more aggressively in NOD/SCID mice than SCID mice (data not shown), since NOD/SCID mice have very few NK cells, while SCID mice have normal numbers of NK cells. Our results show that, although all myeloma-bearing mice have elevated levels of circulating human ?2M and A2-NOD/SCID mice express human MHC class I on almost every tissues, treatment with mAb D1 significantly reduced tumor burdens ( Fig. 4A ) and prolonged survival ( Fig. 4B ) in A2-NOD/SCID ( P < 0.005, compared with controls) and in NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 4C and Fig. 4D ; P < 0.005, compared with controls). Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing mice treated with D1 mAb (data not shown). Taken together, these results clearly show that the anti-?2M mAbs were therapeutic against established myeloma in human-like mouse models. To evaluate the effects of anti-?2M mAbs on established primary myeloma in the mice, we used A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish SCID-hu hosts as described previously ( 30 ). This model offers the best representation of clinical myeloma ( 30 , 33 ). A2-NOD/SCID mice were first implanted subcutaneously with fetal human bone chips and 4–6 weeks later, primary myeloma cells were injected directly into the human bones. Tumor burdens were measured as levels of circulating human IgG (M-proteins). After myeloma established (circulating human M-protein reaches ? 50 ?g/mL), treatment with mAb D1 started, which was the same as for myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. As shown in Fig. 4E , treatment with the mAb significantly reduced the tumor burdens in primary myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID-hu mice. Treatment with mouse IgG1 or PBS had no effects on myeloma growth. Together, these results indicated that the mAbs have high therapeutic efficacy on both myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma cells in vivo in human-like mouse models.  In vivo efficacy of anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs to treat established myeloma in A2-NOD/SCID mice After confirming that A2-NOD/SCID mice are suited for our study, we proceeded to examine the efficacy and toxicity of the mAbs to treat established myeloma in these models. Mice were subcutaneously inoculated with myeloma cells ARP-1. When palpable tumors developed, treatment was initiated, which was intraperitoneal injections of 500 ?l of ascites containing 1 mg of mAb D1 twice a week for a total of 4 injections. Control mice received injections of equal amounts of mouse IgG1 or PBS. Tumor burdens were measured as tumor volumes. As expected, myeloma cells grew more aggressively in NOD/SCID mice than SCID mice (data not shown), since NOD/SCID mice have very few NK cells, while SCID mice have normal numbers of NK cells. Our results show that, although all myeloma-bearing mice have elevated levels of circulating human ?2M and A2-NOD/SCID mice express human MHC class I on almost every tissues, treatment with mAb D1 significantly reduced tumor burdens ( Fig. 4A ) and prolonged survival ( Fig. 4B ) in A2-NOD/SCID ( P < 0.005, compared with controls) and in NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 4C and Fig. 4D ; P < 0.005, compared with controls). Similar results were obtained from MM.1S-bearing mice treated with D1 mAb (data not shown). Taken together, these results clearly show that the anti-?2M mAbs were therapeutic against established myeloma in human-like mouse models. To evaluate the effects of anti-?2M mAbs on established primary myeloma in the mice, we used A2-NOD/SCID mice to establish SCID-hu hosts as described previously ( 30 ). This model offers the best representation of clinical myeloma ( 30 , 33 ). A2-NOD/SCID mice were first implanted subcutaneously with fetal human bone chips and 4–6 weeks later, primary myeloma cells were injected directly into the human bones. Tumor burdens were measured as levels of circulating human IgG (M-proteins). After myeloma established (circulating human M-protein reaches ? 50 ?g/mL), treatment with mAb D1 started, which was the same as for myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. As shown in Fig. 4E , treatment with the mAb significantly reduced the tumor burdens in primary myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID-hu mice. Treatment with mouse IgG1 or PBS had no effects on myeloma growth. Together, these results indicated that the mAbs have high therapeutic efficacy on both myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma cells in vivo in human-like mouse models.  In vivo validation of mAb-induced apoptosis in tumor cells Since our previous studies demonstrated that the mAbs induced myeloma cell apoptosis via a caspase-dependent pathway, we wanted to validate the antimyeloma mechanism of the mAbs in the mouse models. Tumor-bearing mice were sacrificed after treatment, and tumors were removed for examining caspase-9 and caspase–3 activities by immunohistochemistry analysis, and for detecting tumor cell apoptosis by in situ TUNEL assay. Injections of the mAbs activated and cleaved caspase-9 and caspase-3 and induced apoptosis in myeloma cells in both treated A2-NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5A ) and in NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5B ) mice. In tumor sections, around 50% of cells had activated caspase-9 or -3, or were apoptotic in mice treated with the mAbs ( Fig. 5D ). _No caspase activation or cell apoptosis were detected in tumor cells of mice treated with mouse IgG1 ( Fig. 5C ). Thus, anti-?2M mAb-induced tumoricidal activity in the mice was also dependent on mAb-induced, caspase-mediated apoptosis in myeloma cells in vivo.  In vivo validation of mAb-induced apoptosis in tumor cells Since our previous studies demonstrated that the mAbs induced myeloma cell apoptosis via a caspase-dependent pathway, we wanted to validate the antimyeloma mechanism of the mAbs in the mouse models. Tumor-bearing mice were sacrificed after treatment, and tumors were removed for examining caspase-9 and caspase–3 activities by immunohistochemistry analysis, and for detecting tumor cell apoptosis by in situ TUNEL assay. Injections of the mAbs activated and cleaved caspase-9 and caspase-3 and induced apoptosis in myeloma cells in both treated A2-NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5A ) and in NOD/SCID ( Fig. 5B ) mice. In tumor sections, around 50% of cells had activated caspase-9 or -3, or were apoptotic in mice treated with the mAbs ( Fig. 5D ). _No caspase activation or cell apoptosis were detected in tumor cells of mice treated with mouse IgG1 ( Fig. 5C ). Thus, anti-?2M mAb-induced tumoricidal activity in the mice was also dependent on mAb-induced, caspase-mediated apoptosis in myeloma cells in vivo.  Anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs did not damage ?<sub>2</sub>M/MHC class I-expressing normal tissues in treated mice The potential toxicity of anti-?2M mAbs is another major concern for their future application to treat patients. Using the myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse model, we examined whether the mAbs damaged human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells and tissues in vivo. After treatment with four intraperitoneal injections of the mAbs, mice were sacrificed and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver, and kidney were removed for histological examination. Although the mAbs bind with the organs of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, all of the organs examined display normal histology ( Fig. 6A , upper panel). As expected, no tissue damage was observed in mAb-treated myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice in which no human ?2M or MHC class I molecules are expressed ( Fig. 6A , lower panel). We also examined whether the treatment with mAbs induced caspase activation and cell apoptosis in normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 6B ). Using specific antibodies for cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9, we show that treatment with the mAbs did not induce obvious caspase-9 or caspase-3 activation in different organs ( Fig. 5D ). Furthermore, only fewer apoptotic cells were detected in these normal tissues by using TUNEL assay ( Fig. 5D ). Thus, these findings indicate that, although anti-?2M mAbs bind with normal cells and their surface human MHC class I molecules are functional, the mAbs did not induce apoptosis in normal cells or damage the organs in vivo.  Anti-?<sub>2</sub>M mAbs did not damage ?<sub>2</sub>M/MHC class I-expressing normal tissues in treated mice The potential toxicity of anti-?2M mAbs is another major concern for their future application to treat patients. Using the myeloma-A2-NOD/SCID mouse model, we examined whether the mAbs damaged human ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells and tissues in vivo. After treatment with four intraperitoneal injections of the mAbs, mice were sacrificed and murine organs including the heart, lung, spleen, liver, and kidney were removed for histological examination. Although the mAbs bind with the organs of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, all of the organs examined display normal histology ( Fig. 6A , upper panel). As expected, no tissue damage was observed in mAb-treated myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID mice in which no human ?2M or MHC class I molecules are expressed ( Fig. 6A , lower panel). We also examined whether the treatment with mAbs induced caspase activation and cell apoptosis in normal tissues of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice ( Fig. 6B ). Using specific antibodies for cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-9, we show that treatment with the mAbs did not induce obvious caspase-9 or caspase-3 activation in different organs ( Fig. 5D ). Furthermore, only fewer apoptotic cells were detected in these normal tissues by using TUNEL assay ( Fig. 5D ). Thus, these findings indicate that, although anti-?2M mAbs bind with normal cells and their surface human MHC class I molecules are functional, the mAbs did not induce apoptosis in normal cells or damage the organs in vivo.  DISCUSSION Several mAbs, including rituximab, have been successfully developed to treat cancer patients. Unfortunately no mAb-based therapy is yet available for myeloma patients. We recently demonstrated that anti-?2M mAbs have remarkably strong apoptotic effects on myeloma cells in vitro and were therapeutic against established human myeloma in SCID and SCID-hu mice ( 28 ). In this study, we further evaluated their in vivo tumoricidal efficacy and potential toxicity in human-like myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mouse models. Our results clearly show that the mAbs selectively retarded myeloma growth without inducing caspase-dependent cell apoptosis or causing tissue damage in normal murine organs. More importantly, the first and probably the most successful tumor antigen for mAb (cetuximab, panitummab, and matuzumab) targeting to treat cancer patients is epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which, similar to ?2M, is widely expressed by normal cells of epithelial, mesenchymal, and neuronal origin, although at lower densities compared to cancer cells ( 34 ). Interestingly, compared with our mAbs, the efficacy of the original anti-EGFR mAb (clone 225, mouse IgG2a) in treating established human tumors in nude mice was much less promising when a same mAb concentration but more treatments (1 mg per mice, twice a week for 4 weeks ( 35 , 36 ) compared with 1 mg per mouse, twice a week for two weeks for ?2M mAbs in our studies) were used. Myeloma cells reside in the bone marrow of patients and are protected by marrow stromal cells that express ?2M/MHC class I molecules. In addition, MHC class I, although at lower densities compared with myeloma cells, are widely expressed on every organs, and elevated levels of circulating ?2M are present in myeloma patients. Although we have used cell culture systems and myeloma-SCID and SCID-hu mouse models to demonstrate the antimyeloma efficacy and safety of the mAbs in our previous study ( 28 ), these models contain circulating human ?2M and human bone marrow microenvironment (SCID-hu mice), but not normal tissues that express human MHC class I/?2M, which could hypothetically compromise the therapeutic efficacy by trapping the mAbs. To develop better mouse models for testing the mAbs, we adopted A2-NOD/SCID mice for our studies. A2-NOD/SCID mice are transgenic for human HLA-A2 ?-chain ( 37 ), in which every tissues express human MHC class I molecules but not human ?2M. Interestingly, after palpable tumors develop, normal tissues of the mice express both HLA-A2 ?-chain and human ?2M, indicating that human ?2M, derived from human myeloma cells, bind with the ?-chain and formed mature MHC class I molecules on normal cells. Moreover, MHC class I molecules are also functional, as we showed that cross-linking them by immobilized W6/32 mAb triggered phosphorylation of kinases Lyn, Syk, and PLC-?2 ( Fig. 3 ), which are known to be associated with MHC class I signaling ( 38 ). On the other hand, high levels of circulating human ?2M and M-proteins are present in both myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice. As expected, injection of anti-?2M mAbs led to accumulation of the mAbs on tumor cells and on normal organs except the brain in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, whereas in NOD/SCID mice the mAbs were only found on the tumor cells but not on normal organs. These data indicate that myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice are suitable for our studies because they resemble MM patients in that: (a) there are high amounts of circulating human ?2M; (b) normal tissues express human MHC class I/?2M; and (c) the levels of tissue-expressing human ?2M/MHC class I are lower than those expressed by tumor cells. In this study, we used A2-NOD/SCID mouse models to examine the potential toxicity of the mAbs on normal cells and tissues. Even though the normal cells had low density of human ?2M that could bind with the mAbs, no obvious tissue damages was observed. Furthermore, the mAbs did not induce caspase activation or cell apoptosis in normal tissue cells. Similar results are reported from other mAb-based therapy for cancers, such as anti-EGFR mAbs ( 39 – 41 ). Anti-EGFR mAbs effectively eradicate tumor cells and are currently used in treatment of several solid cancers. However, anti-EGFR mAbs have low toxicity on these normal cells ( 40 ), which may be due to over-expression of these antigens by tumor cells ( 28 , 40 ). In conclusion, our results demonstrate that anti-?2M mAbs may be promising therapeutic agent to treat MM. The mAbs have remarkably strong tumoricidal effect on myeloma cells in vitro and in vivo where the tumor cells are surrounded and outnumbered by ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells and tissues and by high levels of circulating human ?2M. Furthermore, these mAbs have low or no toxicity to normal cells. Further studies are warranted to develop these mAbs to clinically useful mAbs for patient application.  DISCUSSION Several mAbs, including rituximab, have been successfully developed to treat cancer patients. Unfortunately no mAb-based therapy is yet available for myeloma patients. We recently demonstrated that anti-?2M mAbs have remarkably strong apoptotic effects on myeloma cells in vitro and were therapeutic against established human myeloma in SCID and SCID-hu mice ( 28 ). In this study, we further evaluated their in vivo tumoricidal efficacy and potential toxicity in human-like myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mouse models. Our results clearly show that the mAbs selectively retarded myeloma growth without inducing caspase-dependent cell apoptosis or causing tissue damage in normal murine organs. More importantly, the first and probably the most successful tumor antigen for mAb (cetuximab, panitummab, and matuzumab) targeting to treat cancer patients is epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which, similar to ?2M, is widely expressed by normal cells of epithelial, mesenchymal, and neuronal origin, although at lower densities compared to cancer cells ( 34 ). Interestingly, compared with our mAbs, the efficacy of the original anti-EGFR mAb (clone 225, mouse IgG2a) in treating established human tumors in nude mice was much less promising when a same mAb concentration but more treatments (1 mg per mice, twice a week for 4 weeks ( 35 , 36 ) compared with 1 mg per mouse, twice a week for two weeks for ?2M mAbs in our studies) were used. Myeloma cells reside in the bone marrow of patients and are protected by marrow stromal cells that express ?2M/MHC class I molecules. In addition, MHC class I, although at lower densities compared with myeloma cells, are widely expressed on every organs, and elevated levels of circulating ?2M are present in myeloma patients. Although we have used cell culture systems and myeloma-SCID and SCID-hu mouse models to demonstrate the antimyeloma efficacy and safety of the mAbs in our previous study ( 28 ), these models contain circulating human ?2M and human bone marrow microenvironment (SCID-hu mice), but not normal tissues that express human MHC class I/?2M, which could hypothetically compromise the therapeutic efficacy by trapping the mAbs. To develop better mouse models for testing the mAbs, we adopted A2-NOD/SCID mice for our studies. A2-NOD/SCID mice are transgenic for human HLA-A2 ?-chain ( 37 ), in which every tissues express human MHC class I molecules but not human ?2M. Interestingly, after palpable tumors develop, normal tissues of the mice express both HLA-A2 ?-chain and human ?2M, indicating that human ?2M, derived from human myeloma cells, bind with the ?-chain and formed mature MHC class I molecules on normal cells. Moreover, MHC class I molecules are also functional, as we showed that cross-linking them by immobilized W6/32 mAb triggered phosphorylation of kinases Lyn, Syk, and PLC-?2 ( Fig. 3 ), which are known to be associated with MHC class I signaling ( 38 ). On the other hand, high levels of circulating human ?2M and M-proteins are present in both myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice. As expected, injection of anti-?2M mAbs led to accumulation of the mAbs on tumor cells and on normal organs except the brain in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice, whereas in NOD/SCID mice the mAbs were only found on the tumor cells but not on normal organs. These data indicate that myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice are suitable for our studies because they resemble MM patients in that: (a) there are high amounts of circulating human ?2M; (b) normal tissues express human MHC class I/?2M; and (c) the levels of tissue-expressing human ?2M/MHC class I are lower than those expressed by tumor cells. In this study, we used A2-NOD/SCID mouse models to examine the potential toxicity of the mAbs on normal cells and tissues. Even though the normal cells had low density of human ?2M that could bind with the mAbs, no obvious tissue damages was observed. Furthermore, the mAbs did not induce caspase activation or cell apoptosis in normal tissue cells. Similar results are reported from other mAb-based therapy for cancers, such as anti-EGFR mAbs ( 39 – 41 ). Anti-EGFR mAbs effectively eradicate tumor cells and are currently used in treatment of several solid cancers. However, anti-EGFR mAbs have low toxicity on these normal cells ( 40 ), which may be due to over-expression of these antigens by tumor cells ( 28 , 40 ). In conclusion, our results demonstrate that anti-?2M mAbs may be promising therapeutic agent to treat MM. The mAbs have remarkably strong tumoricidal effect on myeloma cells in vitro and in vivo where the tumor cells are surrounded and outnumbered by ?2M/MHC class I-expressing normal cells and tissues and by high levels of circulating human ?2M. Furthermore, these mAbs have low or no toxicity to normal cells. Further studies are warranted to develop these mAbs to clinically useful mAbs for patient application.  Figures Figure 1 Human-like myeloma mouse models. ( A ) Histograms showing the expression of surface HLA-A2, human ?2M and CD138 on tumor (ARP-1) and normal organ cells of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice. Pooled data showing the levels (MFI: mean fluorescence intensity) of surface expression of the molecules on different organs and tumors of ( B ) myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID (MM-NOD/SCID) and A2-NOD/SCID (MM-A2-NOD/SCID) mice, or ( C ) tumor-free NOD/SCID and A2-NOD/SCID mice. Levels of circulating human ?2M ( D ) and M-proteins ( E ) secreted by myeloma cells in tumor-free (No tumor) or myeloma (cell lines: MM lines; or primary myeloma: primary MM) -bearing NOD/SCID(-hu) and A2-NOD/SCID(-hu) mice. Measurement was done with palpable tumor developed (? 5 mm for subcutaneous tumors, or M-protein ? 50 ?g/mL for primary myeloma cells in NOD/SCID-hu mice). Figure 2 In vivo distribution of anti-?2M mAbs on tumors and murine organs of treated, myeloma-bearing ( A ) A2-NOD/SCID or ( B ) NOD/SCID mice. Myeloma-bearing mice were treated with the mAbs and subcutaneous tumors and murine organs were removed after the treated and stained for surface anti-?2M mAb (mouse IgG1). Figure 3 Expression of human ?2M/MHC class I molecules on and class I signaling of splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice pretreated with soluble human ?2M. Histograms showing the expression of ( A ) human ?2M or ( B ) HLA-A2 on the surface of A2-NOD/SCID splenocytes before and after overnight treatment with 10 ?g/mL of soluble human ?2M. Cells without treatment (No treatment) serve as controls. Western blot analysis showing increased levels of phosphorylated Src-family protein tyrosine kinases Lyn (pLyn), Syk (pSyk) and phosphorylated PLC?2 (pPLC?2) in ( C ) human ?2M-pretreated splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice or ( D ) human CD3+ T cells induced by cross-linking of surface MHC class I by immobilized W6/32 mAb. The expression of ?-actin was shown as protein loading controls. Results obtained from one representative experiment out of three performed were shown. Figure 4 Therapeutic efficacy of anti-?2M mAbs against established myeloma in the mouse models. Shown are the effects of anti-?2M mAb D1 in reducing tumor burdens and prolonging survival in myeloma-bearing ( A and B ) A2-NOD/SCID and ( C and D ) NOD/SCID mice (5 per group) inoculated subcutaneously with ARP-1, and in ( E ) A2-NOD/SCID-hu mice (5 per group), inoculated intra-bone with primary tumor cells freshly isolated from myeloma patients (n = 6). Treatment with mouse IgG1 or PBS serves as controls. Note: because primary myeloma cells only grow in implanted human bone and not in murine bone marrow or other organs, these mice usually do not develop systemic symptoms and become moribund, therefore no death data were available. Representative results of one experiment of three performed are shown. ** P< 0.005 Figure 5 In vivo validation of antimyeloma mechanism of the mAbs. Shown are the activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3 and cell apoptosis detected by TUNEL assay in subcutaneous tumors of myeloma-bearing ( A ) A2-NOD/SCID and (B) NO?/?XI? ???? ????? ????????? ???? ????–?2M mAb D1, or ( C ) myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice treated with mouse IgG1. After treatment, tumors were removed for detecting the activities of caspase-9 and caspase-3 by immunohistochemistry staining, and for determining tumor cell apoptosis by in situ TUNEL assay. ( D ) Numbers of caspase-3- or -9-expressing, and apoptotic cells in tumor and tissue sections obtained from mice treated with the mAb D1. Samples from untreated tumor-bearing mice served as controls. Summarized results from three experiments performed are shown. Figure 6 Anti-?2M mAbs do not impair normal ?2M/MHC class I-positive murine tissues in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. ( A ) Normal histology of murine tissues in mAb-treated, myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice. ( B ) Activities of caspase-9 and caspase-3 and cell apoptosis detected by TUNEL assay in normal organs of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice after the treatment with mAb D1.  Figures Figure 1 Human-like myeloma mouse models. ( A ) Histograms showing the expression of surface HLA-A2, human ?2M and CD138 on tumor (ARP-1) and normal organ cells of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice. Pooled data showing the levels (MFI: mean fluorescence intensity) of surface expression of the molecules on different organs and tumors of ( B ) myeloma-bearing NOD/SCID (MM-NOD/SCID) and A2-NOD/SCID (MM-A2-NOD/SCID) mice, or ( C ) tumor-free NOD/SCID and A2-NOD/SCID mice. Levels of circulating human ?2M ( D ) and M-proteins ( E ) secreted by myeloma cells in tumor-free (No tumor) or myeloma (cell lines: MM lines; or primary myeloma: primary MM) -bearing NOD/SCID(-hu) and A2-NOD/SCID(-hu) mice. Measurement was done with palpable tumor developed (? 5 mm for subcutaneous tumors, or M-protein ? 50 ?g/mL for primary myeloma cells in NOD/SCID-hu mice). Figure 2 In vivo distribution of anti-?2M mAbs on tumors and murine organs of treated, myeloma-bearing ( A ) A2-NOD/SCID or ( B ) NOD/SCID mice. Myeloma-bearing mice were treated with the mAbs and subcutaneous tumors and murine organs were removed after the treated and stained for surface anti-?2M mAb (mouse IgG1). Figure 3 Expression of human ?2M/MHC class I molecules on and class I signaling of splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice pretreated with soluble human ?2M. Histograms showing the expression of ( A ) human ?2M or ( B ) HLA-A2 on the surface of A2-NOD/SCID splenocytes before and after overnight treatment with 10 ?g/mL of soluble human ?2M. Cells without treatment (No treatment) serve as controls. Western blot analysis showing increased levels of phosphorylated Src-family protein tyrosine kinases Lyn (pLyn), Syk (pSyk) and phosphorylated PLC?2 (pPLC?2) in ( C ) human ?2M-pretreated splenocytes of A2-NOD/SCID mice or ( D ) human CD3+ T cells induced by cross-linking of surface MHC class I by immobilized W6/32 mAb. The expression of ?-actin was shown as protein loading controls. Results obtained from one representative experiment out of three performed were shown. Figure 4 Therapeutic efficacy of anti-?2M mAbs against established myeloma in the mouse models. Shown are the effects of anti-?2M mAb D1 in reducing tumor burdens and prolonging survival in myeloma-bearing ( A and B ) A2-NOD/SCID and ( C and D ) NOD/SCID mice (5 per group) inoculated subcutaneously with ARP-1, and in ( E ) A2-NOD/SCID-hu mice (5 per group), inoculated intra-bone with primary tumor cells freshly isolated from myeloma patients (n = 6). Treatment with mouse IgG1 or PBS serves as controls. Note: because primary myeloma cells only grow in implanted human bone and not in murine bone marrow or other organs, these mice usually do not develop systemic symptoms and become moribund, therefore no death data were available. Representative results of one experiment of three performed are shown. ** P< 0.005 Figure 5 In vivo validation of antimyeloma mechanism of the mAbs. Shown are the activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3 and cell apoptosis detected by TUNEL assay in subcutaneous tumors of myeloma-bearing ( A ) A2-NOD/SCID and (B) NO?/?XI? ???? ????? ????????? ???? ????–?2M mAb D1, or ( C ) myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice treated with mouse IgG1. After treatment, tumors were removed for detecting the activities of caspase-9 and caspase-3 by immunohistochemistry staining, and for determining tumor cell apoptosis by in situ TUNEL assay. ( D ) Numbers of caspase-3- or -9-expressing, and apoptotic cells in tumor and tissue sections obtained from mice treated with the mAb D1. Samples from untreated tumor-bearing mice served as controls. Summarized results from three experiments performed are shown. Figure 6 Anti-?2M mAbs do not impair normal ?2M/MHC class I-positive murine tissues in myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice. ( A ) Normal histology of murine tissues in mAb-treated, myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID and NOD/SCID mice. ( B ) Activities of caspase-9 and caspase-3 and cell apoptosis detected by TUNEL assay in normal organs of myeloma-bearing A2-NOD/SCID mice after the treatment with mAb D1. 