Sexual Rehabilitation after Localized Prostate Cancer: Current Interventions and Future Directions Many published articles have documented the impact of prostate-cancer treatment on sexual functioning in men treated for localized disease. Surprisingly, the literature on interventions to rehabilitate men’s sexual functioning is much more limited. In this article, we review the sexual-rehabilitation interventions for prostate-cancer patients and identify a number of common themes across interventions. We also identify areas where further research is needed and propose a conceptual model based on psychological and nursing theories and informed by the published research.  Conclusions Many studies have described the substantial impact of prostate-cancer treatment on sexual functioning. In this article, we have summarized the limited number of intervention studies developed sexual rehabilitation of prostate-cancer survivors. A number of common themes emerged. Several interventions have focused primarily on psychosocial symptoms, with sexual rehabilitation as a secondary goal. Interventions that focused on sexual rehabilitation as a primary goal had better results. One intervention was tailored to address the symptoms of greatest concern to the participants. Developing such tailored interventions may be a way to increase “face validity” of the intervention with participants by closely linking the intervention to what they report as their primary concerns and could be linked with a stepped-care approach to increase the likelihood of developing interventions cost-effective that can be sustained past the end of a funded study. Although clinical characteristics are important, others such as personality traits, literacy level, or the lack of congruence between sexual desire and functioning, may be important determinants of who needs rehabilitation efforts the most and who is most likely to benefit from them. Research is needed to understand how gay men are affected by prostate cancer and its treatment, and how sexual-rehabilitation efforts could be tailored to their particular needs. Finally, we have proposed a conceptual model for prostate–cancer-symptom research informed by psychological and nursing theories and the published research on sexual rehabilitation in prostate-cancer survivors. Further work is needed to build on the published work reviewed here to encourage sexual-rehabilitation efforts to focus on populations with greatest need because of psychological makeup, low health literacy, or other characteristics that may put a prostate-cancer survivor at risk for low HRQOL. Physicians should recognize the importance of sexual rehabilitation programs and actively refer their patients to such programs. Mental health providers and nurses should provide sexual rehabilitation interventions to patients and work with their physician colleagues to provide effective medical interventions supported by patient education materials at the appropriate reading level. Such efforts will address concerns raised in the IOM report by helping men move smoothly from being a patient to a survivor, armed with the necessary tools and support needed to live well after cancer.  Figure and Table Figure 1 Table 1 Psychosocial interventions for sexual rehabilitation after treatment for localized prostate cancer Author Publication year Number of participants Randomized Intervention type Partner included Outcomes Results Mishel et al 21 2002 239 Yes Psychoeducational telephone sessions with patient and designated person Patient could designate person to be included in intervention (i.e., partner, family member, etc.) SDS, SWOG QOL, non- standard urinary function, and sexual function and satisfaction questions Significant improvement in sexual satisfaction, trend toward interaction between sexual functioning and ethnicity Lepore et al 9 2003 250 Yes 6 educational sessions vs. 6 educational sessions plus discussion group No PCI, SF-36 Sexual bother reduced for men in the education- plus-discussion arm Maliski et al 26 2004 7 nurse case managers’ notes on 30 patients No Case management No Not specified Not specified Weber et al 27 2004 30 Yes In-person peer support No PCI, GDS Significantly less sexual bother in treatment group participants at follow-up Canada et al 30 2005 51 couples Yes 4 sessions of psychoeducation for patient and partner Some IIEF, DAS, FSFI, PCI, SF- 36, BSI Significant improvements for treatment men in all IIEF domains and for treatment women in all FSFI domains Giesler et al 31 2005 99 Yes Monthly sessions (2 in person, 4 by telephone) with patient and partner Some PC-QoL, DAS, CES-D, SF-36 Significant gains in sexual functioning and significant reductions in how much sexual dysfunction limited role activities at 7 and 12 months post-treatment Titta et al 32 2006 57 Yes Short-term psychodynamic therapy in person and on the phone Yes IIEF Significant improvements in erectile functioning over time for both groups but men in the sexual counseling plus injection group reported significantly better erectile functioning at 18 month follow-up Molton et al 33 2008 101 Yes 10-week cognitive behavioral stress- management intervention No PCI Men with greater interpersonal sensitivity reported greater increases in sexual functioning than men lower on this personality characteristic 