Interactions between PTEN and receptor tyrosine kinase pathways and their implications for glioma therapy Gliomas are the most common and deadly form of malignant primary brain tumors. Loss of the tumor-suppressor PTEN and activation of the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) EGF receptor, c-Met, PDGF receptor and VEGF receptor are among the most common molecular dysfunctions associated with glioma malignancy. PTEN interacts with RTK-dependent signaling at multiple levels. These include the ability of PTEN to counteract PI3K activation by RTKs, as well as possible effects of PTEN on RTK activation of the MAPK pathway and RTK-dependent gene-expression regulation. Consequently, PTEN expression affects RTK-induced malignancy. Importantly, the PTEN status was recently found to be critical for the outcome of RTK-targeted clinical therapies that have been developed recently. Combining RTK-targeted therapies with therapies aimed at counteracting the effects of PTEN loss, such as mTOR inhibition, might also have therapeutic advantage. This article reviews the known molecular and functional interactions between PTEN and RTK pathways and their implications for glioma therapy.  Conclusion In conclusion, PTEN and RTK deregulations are among the most common molecular dysfunctions in gliomas. Since PTEN interacts with RTK-dependent signaling at multiple levels, PTEN expression affects RTK-dependent malignant functions and influences RTK-targeted therapies. As a consequence, the PTEN status should be considered when newly developed RTK inhibitors are used in the clinic. In addition, strategies to counteract the effects of PTEN loss, such as mTOR inhibition, represent a promising approach to improving the efficacy of RTK inhibition in cancer and gliomas.  Expert commentary Gliomas are extremely heterogeneous, with numerous histopathologically distinct entities. Due to this complexity, it is most likely that only a small subset of patients will benefit from RTK-pathway inhibition as single therapies. To achieve greater therapeutic efficiency from RTK targeting, it will be important to better understand the molecular determinants of RTK-pathway dependency. This will require that the clinical testing of pathway inhibitors include the rigorous analysis of RTK activation levels, mutations, PTEN status and the coexpression and coactivation of all RTKs commonly active in malignant brain tumors. Knowledge of the factors that determine sensitivity and dependence to RTKs, and the development of tests for determining such factors will, hopefully, identify patient subsets most likely to respond to pathway inhibitors. It is also likely RTK targeting will be most useful in combination with other existing and emerging therapies. Basic and translational research has provided a rationale for combining anti-RTK therapies with traditional cytotoxic therapies, such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy. New therapeutically relevant inter-relationships between different RTKs, such as crossactivation and pathway switching, have been discovered in glioma models and systemic human cancers, raising the prospect for considerable therapeutic benefit by simultaneously targeting these pathways. Based on the studies described in the present review, targeting RTKs in combination with approaches that counteract the effects of PTEN loss are likely to also be of value for the success of molecularly targeted therapies of gliomas.  Five-year view The clinical success of RTK-targeted therapies in gliomas has been modest. These therapies are likely to depend on the PTEN status of tumors, which might be taken into consideration in future clinical applications. In PTEN-mutated tumors, combinations of anti-RTK therapies with therapies that counteract the effects of PTEN loss are likely to improve the efficacy of RTK inhibitors. As our knowledge of PTEN–RTK interactions improves, similar therapies will be developed and tested in a clinical setting. These will include combinations of anti-RTK agents with PI3K, Akt and mTOR, as well as with other as yet unknown approaches for counteracting the effects of PTEN loss. Key issues Loss of the tumor-suppressor PTEN and activation of the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) EGF receptor, c-Met, PDGF receptor and VEGF receptor are among the most common molecular dysfunction in gliomas. PTEN interacts with RTK-dependent signaling at multiple levels, including the ability of PTEN to counteract PI3K activation by RTKs, as well as possible effects of PTEN on RTK activation of the MAPK pathway and RTK-dependent gene-expression regulation. PTEN expression affects RTK-induced malignancy. Clinically applicable RTK inhibitors have been developed but their success in gliomas has been modest. The PTEN status affects the success of RTK-targeted experimental and clinical therapies. PTEN restoration sensitizes experimental tumors to RTK inhibitors. Combining RTK inhibitors with approaches that counteract the effects of PTEN loss, such as mTOR inhibitors, could be of value for future therapies for glioma patients.  Figures Figure 1 Strategies used to inhibit RTK activation LIG: Ligand; RTK: Receptor tyrosine kinase. Figure 2 Known molecular interactions between PTEN and RTK-dependent signaling FAK: Focal adhesion kinase; LIG: Ligand; PIP2: Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,-bisphosphate; PIP3: Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate; RTK: Receptor tyrosine kinase. Figure 3 Rationale for combining RTK-targeted and mTOR-targeted therapies Arrow thickness is proportional to signal strength. Font weight of ‘malignancy’ is proportional to malignant effects. LIG: Ligand; PIP2: Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,-bisphosphate; PIP3: Phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate; RTK: Receptor tyrosine kinase. 