Regulation of nitric oxide signaling by thrombospondin-1: implications for anti-angiogenic therapies In addition to long term regulation of angiogenesis, angiogenic growth factor signaling through nitric oxide (NO) acutely controls blood flow and hemostasis. Inhibition of this pathway may account for the hypertensive and prothrombotic side effects of vascular endothelial growth factor antagonists currently used for cancer treatment. The first identified endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor, thrombospondin-1, also controls tissue perfusion, hemostasis, and radiosensitivity by antagonizing NO signaling. We examine the role of these and other emerging activities of thrombospondin-1 in cancer. Clarifying how endogenous and therapeutic angiogenesis inhibitors regulate vascular NO signaling could facilitate development of more selective inhibitors.  Conclusions and perspectives Several common themes are emerging from studies of the endogenous inhibitor TSP1 and therapeutic angiogenesis inhibitors. First, we must not allow the name “angiogenesis inhibitor” to limit how we view the physiological pathways influenced by these agents. NO/cGMP signaling is an important component of pro-angiogenic signaling downstream of VEGF and other vascular growth factors, but the same pathway also mediates acute effects of VEGF signaling on vascular smooth muscle tone and regulates platelet homeostasis ( Fig. 4 ). Just as VEGF has both long term and acute effects on vascular physiology and thrombosis, endogenous and therapeutic angiogenesis inhibitors should be expected to acutely affect the same pathways. TSP1 is an acute vasoconstrictor 136 , and bevacizumab and VEGFR kinase inhibitors exhibit similar hypertensive activities. TSP1 and the therapeutic VEGF pathway antagonists also share similar prothrombotic activities. Because NO rapidly diffuses between cells, blocking NO synthesis by endothelial cells using VEGF pathway antagonists lowers the level of NO seen by platelets and VSMC. This concept is beginning to be recognized in attempts to overcome the side effects of therapeutic VEGF antagonists 6 . If NO/cGMP signaling is critical for both angiogenesis and acute cardiovascular regulation, then manipulation of other pathways unique to acute vascular regulation may compensate for loss of NO signaling. Thus, use of antihypertensive drugs (an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or a calcium channel blocker) overcame the hypertensive activity of the VEGF signaling inhibitor cediranib without blocking its inhibition of tumor growth 6 , 120 . What does this teach us about designing a better angiogenesis inhibitor? One scenario would be to selectively target components of the NO/cGMP signaling cascade that mediate long term regulation of angiogenesis but not acute cardiovascular responses. The current FDA-approved angiogenesis inhibitors all are expected to inhibit eNOS activation and thus lower the level of NO available for its paracrine regulation of VSMC and platelets. TSP1 signaling via CD47 inhibits sGC and cGK activation. Drugs that selectively inhibit at this level in endothelium could potentially block the autocrine pro-angiogenic activity of NO without blocking physiological NO paracrine signaling to the underlying VSMC. Antibodies that engage CD47 and mimic TSP1 binding would be one such approach. These would engage CD47 on the endothelium but be too large to cross the basement membrane to inhibit signaling in the VSMC. CD47 antagonists may also provide an advantage over VEGF antagonists by their ability to also block NO/cGMP signaling induced by other tumor-derived angiogenic factors ( Fig. 4 ). As we learn more about the specific downstream targets of NO/cGMP signaling that are critical for long term angiogenic responses versus acute vasoregulation and hemostasis, additional targets may be identified that can selectively block the pro-angiogenic aspects of NO/cGMP signaling. Achieving this goal will require further efforts to map the signaling networks mediating acute and chronic responses to NO in each vascular cell type. Studies of TSP1 are also teaching us that angiogenesis inhibitors can profoundly affect other aspects of tumor biology including anti-tumor immunity and radiotherapy responses. Although TSP1 potently inhibits NO/cGMP signaling, additional signaling pathways controlled by TSP1 may be important for these other activities. Investigating these may identify additional targets for controlling tumor growth and improving responsiveness to ablative therapies.  Display items Box 1 Expanding the role of TSP1 in cancer to innate immunity[G] In addition to suppression of angiogenesis and acute blood flow regulation, down-regulation of TSP1 and TSP2 during tumor progression and inhibition of growth by re-expression of the proteins in murine models can also result from modulation of innate anti-tumor immunity 137 . Over-expression of TSP1 in melanoma cells causes delayed growth and increased tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) recruitment into xenograft tumors grown in nude mice 74 . However, TAM can differentiate into either cytotoxic (M1) or tumor growth-promoting (M2) states. Increased iNOS is a hallmark of M1 macrophages 138 , and although M1 cytotoxic macrophages are a minor fraction of the TAM in MDA-MB-435 tumors, their recruitment or differentiation is increased when those tumors express TSP1. In vitro , TSP1 acutely induces expression of PAI-1, an important regulator of macrophage migration 139 , 140 , by human and mouse macrophages. PAI-1 is strongly expressed by TAM in TSP1-overexpressing tumors in vivo , suggesting that TSP1-induced macrophage recruitment is at least partially mediated by PAI-1 137 . Moreover, TSP1 and TSP2 cause a significant increase in phorbol ester-mediated superoxide generation by M1-differentated human monocytic cells, which mediates tumor cell killing, by interacting with ?6?1 integrin through their NH2-terminal domains. TSP1 stimulates killing of breast carcinoma and melanoma cells by M1-polarized macrophages in vitro via this release of ROS. Taken together, these data suggest that TSP1 plays an important role in innate anti-tumor immunity by enhancing recruitment and activation of M1 TAM. Thus, avoiding this innate immune surveillance could provide an additional selective pressure for loss of TSP1 and TSP2 expression during tumor progression. iNOS, inducible nitric oxide synthase; PAI-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TAM, tumor-associated macrophages. Box 2 TSP1 receptors that regulate angiogenesis Although intact TSP1 is a potent angiogenesis inhibitor, its N-terminal domains have pro-angiogenic activities 141 , 142 . These are mediated by interactions with several TSP1-binding integrins: ?3?1, ?4?1, ?6?1, and ?9?1 141 , 143 – 145 . The N-terminal domain of TSP1 also modulates endothelial cell focal adhesions and vascular permeability by engaging calreticulin and low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 146 , 147 . The central type 1 repeats of TSP1 and TSP2 inhibit angiogenesis by engaging the receptor CD36 92 , 148 . CD36, a class B scavenger receptor and fatty acid translocase 104 , is expressed on microvascular endothelium and VSMC. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-? ligands increase vascular expression of CD36 and correspondingly increase tumor responses to the CD36-targeted drug ABT-510 149 . A coding polymorphism in CD36 was associated with increased risk of colorectal carcinoma in a Japanese population 150 . CD47 is a high affinity cell surface receptor for the C-terminal domain of TSP1 and a low affinity receptor for this domain of TSP2 108 , but the specific residues in TSP1 that mediate binding to CD47 is currently a subject of debate 151 – 153 . CD47 is ubiquitously expressed and also plays an important role in regulating phagocytosis through engaging its counter-receptor SHPS1 154 . In some hematologic malignancies and breast cancer, antibody targeting of CD47 can kill tumor cells 155 , 156 .  At-a-glance Nitric oxide (NO) mediates pro-angiogenic activities of vascular endothelial growth factor and a number of additional angiogenic factors that support the neovascularization of tumors. This signaling involves activation of soluble guanylate cyclase and downstream targets of cGMP. Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) and TSP2 are endogenous angiogenesis inhibitors. Their expression is frequently lost during cancer progression, and over-expression suppresses tumor growth. TSP1 is a potent antagonist of NO signaling in vascular endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and platelets. TSP2 is substantially less active. Antagonism of NO signaling can be mediated by TSP1 binding to two of its receptors, CD36 and CD47, but CD47 mediates inhibition at much lower concentrations of TSP1, and CD47 is also required for signaling through CD36. TSP1 signaling through CD47 redundantly inhibits NO signaling at the level of soluble guanylate cyclase and cGMP-dependent protein kinase. In addition to long term inhibition of angiogenesis, antagonism of NO signaling by TSP1 results in acute inhibition of tissue perfusion and acceleration of platelet hemostasis. Consequently, TSP1 and CD47 limit recovery of blood flow and tissue survival following ischemic injuries. In contrast, tumor vasculature is resistant to acute vasodilation by NO, and increased circulating TSP1 produced by tumor stroma may instead indirectly increase tumor perfusion by limiting blood flow elsewhere. These activities of TSP1 parallel the hypertensive and prothrombotic activities that are emerging as frequent side effects of therapeutic angiogenesis inhibitors, and both can be explained by inhibition of NO signaling. TSP1 signaling through CD47 also limits soft tissue survival after radiation injury. Disruption of this pathway is a possible strategy to permit delivery of higher therapeutic radiation doses to tumors while selectively protecting surrounding healthy tissues.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 The central role of nitric oxide (NO) signaling in angiogenesis, vascular tone, and hemostasis a | Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) binding to its receptor on endothelial cells activates nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) to produce the diffusible signaling molecule NO. NO acts in an autocrine manner to stimulate endothelial cell growth and motility leading to angiogenesis. VEGF signaling via NO also contributes to increasing vascular permeability. NO diffuses into vessel walls, causing arterial vessels to relax and increase blood flow. NO also acts in a paracrine manner to prevent thrombosis by inhibiting platelet adhesion and aggregation. b | Different vascular activities of NO occur on different time scales. c | In endothelial cells, VEGF signaling through VEGFR2 activates the phosphatidyinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway; Akt then phosphorylates human eNOS at Ser1177 157 , 158 , activating eNOS and decreasing its calcium dependence. The kinase Src, which is activated by VEGF, also activates eNOS through two mechanisms: phosphorylation of Tyr 83 , 159 and phosphorylation of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), which then binds to eNOS and activates NO synthesis 160 . Simultaneously, VEGFR2 signaling through phospholipase-C? (PLC?) mobilizes intracellular Ca2+, which further activates eNOS in a calmodulin (CaM)-dependent manner, and increases AMP kinase (AMPK)-mediated eNOS phosphorylation at Ser1177161. NO produced by eNOS binds to the prosthetic heme on soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) to stimulate cGMP synthesis, activating cGMP-dependent protein kinase (cGK-I) and cGMP-gated channels to regulate downstream targets that increase endothelial cell proliferation, migration, survival, and permeability 14 . Additional parallel signaling through Src, Akt, and the protein kinase C-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway (PKC-Raf1-MEK-ERK) synergizes with NO/cGMP signaling to support each of these endothelial cell responses. In VSMC and platelets, the same downstream pathways are activated by exogenous NO diffusing from endothelium. Figure 2 CD47 and CD36 mediate inhibition of NO/cGMP signaling by thrombospondin-1 Thrombospondin-1 (TSP1) redundantly inhibits cGMP signaling driven by exogenous or endogenous NO in vascular cells via 2 receptors. The C-terminal G-module of TSP1 contains two peptide motifs that have been shown to bind CD47 106 . The yellow highlighted residues in these peptides are conserved across all 5 TSPs, but studies using recombinant domains of TSP2 and TSP4 indicate that high affinity binding to CD47 is specific to TSP1 108 . Binding of TSP1 or the peptides signals via CD47 to inhibit both NO-mediated activation of soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) in endothelial cells, VSMC, and platelets and cGMP-mediated activation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase (cGK-I) in platelets. At elevated levels, TSP1 also interacts with CD36 via its central type 1 repeats and thereby inhibits its fatty acid translocase activity 105 , limiting myristate uptake into the cytoplasm and thereby inhibiting membrane translocation of Src family kinases in endothelial cells. CD36-dependent myristate uptake activates two known eNOS kinases: Src and AMP kinase (AMPK) 96 , 103 , but the relative importance of these two pathways in controlling eNOS activation through CD36 has not been established. The TSP1 mimetic drug ABT-510 also binds to CD36 and inhibits angiogenesis via both translocase-dependent and caspase-dependent mechanisms 96 , 162 . Figure 3 Vascular responses outside the tumor primarily determine effects of TSP1 on tumor perfusion a | Tumor vasculature is much less responsive than normal vasculature to physiological regulation by vasodilators such as NO and vasoconstrictors such as epinephrine. Thus, vasodilation indirectly decreases blood flow through the tumor, and vasoconstriction increases flow through the tumor. b | These responses to vasoactive agents are not sensitive to endogenous TSP1 in the tumor vasculature, but over-expression of TSP1 in the tumor either locally or by release into the circulation tempers responses to vasoactive agents in the host vasculature and decreases the “steal” phenomenon in mice bearing TSP1-expressing tumors. The relative contribution of local versus systemic effects of TSP1 on tumor vascular resistance remains to be defined. Figure 4 Convergence of angiogenesis inhibitor signaling on the nitric oxide (NO)/cGMP cascade The current US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved angiogenesis inhibitors for cancer therapy block vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) binding to the VEGF receptor (VEGFR2) (the inhibitor bevacizumab) or inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of VEGFR2 (the inhibitors sorafenib and sunitinib). VEGFR2 activates several parallel signaling pathways that control angiogenesis, but inhibiting NO/cGMP signaling blocks most of these responses. Therapeutic responses to VEGF inhibitors may be limited by parallel activation of the downstream pathways by additional angiogenic factors produced by tumors that can activate NO/cGMP signaling independent of the VEGF receptor such as adrenomedullin, angiopoietin-1, sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), angiopoietin-related growth factor (AGF), estrogens, insulin, and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2) 15 , 22 – 24 . Therefore, inhibitors that act on essential downstream pathways may be more effective than the existing VEGF/VEGFR antagonists for controlling tumor angiogenesis. Endostatin is one such agent that acts via the phosphatase PP2A to inhibit nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activation 121 and downstream to inhibit soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) expression 122 . Thrombospondin 1 (TSP1) is a redundant inhibitor of the NO/cGMP cascade, and the experimental drug ABT-510, a TSP1 mimetic, inhibits angiogenesis via the TSP1 receptor CD36 96 . However, native TSP1 also acts through the more potent inhibitory pathway mediated by CD47. Proangiogenic factors and signaling pathways are shown in green, and anti-angiogenic factors and pathways are in red. Table 1 Thrombospondin expression and cancer progression * Study Design Outcome Cancer sites References Trp53 null × Thbs1 null mice Decreased survival; decreased incidence of osteosarcomas Various 163 MMTV-THBS1 × MMTV-neu mice Delays and prevents tumors Mammary gland 164 K14-THBS1 mice: over-expression in skin: chemical carcinogenesis delays squamous carcinogenesis but not malignant conversion Skin 66 UPII-SV40T transgenic mice Castration delays bladder carcinoma and increases TSP1 Bladder 165 polyomavirus middle Tag × Thbs1 null mice Larger primary tumors but fewer lung metastases Mammary gland 125 Thbs1 null mice Antitumor effects of low- dose continuous cyclophosphamide lost in Thbs1 -null Syngeneic LL/2 tumors s.c. 166 Thbs2 null mice: chemical carcinogenesis Accelerated and increased tumor formation skin 65 Human pathological studies TSP1 or 2 decrease with progression Colon carcinoma, penile squamous cell carcinoma, cervical carcinoma, leiomyosarcoma, melanoma, prostate cancer, neuroblastoma, breast ductal carcinoma in situ 58 , 59 , 63 , 68 , 167 – 174 TSP1 or TSP2 increase with progression non-Hogkin’s lymphoma, colorectal liver metastases, vulvar squamous cell carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma 61 , 175 – 177 TSP1 and TSP2 not correlated with progression stage III ovarian carcinoma, breast cancers 178 , 179 TSP1 expression attributed to tumor is actually from stroma Melanoma, breast ductal carcinoma in situ, Pancreatic ductal carcinoma 62 – 64 * This table is meant to be an illustrative but not comprehensive listing of the observed relationships between thrombospondin and cancer progression. MMTV, mouse mammary tumor virus; UPII, uroplakin II promoter; K14, Keratin 14 promoter Table 2 Hypertensive and prothrombotic activities of angiogenesis inhibitors Drug Side-effect (incidence) Study design Reference Bevacizumab Hypertension (35%) 154 patients: 20% new onset and 80% an exacerbation of pre-existing hypertension 1 Bevacizumab Hypertension (15%) Phase II trial in unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma 180 Thrombosis (6%). Bevacizumab Venous thromboembolism (11.9%) Meta-analysis of 7956 patients from 15 randomized controlled trials 181 Bevacizumab Hypertension (23–34%) Review of clinical data for several cancers 182 Sorafenib Hypertension (11–75%) Sunitinib Hypertension (19%) Sorafenib Hypertension (23.4%) Meta-analysis of 4599 patients with renal cell carcinoma 2 Sorafenib Hypertension and proteinuria (7 patients) Noted to resemble preeclampsia 183 Sunitinib Cedifanib Acute hypertension in rats NO signaling proposed to be responsible 6 Telatinib Hypertension and Proteinuria (18 patients) Phase I trial: noted decreased response to nitroglycerin 184 Various inhibitors Hemostasis and thrombosis Review of clinical study and trial data 3 Various inhibitor Hypertension and proteinuria Editorial proposes key role for NO depletion in renal vasculature 120 NO, nitric oxide 