Controlling brain tumor growth via intraventricular administration of an AAV vector encoding IFN-? Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive type of all primary brain tumors, with an overall median survival < 1 year after diagnosis. Despite introduction of multimodal treatment approaches, the prognosis has not improved significantly over the last 50 years. In this study we investigated the effect of intracerebroventricular injection of an AAV vector encoding human interferon-beta (hIFN-?) on glioblastoma growth. Recently, we found that peri-tumoral parenchymal transduction with an AAV vector encoding hIFN-? was exceptionally efficient in eradicating GBM brain tumors. However the extensive infiltration and migration displayed by glioblastoma cells in patients may leave a significant number of tumor cells outside a local therapeutic zone created by intraparenchymal delivery of AAV vectors. Here we show that pretreatment of mice via intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of an AAV vector encoding hIFN-? (AAV-IFN-?) completely prevents tumor growth in an orthotopic model of GBM. Furthermore, ICV infusion of AAV-IFN-? into mice bearing pre-established U87 intracranial tumors improved their survival compared to mice infused via the same route with a control AAV vector. These data suggest that ICV injection of AAV vectors encoding anti-tumor proteins is a promising approach deserving further consideration for the treatment of GBM.  INTRODUCTION Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive type of all primary brain tumors, with an overall median survival of less than 1 year for GBM patients. 1 Unfortunately, current multimodal treatment approaches have not improved significantly the prognosis for GBM patients. This dismal clinical picture is the result of a number of features unique to glioblastomas. These include high interstitial fluid pressure and altered vasculature, which limit systemic and local drug delivery to these tumors, 2 , 3 a large fraction of tumor cells in Go at any given time and thus resistance to anti-mitotic agents, and perhaps the most insidious of all, single cell invasive growth, which is impossible to identify and target by surgical or radiological means, and ultimately responsible for recurrent tumors that result in the patient’s death. Thus new therapeutic approaches for this devastating disease are needed. Recently we have tested a new therapeutic approach for brain tumors using AAV vectors to genetically modify normal brain parenchyma to create a zone of resistance to tumor growth. We have shown the exceptional effectiveness of this approach consisting of normal brain cells producing an anti-tumor protein, human interferon-beta (hIFN-?), in eradicating tumors in an orthotopic xenograft model of GBM. 4 One of the hallmarks of glioblastomas, and possibly its most insidious property, is single cell infiltration and extensive migration along white matter tracts and perivascular space of Virchow-Robin. 5 , 6 In patients, brain tumor recurrence is for the most part a local phenomenon that occurs after resection within a 2 cm radius around the primary tumor. 7 – 9 However the extensive infiltration and migration displayed by glioblastoma cells in patients may leave a significant number of tumor cells outside a zone of resistance created by intraparenchymal delivery of AAV vectors, even using convection-enhanced delivery, which is highly effective in distributing these vectors over large structures. 10 – 12 Furthermore, if the tumor lies near a critical structure in the brain, then intraparenchymal injection of AAV vector close to the tumor may not be an option. To overcome these potential limitations of intraparenchymal delivery of therapeutic AAV vectors, we hypothesized that intracerebroventricular (ICV) injection of an AAV vector encoding hIFN-?, which is secreted from transduced cells, would create a global therapeutic effect against tumor growth through the brain. ICV and intrathecal delivery of AAV2 and AAV4 vectors encoding lysosomal enzymes, which are also secreted from transduced cells, has proven very effective in transducing the normal brain in adult mouse models for lysosomal storage disease, providing therapeutic levels of enzyme throughout the CNS. 13 , 14 Here, we show that ICV delivery of an AAV vector encoding hIFN-? is an effective approach to curb glioblastoma tumor growth.  MATERIAL AND METHODS Cell culture Human glioblastoma cell line U87 (ATCC, Manassas, VA) was cultured in high glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 ?g/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) in a humidified atmosphere supplemented with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. U87fluc-mCherry cells stably expressing firefly luciferase (fluc) have been described previously. 4 AAV vector design and preparation The AAV2/rh.8-CBA-IFN-? vector has been previously described. 4 The AAV serotype used in this study is derived from the capsid sequence of AAVrh.8. 15 AAV vectors were prepared as described. 16 Animals and stereotaxic injections of mice Intracranial injections were performed in male BALB/c nu/nu mice age 6–8 weeks obtained from a colony maintained at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (125 mg/kg) and xylazine (12.5 mg/kg) in 0.9% saline and placed in a rodent stereotaxic frame (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL). Tumor cells were implanted in the left or right midstriatum using the following coordinates from bregma in mm: (AP +0.5, ML +2.0, DV ?2.5.). All tumor cell implantations were performed using a Micro 4 Microsyringe Pump Controller (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) attached to a Hamilton syringe with a 33-gauge needle (Hamilton Co., Rena, NV). Tumor cells were resuspended in Opti-MEM (Invitrogen) and injected into the striatum in a volume of 2?l (5×105 cells) at a rate of 200 nl/min. After injection, the needle was left in place for 2 min before slow withdrawal. AAV vectors were infused into the left lateral ventricle (coordinates from bregma in mm: AP -0.4, ML +1.0, DV -1.7) using a Harvard 22 syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus, MA) to drive a gas-tight Hamilton Syringe (Hamilton Co., Rena, NV) attached to a 33-gauge steel needle (Hamilton Co., Rena, NV) via PEEK tubing (Alltech, Deerfield, IL) and Luer adapters (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). Briefly, 5×1010 genome copies (gc) or 5×1011 gc were infused at a rate of 4 ?l/min after which the needle was left in place for 2 min to prevent backflow before withdrawal. The experimental protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the Massachusetts General Hospital and follows guidelines set forth in the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. For the survival analysis experiments, animal death was defined as euthanasia after the development of symptoms associated with tumor burden in accordance with the guidelines of the MGH animal facility. Bioluminescent imaging Bioluminescence imaging of tumor-associated firefly luciferase expression in live animals was carried out using a cryogenically cooled, high efficiency CCD camera system (Roper Scientific) available to us through the MGH Small Animal Imaging Facility at the Center for Molecular Imaging Research (CMIR) as described. 4 Human IFN-? level in brain lysates by ELISA Quantification of hIFN-? in tissue lysates was performed using the hIFN-? ELISA kit (PBL Biomedical Laboratories, Piscataway, NJ) according to the manufacturers instructions. For detection in brain lysates, the mice were sacrificed, the brains removed, and placed in a mouse coronal matrix (Roboz Surgical Instrument Co., Gaithersburg, MD) for sectioning. An approximately 2 mm brain slice was removed spanning the injection site. The striatum was further isolated by careful cutting with a scalpel, and the tissue placed in 400 ?l MPER lysis buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) containing Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). The tissue was first homogenized and then rotated at 4°C for 15 min. The lysate was then centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000×g. Clarified lysate was transferred to a fresh tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the DC protein assay (BioRad, Hercules, CA). Lysates were diluted 1:1000 in dilution buffer prior to the ELISA. The sensitivity of the assay was 25 ng hIFN-?/ml. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining To visualize tumor tissue in brain sections of mice H&E staining was performed according to standard protocols on 20 ?m brain slices. High resolution images of the stained sections were obtained using a Nikon Super Coolscan 9000 and Nikon Scan 4.0 imaging software (Nikon, Melville, NY). Vector distribution analysis To analyse AAV vector distribution, AAV2/rh.8-CBA-GFP- injected mice were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde two weeks after vector infusion. The brain tissue was sectioned into 50 ?m coronal sections, coverslipped with Fluorescence Mounting Media (Dako North America, Carpenteria, CA) and visualized with a Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U fluorescence microscope. Images were captured with a Retiga EXi CCD digital camera (Qimaging, Surrey, British Columbia) and viewed with Metavue imaging software (version 6.2r4; Molecular Devices Corp., Downington, PA). Statistical analysis Data presented provides the mean value ± 1 standard deviation. Group comparisons were computed by an unpaired Student’s t -test and One-way ANOVA using GraphPad PRISM software (version 5.0, San Diego, CA). For statistical analysis of group comparisons in Kaplan-Meier survival curves, the Log-Rank (Mantel-Cox) test and Log-Rank test for trend were performed using GraphPad PRISM software.  Cell culture Human glioblastoma cell line U87 (ATCC, Manassas, VA) was cultured in high glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 ?g/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) in a humidified atmosphere supplemented with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. U87fluc-mCherry cells stably expressing firefly luciferase (fluc) have been described previously. 4  AAV vector design and preparation The AAV2/rh.8-CBA-IFN-? vector has been previously described. 4 The AAV serotype used in this study is derived from the capsid sequence of AAVrh.8. 15 AAV vectors were prepared as described. 16  Animals and stereotaxic injections of mice Intracranial injections were performed in male BALB/c nu/nu mice age 6–8 weeks obtained from a colony maintained at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (125 mg/kg) and xylazine (12.5 mg/kg) in 0.9% saline and placed in a rodent stereotaxic frame (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL). Tumor cells were implanted in the left or right midstriatum using the following coordinates from bregma in mm: (AP +0.5, ML +2.0, DV ?2.5.). All tumor cell implantations were performed using a Micro 4 Microsyringe Pump Controller (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL) attached to a Hamilton syringe with a 33-gauge needle (Hamilton Co., Rena, NV). Tumor cells were resuspended in Opti-MEM (Invitrogen) and injected into the striatum in a volume of 2?l (5×105 cells) at a rate of 200 nl/min. After injection, the needle was left in place for 2 min before slow withdrawal. AAV vectors were infused into the left lateral ventricle (coordinates from bregma in mm: AP -0.4, ML +1.0, DV -1.7) using a Harvard 22 syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus, MA) to drive a gas-tight Hamilton Syringe (Hamilton Co., Rena, NV) attached to a 33-gauge steel needle (Hamilton Co., Rena, NV) via PEEK tubing (Alltech, Deerfield, IL) and Luer adapters (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). Briefly, 5×1010 genome copies (gc) or 5×1011 gc were infused at a rate of 4 ?l/min after which the needle was left in place for 2 min to prevent backflow before withdrawal. The experimental protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the Massachusetts General Hospital and follows guidelines set forth in the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. For the survival analysis experiments, animal death was defined as euthanasia after the development of symptoms associated with tumor burden in accordance with the guidelines of the MGH animal facility.  Bioluminescent imaging Bioluminescence imaging of tumor-associated firefly luciferase expression in live animals was carried out using a cryogenically cooled, high efficiency CCD camera system (Roper Scientific) available to us through the MGH Small Animal Imaging Facility at the Center for Molecular Imaging Research (CMIR) as described. 4  Human IFN-? level in brain lysates by ELISA Quantification of hIFN-? in tissue lysates was performed using the hIFN-? ELISA kit (PBL Biomedical Laboratories, Piscataway, NJ) according to the manufacturers instructions. For detection in brain lysates, the mice were sacrificed, the brains removed, and placed in a mouse coronal matrix (Roboz Surgical Instrument Co., Gaithersburg, MD) for sectioning. An approximately 2 mm brain slice was removed spanning the injection site. The striatum was further isolated by careful cutting with a scalpel, and the tissue placed in 400 ?l MPER lysis buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) containing Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). The tissue was first homogenized and then rotated at 4°C for 15 min. The lysate was then centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000×g. Clarified lysate was transferred to a fresh tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the DC protein assay (BioRad, Hercules, CA). Lysates were diluted 1:1000 in dilution buffer prior to the ELISA. The sensitivity of the assay was 25 ng hIFN-?/ml.  Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining To visualize tumor tissue in brain sections of mice H&E staining was performed according to standard protocols on 20 ?m brain slices. High resolution images of the stained sections were obtained using a Nikon Super Coolscan 9000 and Nikon Scan 4.0 imaging software (Nikon, Melville, NY).  Vector distribution analysis To analyse AAV vector distribution, AAV2/rh.8-CBA-GFP- injected mice were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde two weeks after vector infusion. The brain tissue was sectioned into 50 ?m coronal sections, coverslipped with Fluorescence Mounting Media (Dako North America, Carpenteria, CA) and visualized with a Nikon Eclipse TE2000-U fluorescence microscope. Images were captured with a Retiga EXi CCD digital camera (Qimaging, Surrey, British Columbia) and viewed with Metavue imaging software (version 6.2r4; Molecular Devices Corp., Downington, PA).  Statistical analysis Data presented provides the mean value ± 1 standard deviation. Group comparisons were computed by an unpaired Student’s t -test and One-way ANOVA using GraphPad PRISM software (version 5.0, San Diego, CA). For statistical analysis of group comparisons in Kaplan-Meier survival curves, the Log-Rank (Mantel-Cox) test and Log-Rank test for trend were performed using GraphPad PRISM software.  Analysis of transduced cell distribution after ICV delivery of an AAV-GFP vector in adult athymic nude mice Finally we assessed the distribution of transduced cells in the brain after ICV delivery of AAV vectors in adult athymic nude mice. For this purpose we injected 5×1010 gc of AAV2/rh.8-CBA-GFP into the left lateral ventricle, and one month later analyzed the distribution of GFP-positive cells in the brain ( Figure 4a ). In the injected hemisphere GFP-positive cell bodies were detected in the cortex along the needle track ( Figure 4a , left), as well as in the ependymal lining of the ventricles ( Figure 4b ), subventricular zone ( Figure 4c ), and septum ( Figure 4a -left; 4d). Additionally, intense GFP signal was seen in glial cells located in the corpus callosum ( Figure 4e ). GFP-positive cells were also present in cortical layer VI ( Figure 4f ). Pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the ipsilateral hippocampus were also transduced, but in a declining anterior-posterior gradient ( Figures 4g and h , respectively). Some pyramidal cells in the posterior ipsilateral CA3 region were also detected ( Figure 4i ). The hippocampal oriens and radiatum layers of the ipsilateral and contralateral hippocampus were filled with GFP fibers ( Figure 4a -right). The latter observation is consistent with the intense GFP signal observed in the fornix ( Figure 4a -center) composed of commissural collaterals that connect both hippocampi. In the contralateral hemisphere GFP-positive cells were detected only in the septal nuclei close to the midline ( Figure 4a -left).  RESULTS Striatal expression of hIFN-? after ICV delivery of AAV vector in adult athymic nude mice Based on the therapeutic efficacy of intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of AAV vectors encoding a secreted protein in adult mice, 13 we hypothesized that ICV delivery of an AAV vector encoding human interferon-beta (hIFN-?) in adult mice may be an effective approach to control and prevent brain tumor growth in an experimental GBM model. Our first goal was to determine hIFN-? levels in brain parenchyma after infusion of 5×1010 gc of AAV2/rh.8-CBA-hIFN-? (AAV-hIFN-?), or AAV-ev (vector without a transgene), into the left cerebral ventricle of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. Two weeks post-infusion we found comparable levels of hIFN-? (approximately 3 ng/mg total protein) in ipsilateral and contralateral striatum of mice injected with AAV-hIFN-? ( Figure 1 ). Pre-treatment of adult athymic nude mice with AAV-hIFN? vector infused ICV prevents brain tumor growth To test our hypothesis, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left cerebral lateral ventricle 6–8 week old athymic nude mice, and two weeks later we injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells into the ipsilateral or contralateral striatum ( Figure 2a ). Control mice injected ICV with 5×1010 gc of AAV-ev vector received 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells in the ipsilateral striatum. We assessed tumor growth by sequential in vivo imaging of tumor associated bioluminescence signal (TABS) ( Figure 2b,c ). TABS in AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice was detectable in the first two imaging sessions at days 3 and 7 post-tumor injection, albeit lower than in controls, and was absent in both groups of animals from two weeks on ( Figure 2b ). In contrast, TABS in AAV-ev-treated animals was detectable at 2 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2b ), and continued to increase until the last imaging session at 4 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2c ). The endpoint in these studies was defined as a body weight loss > 20% of maximal body weight. All AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice survived until the arbitrary endpoint at 80 days post-tumor injection, which is significantly longer (p < 0.01) than the median survival of AAV-ev treated animals (35 days, Figure 2d ). Histological analysis of brain sections from representative animals showed large tumors in control animals treated with AAV-ev, and no evidence of tumors in AAV-hIFN-?-treated animals ( Figure 2e ). ICV delivery of AAV-hIFN-? in athymic nude mice with pre-existing tumors improves survival Next we analyzed whether this delivery modality was effective in controlling the growth of established glioblastoma tumors. We injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells into the left or right striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. One week after tumor cell implantation, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left ventricle. Control mice received 5×1011 gc of AAV-ev ( Figure 3a ). At one and three weeks after vector injection, TABS was 3- and 4-fold higher in control mice compared to those treated with AAV-hIFN-? contralateral or ipsilateral to the tumor, respectively (at one week p = 0.11 and 0.17, at three weeks p = 0.14 and 0.20, Figure 3b ). In addition we tested the anti-tumor effect of a higher dose of AAV-hIFN-? vector (5×1011 gc) injected contralateral to tumor ( Figure 3b ). At one week post vector injection the higher dose resulted in statistically significant lower TABS compared to the control and low dose groups (~30-fold, p = 0.03, Figure 3b ). Within two weeks after AAV-hIFN-? vector infusion, no bioluminescence signal was detectable in any of the mice in this high dose group ( Figure 3b,c ). All mice in the control group treated with AAV-ev were killed within six weeks post tumor injection (median survival 37 days, Figure 3d ). Some of the low dose animals survived longer than the animals in the control group, although this was not statistically significant, (median survival 35 and 45 days, p = 0.6 and 0.2 respectively, Figure 3d ) with all animals being killed within 10 weeks after tumor injection. Mice in the high dose group survived longer than other groups (median survival 57 days, p = 0.03, Figure 3d ). Analysis of transduced cell distribution after ICV delivery of an AAV-GFP vector in adult athymic nude mice Finally we assessed the distribution of transduced cells in the brain after ICV delivery of AAV vectors in adult athymic nude mice. For this purpose we injected 5×1010 gc of AAV2/rh.8-CBA-GFP into the left lateral ventricle, and one month later analyzed the distribution of GFP-positive cells in the brain ( Figure 4a ). In the injected hemisphere GFP-positive cell bodies were detected in the cortex along the needle track ( Figure 4a , left), as well as in the ependymal lining of the ventricles ( Figure 4b ), subventricular zone ( Figure 4c ), and septum ( Figure 4a -left; 4d). Additionally, intense GFP signal was seen in glial cells located in the corpus callosum ( Figure 4e ). GFP-positive cells were also present in cortical layer VI ( Figure 4f ). Pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the ipsilateral hippocampus were also transduced, but in a declining anterior-posterior gradient ( Figures 4g and h , respectively). Some pyramidal cells in the posterior ipsilateral CA3 region were also detected ( Figure 4i ). The hippocampal oriens and radiatum layers of the ipsilateral and contralateral hippocampus were filled with GFP fibers ( Figure 4a -right). The latter observation is consistent with the intense GFP signal observed in the fornix ( Figure 4a -center) composed of commissural collaterals that connect both hippocampi. In the contralateral hemisphere GFP-positive cells were detected only in the septal nuclei close to the midline ( Figure 4a -left).  RESULTS Striatal expression of hIFN-? after ICV delivery of AAV vector in adult athymic nude mice Based on the therapeutic efficacy of intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of AAV vectors encoding a secreted protein in adult mice, 13 we hypothesized that ICV delivery of an AAV vector encoding human interferon-beta (hIFN-?) in adult mice may be an effective approach to control and prevent brain tumor growth in an experimental GBM model. Our first goal was to determine hIFN-? levels in brain parenchyma after infusion of 5×1010 gc of AAV2/rh.8-CBA-hIFN-? (AAV-hIFN-?), or AAV-ev (vector without a transgene), into the left cerebral ventricle of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. Two weeks post-infusion we found comparable levels of hIFN-? (approximately 3 ng/mg total protein) in ipsilateral and contralateral striatum of mice injected with AAV-hIFN-? ( Figure 1 ). Pre-treatment of adult athymic nude mice with AAV-hIFN? vector infused ICV prevents brain tumor growth To test our hypothesis, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left cerebral lateral ventricle 6–8 week old athymic nude mice, and two weeks later we injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells into the ipsilateral or contralateral striatum ( Figure 2a ). Control mice injected ICV with 5×1010 gc of AAV-ev vector received 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells in the ipsilateral striatum. We assessed tumor growth by sequential in vivo imaging of tumor associated bioluminescence signal (TABS) ( Figure 2b,c ). TABS in AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice was detectable in the first two imaging sessions at days 3 and 7 post-tumor injection, albeit lower than in controls, and was absent in both groups of animals from two weeks on ( Figure 2b ). In contrast, TABS in AAV-ev-treated animals was detectable at 2 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2b ), and continued to increase until the last imaging session at 4 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2c ). The endpoint in these studies was defined as a body weight loss > 20% of maximal body weight. All AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice survived until the arbitrary endpoint at 80 days post-tumor injection, which is significantly longer (p < 0.01) than the median survival of AAV-ev treated animals (35 days, Figure 2d ). Histological analysis of brain sections from representative animals showed large tumors in control animals treated with AAV-ev, and no evidence of tumors in AAV-hIFN-?-treated animals ( Figure 2e ). ICV delivery of AAV-hIFN-? in athymic nude mice with pre-existing tumors improves survival Next we analyzed whether this delivery modality was effective in controlling the growth of established glioblastoma tumors. We injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells into the left or right striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. One week after tumor cell implantation, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left ventricle. Control mice received 5×1011 gc of AAV-ev ( Figure 3a ). At one and three weeks after vector injection, TABS was 3- and 4-fold higher in control mice compared to those treated with AAV-hIFN-? contralateral or ipsilateral to the tumor, respectively (at one week p = 0.11 and 0.17, at three weeks p = 0.14 and 0.20, Figure 3b ). In addition we tested the anti-tumor effect of a higher dose of AAV-hIFN-? vector (5×1011 gc) injected contralateral to tumor ( Figure 3b ). At one week post vector injection the higher dose resulted in statistically significant lower TABS compared to the control and low dose groups (~30-fold, p = 0.03, Figure 3b ). Within two weeks after AAV-hIFN-? vector infusion, no bioluminescence signal was detectable in any of the mice in this high dose group ( Figure 3b,c ). All mice in the control group treated with AAV-ev were killed within six weeks post tumor injection (median survival 37 days, Figure 3d ). Some of the low dose animals survived longer than the animals in the control group, although this was not statistically significant, (median survival 35 and 45 days, p = 0.6 and 0.2 respectively, Figure 3d ) with all animals being killed within 10 weeks after tumor injection. Mice in the high dose group survived longer than other groups (median survival 57 days, p = 0.03, Figure 3d ). Analysis of transduced cell distribution after ICV delivery of an AAV-GFP vector in adult athymic nude mice Finally we assessed the distribution of transduced cells in the brain after ICV delivery of AAV vectors in adult athymic nude mice. For this purpose we injected 5×1010 gc of AAV2/rh.8-CBA-GFP into the left lateral ventricle, and one month later analyzed the distribution of GFP-positive cells in the brain ( Figure 4a ). In the injected hemisphere GFP-positive cell bodies were detected in the cortex along the needle track ( Figure 4a , left), as well as in the ependymal lining of the ventricles ( Figure 4b ), subventricular zone ( Figure 4c ), and septum ( Figure 4a -left; 4d). Additionally, intense GFP signal was seen in glial cells located in the corpus callosum ( Figure 4e ). GFP-positive cells were also present in cortical layer VI ( Figure 4f ). Pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the ipsilateral hippocampus were also transduced, but in a declining anterior-posterior gradient ( Figures 4g and h , respectively). Some pyramidal cells in the posterior ipsilateral CA3 region were also detected ( Figure 4i ). The hippocampal oriens and radiatum layers of the ipsilateral and contralateral hippocampus were filled with GFP fibers ( Figure 4a -right). The latter observation is consistent with the intense GFP signal observed in the fornix ( Figure 4a -center) composed of commissural collaterals that connect both hippocampi. In the contralateral hemisphere GFP-positive cells were detected only in the septal nuclei close to the midline ( Figure 4a -left).  Striatal expression of hIFN-? after ICV delivery of AAV vector in adult athymic nude mice Based on the therapeutic efficacy of intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of AAV vectors encoding a secreted protein in adult mice, 13 we hypothesized that ICV delivery of an AAV vector encoding human interferon-beta (hIFN-?) in adult mice may be an effective approach to control and prevent brain tumor growth in an experimental GBM model. Our first goal was to determine hIFN-? levels in brain parenchyma after infusion of 5×1010 gc of AAV2/rh.8-CBA-hIFN-? (AAV-hIFN-?), or AAV-ev (vector without a transgene), into the left cerebral ventricle of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. Two weeks post-infusion we found comparable levels of hIFN-? (approximately 3 ng/mg total protein) in ipsilateral and contralateral striatum of mice injected with AAV-hIFN-? ( Figure 1 ).  Striatal expression of hIFN-? after ICV delivery of AAV vector in adult athymic nude mice Based on the therapeutic efficacy of intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of AAV vectors encoding a secreted protein in adult mice, 13 we hypothesized that ICV delivery of an AAV vector encoding human interferon-beta (hIFN-?) in adult mice may be an effective approach to control and prevent brain tumor growth in an experimental GBM model. Our first goal was to determine hIFN-? levels in brain parenchyma after infusion of 5×1010 gc of AAV2/rh.8-CBA-hIFN-? (AAV-hIFN-?), or AAV-ev (vector without a transgene), into the left cerebral ventricle of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. Two weeks post-infusion we found comparable levels of hIFN-? (approximately 3 ng/mg total protein) in ipsilateral and contralateral striatum of mice injected with AAV-hIFN-? ( Figure 1 ).  Pre-treatment of adult athymic nude mice with AAV-hIFN? vector infused ICV prevents brain tumor growth To test our hypothesis, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left cerebral lateral ventricle 6–8 week old athymic nude mice, and two weeks later we injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells into the ipsilateral or contralateral striatum ( Figure 2a ). Control mice injected ICV with 5×1010 gc of AAV-ev vector received 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells in the ipsilateral striatum. We assessed tumor growth by sequential in vivo imaging of tumor associated bioluminescence signal (TABS) ( Figure 2b,c ). TABS in AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice was detectable in the first two imaging sessions at days 3 and 7 post-tumor injection, albeit lower than in controls, and was absent in both groups of animals from two weeks on ( Figure 2b ). In contrast, TABS in AAV-ev-treated animals was detectable at 2 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2b ), and continued to increase until the last imaging session at 4 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2c ). The endpoint in these studies was defined as a body weight loss > 20% of maximal body weight. All AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice survived until the arbitrary endpoint at 80 days post-tumor injection, which is significantly longer (p < 0.01) than the median survival of AAV-ev treated animals (35 days, Figure 2d ). Histological analysis of brain sections from representative animals showed large tumors in control animals treated with AAV-ev, and no evidence of tumors in AAV-hIFN-?-treated animals ( Figure 2e ).  Pre-treatment of adult athymic nude mice with AAV-hIFN? vector infused ICV prevents brain tumor growth To test our hypothesis, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left cerebral lateral ventricle 6–8 week old athymic nude mice, and two weeks later we injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells into the ipsilateral or contralateral striatum ( Figure 2a ). Control mice injected ICV with 5×1010 gc of AAV-ev vector received 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells in the ipsilateral striatum. We assessed tumor growth by sequential in vivo imaging of tumor associated bioluminescence signal (TABS) ( Figure 2b,c ). TABS in AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice was detectable in the first two imaging sessions at days 3 and 7 post-tumor injection, albeit lower than in controls, and was absent in both groups of animals from two weeks on ( Figure 2b ). In contrast, TABS in AAV-ev-treated animals was detectable at 2 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2b ), and continued to increase until the last imaging session at 4 weeks post-tumor injection ( Figure 2c ). The endpoint in these studies was defined as a body weight loss > 20% of maximal body weight. All AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice survived until the arbitrary endpoint at 80 days post-tumor injection, which is significantly longer (p < 0.01) than the median survival of AAV-ev treated animals (35 days, Figure 2d ). Histological analysis of brain sections from representative animals showed large tumors in control animals treated with AAV-ev, and no evidence of tumors in AAV-hIFN-?-treated animals ( Figure 2e ).  ICV delivery of AAV-hIFN-? in athymic nude mice with pre-existing tumors improves survival Next we analyzed whether this delivery modality was effective in controlling the growth of established glioblastoma tumors. We injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells into the left or right striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. One week after tumor cell implantation, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left ventricle. Control mice received 5×1011 gc of AAV-ev ( Figure 3a ). At one and three weeks after vector injection, TABS was 3- and 4-fold higher in control mice compared to those treated with AAV-hIFN-? contralateral or ipsilateral to the tumor, respectively (at one week p = 0.11 and 0.17, at three weeks p = 0.14 and 0.20, Figure 3b ). In addition we tested the anti-tumor effect of a higher dose of AAV-hIFN-? vector (5×1011 gc) injected contralateral to tumor ( Figure 3b ). At one week post vector injection the higher dose resulted in statistically significant lower TABS compared to the control and low dose groups (~30-fold, p = 0.03, Figure 3b ). Within two weeks after AAV-hIFN-? vector infusion, no bioluminescence signal was detectable in any of the mice in this high dose group ( Figure 3b,c ). All mice in the control group treated with AAV-ev were killed within six weeks post tumor injection (median survival 37 days, Figure 3d ). Some of the low dose animals survived longer than the animals in the control group, although this was not statistically significant, (median survival 35 and 45 days, p = 0.6 and 0.2 respectively, Figure 3d ) with all animals being killed within 10 weeks after tumor injection. Mice in the high dose group survived longer than other groups (median survival 57 days, p = 0.03, Figure 3d ).  ICV delivery of AAV-hIFN-? in athymic nude mice with pre-existing tumors improves survival Next we analyzed whether this delivery modality was effective in controlling the growth of established glioblastoma tumors. We injected 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells into the left or right striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. One week after tumor cell implantation, we infused 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? into the left ventricle. Control mice received 5×1011 gc of AAV-ev ( Figure 3a ). At one and three weeks after vector injection, TABS was 3- and 4-fold higher in control mice compared to those treated with AAV-hIFN-? contralateral or ipsilateral to the tumor, respectively (at one week p = 0.11 and 0.17, at three weeks p = 0.14 and 0.20, Figure 3b ). In addition we tested the anti-tumor effect of a higher dose of AAV-hIFN-? vector (5×1011 gc) injected contralateral to tumor ( Figure 3b ). At one week post vector injection the higher dose resulted in statistically significant lower TABS compared to the control and low dose groups (~30-fold, p = 0.03, Figure 3b ). Within two weeks after AAV-hIFN-? vector infusion, no bioluminescence signal was detectable in any of the mice in this high dose group ( Figure 3b,c ). All mice in the control group treated with AAV-ev were killed within six weeks post tumor injection (median survival 37 days, Figure 3d ). Some of the low dose animals survived longer than the animals in the control group, although this was not statistically significant, (median survival 35 and 45 days, p = 0.6 and 0.2 respectively, Figure 3d ) with all animals being killed within 10 weeks after tumor injection. Mice in the high dose group survived longer than other groups (median survival 57 days, p = 0.03, Figure 3d ).  DISCUSSION In this study we analyzed the anti-tumor efficacy of intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of an AAV vector encoding human interferon-beta (hIFN-?) in an experimental orthotopic GBM model. A significant anti-tumor effect (measured by both tumor-associated bioluminescent imaging and survival analysis) was observed against U87 tumors injected intracranially before or after AAV vector infusion. To our knowledge, this is the first study showing that ICV infusion of an AAV vector carrying a therapeutic gene may be a viable approach to control intraparenchymal brain tumor growth. Pre-treatment of normal brain via ICV-delivery of AAV-hIFN-? prevented glioma tumor growth resulting in survival of all treated mice ( figure 2 ). In addition, ICV injection of the same vector into U87 tumor-bearing nude mice resulted in a significant survival advantage compared to controls, although AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice were eventually sacrificed because of > 20% body weight loss related to disease progression ( Figure 3b ). Previously we showed that transduction of peritumoral normal brain with AAV vectors encoding hIFN-? under a neuronal-specific promoter, or a ubiquitous promoter (CBA promoter as in this study), resulted in complete regression of established glioma tumors and 100% survival (Maguire et al., unpublished observations ). 4 The difference in efficacy between this and our previous study may be due to the local concentration of hIFN-? at the brain/tumor interface. Evidence for this is the fact that the concentration of hIFN-? in the striatum (same coordinates used for tumor implantation) after intrastriatal injection of AAV-hIFN-? (1011 gc) was ~29 fold higher than that obtained in the current study using ICV-injected AAV-hIFN-? (5×1010 gc) ( Figure 1 ). Furthermore, increasing the dose of ICV-delivered AAV-hIFN-? from 5×1010 to 5×1011 gc increased the survival time significantly ( Figure 3 ). Interestingly in high-dose mice, tumor associated bioluminescence was undetectable by 2 weeks, and remained so until at least 3 weeks after vector infusion. Nonetheless all high-dose AAV-treated mice ultimately succumbed to tumor growth (determined by histological examination of brain sections, Figure S1 ). This indicates that the highest vector dose was insufficient to generate hIFN-? levels necessary to eliminate all U87 tumor cells. Most likely the rapid loss of bioluminescent signal indicated that the majority of the tumor mass was eliminated by IFN- ?. In all likelihood a small number of tumor cells below the detection limit of intracranial imaging survived due to higher resistance to relatively low levels of hIFN-?, and eventually formed a tumor. It has been shown that subpopulations of tumors can gradually circumvent anti-angiogenic therapy in vivo after an initial rapid regression. 17 Thus it is possible that ‘recurring’ tumors in the high-dose experiment were derived from a subpopulation of U87 cells more resistant to hINF-?. Higher vector doses could potentially eliminate all tumor cells leading to long-term survival of all treated animals. The moderately low levels of hIFN-? in brain parenchyma is most likely due to the relatively low number of AAV-transduced cells in the brain after ICV delivery of AAV vector in adult athymic nude mice ( Figure 4 ). Most transduced cells were located in the hippocampal formation and corpus callosum. Therefore distribution of hIFN-? to the contralateral striatum is likely to have occurred via cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) flow in the perivascular space of Virchow-Robin. Others have shown that recombinant or vector-encoded lysosomal enzymes can be distributed efficiently throughout the dog and mouse brain via the CSF. 13 , 14 , 18 , 19 The limited transduction reported here in adult mice is in contrast to the exceptional widespread transduction of the brain after ICV delivery of the same AAV vector serotype in neonatal C57BL/6 mice. 16 , 20 It is important to note, however, that in AAV-GFP injected animals, GFP distribution is restricted to the cell bodies, dendrites and axons of AAV-transduced cells. hIFN-? distribution in the brain is likely to be much broader than GFP as IFN-? is a secreted protein (much like the secreted lysosomal enzymes in the aforementioned studies), which could be distributed by diffusion, and CSF flow. Evidence for this comes from the observation that detectable levels of hIFN-? were found in striatum (same site as for tumor implantation) after ICV injection of AAVrh.8-hIFN-? while no GFP positive cells were detected in this same region when AAVrh.8-GFP was injected ICV. The key to achieving a robust anti-tumor effect using the present strategy is to transduce large number of cells, preferentially those lining the ventricles after ICV delivery of AAV vectors. Given the minimal levels of transduction of these regions of the brain using AAVrh.8 after ICV delivery, another alternative may be to use an AAV4 vector to deliver the therapeutic gene. AAV4 vectors have been shown to transduce ependymal cells very efficiently after ICV delivery in adult mice, and they have been used to achieve therapeutic levels of a lysosomal enzyme throughout the entire brain. 13 A number of parameters is likely to determine the final parenchymal concentration of recombinant proteins secreted into the CSF from vector-transduced ependymal cells such as their size, interactions with extracellular matrix components, cellular receptor densities, and half-life. While many of these parameters are likely to be different between lysosomal enzymes and hIFN-?, we anticipate that ICV infusion of an AAV4-hIFN-? vector would result in considerably higher hIFN-? levels in brain parenchyma than obtained with the vector used in this study because of higher transduction efficiency and secretion of hIFN-? directly into CSF in the lateral ventricles. Nonetheless, even with relatively low levels of transduction in the brain with ICV administered AAVrh.8, we show proof of concept that ICV injection of a viral vector encoding an anti-tumor protein is a viable approach for controlling brain tumors. Distribution of high levels of IFN-? throughout the brain via CSF could have potential risks given the pleotropic nature of this cytokine. 21 – 23 The absence of serious side effects in the present study could be misleading since human IFN-? has low affinity for murine interferon receptors. 24 Additional studies using AAV vectors encoding mouse IFN-? will be necessary to assess safety and may indeed dictate that this type of therapeutic approach be implemented for relatively short periods of time. This would require the use of AAV vectors capable of drug-regulated gene expression, 25 – 28 or IFN-? activation of protein kinase R may decrease translation of AAV-encoded IFN-? mRNA. 29 Further development of the global therapeutic approach investigated here may allow complete eradication of established tumors in mice. Scaling up the ICV injection which gave a therapeutic effect against established tumors 1000-fold for the human brain would result in a dose of 5x1014 which is achievable by today’s vector production capabilities (~1015 gc/ml). At these titers, ~500 ?l would be injected into the ventricle which is an accepted volume. While the dose of AAV vector will be readily achieved in terms of vector production and injection volume, the limiting factor will be IFN-?’s toxicity as mentioned above. Still, sub-therapeutic amounts of ICV-administered AAV-IFN-? may enhance tumor cells’ sensitivity to apoptosis by other agents (e.g. radiation, sTRAIL). This approach is most likely to provide maximal therapeutic benefit when used as a complementary modality following surgical debulking and injection of the AAV vector encoding hIFN-? into the peritumoral brain.4 The ICV delivery route of AAV vectors may also be the only means of efficient transduction when tumor is located in an inoperable region of the brain (e.g. brainstem). AAV vector-mediated CSF production of anti-tumor proteins could be used to prevent/delay the growth of glioblastoma cells that infiltrate normal brain tissue, migrate away from the main tumor mass, and give rise to tumor recurrences that are nearly impossible to treat with current post-surgical radiation and chemotherapeutic regimens.  DISCUSSION In this study we analyzed the anti-tumor efficacy of intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion of an AAV vector encoding human interferon-beta (hIFN-?) in an experimental orthotopic GBM model. A significant anti-tumor effect (measured by both tumor-associated bioluminescent imaging and survival analysis) was observed against U87 tumors injected intracranially before or after AAV vector infusion. To our knowledge, this is the first study showing that ICV infusion of an AAV vector carrying a therapeutic gene may be a viable approach to control intraparenchymal brain tumor growth. Pre-treatment of normal brain via ICV-delivery of AAV-hIFN-? prevented glioma tumor growth resulting in survival of all treated mice ( figure 2 ). In addition, ICV injection of the same vector into U87 tumor-bearing nude mice resulted in a significant survival advantage compared to controls, although AAV-hIFN-?-treated mice were eventually sacrificed because of > 20% body weight loss related to disease progression ( Figure 3b ). Previously we showed that transduction of peritumoral normal brain with AAV vectors encoding hIFN-? under a neuronal-specific promoter, or a ubiquitous promoter (CBA promoter as in this study), resulted in complete regression of established glioma tumors and 100% survival (Maguire et al., unpublished observations ). 4 The difference in efficacy between this and our previous study may be due to the local concentration of hIFN-? at the brain/tumor interface. Evidence for this is the fact that the concentration of hIFN-? in the striatum (same coordinates used for tumor implantation) after intrastriatal injection of AAV-hIFN-? (1011 gc) was ~29 fold higher than that obtained in the current study using ICV-injected AAV-hIFN-? (5×1010 gc) ( Figure 1 ). Furthermore, increasing the dose of ICV-delivered AAV-hIFN-? from 5×1010 to 5×1011 gc increased the survival time significantly ( Figure 3 ). Interestingly in high-dose mice, tumor associated bioluminescence was undetectable by 2 weeks, and remained so until at least 3 weeks after vector infusion. Nonetheless all high-dose AAV-treated mice ultimately succumbed to tumor growth (determined by histological examination of brain sections, Figure S1 ). This indicates that the highest vector dose was insufficient to generate hIFN-? levels necessary to eliminate all U87 tumor cells. Most likely the rapid loss of bioluminescent signal indicated that the majority of the tumor mass was eliminated by IFN- ?. In all likelihood a small number of tumor cells below the detection limit of intracranial imaging survived due to higher resistance to relatively low levels of hIFN-?, and eventually formed a tumor. It has been shown that subpopulations of tumors can gradually circumvent anti-angiogenic therapy in vivo after an initial rapid regression. 17 Thus it is possible that ‘recurring’ tumors in the high-dose experiment were derived from a subpopulation of U87 cells more resistant to hINF-?. Higher vector doses could potentially eliminate all tumor cells leading to long-term survival of all treated animals. The moderately low levels of hIFN-? in brain parenchyma is most likely due to the relatively low number of AAV-transduced cells in the brain after ICV delivery of AAV vector in adult athymic nude mice ( Figure 4 ). Most transduced cells were located in the hippocampal formation and corpus callosum. Therefore distribution of hIFN-? to the contralateral striatum is likely to have occurred via cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) flow in the perivascular space of Virchow-Robin. Others have shown that recombinant or vector-encoded lysosomal enzymes can be distributed efficiently throughout the dog and mouse brain via the CSF. 13 , 14 , 18 , 19 The limited transduction reported here in adult mice is in contrast to the exceptional widespread transduction of the brain after ICV delivery of the same AAV vector serotype in neonatal C57BL/6 mice. 16 , 20 It is important to note, however, that in AAV-GFP injected animals, GFP distribution is restricted to the cell bodies, dendrites and axons of AAV-transduced cells. hIFN-? distribution in the brain is likely to be much broader than GFP as IFN-? is a secreted protein (much like the secreted lysosomal enzymes in the aforementioned studies), which could be distributed by diffusion, and CSF flow. Evidence for this comes from the observation that detectable levels of hIFN-? were found in striatum (same site as for tumor implantation) after ICV injection of AAVrh.8-hIFN-? while no GFP positive cells were detected in this same region when AAVrh.8-GFP was injected ICV. The key to achieving a robust anti-tumor effect using the present strategy is to transduce large number of cells, preferentially those lining the ventricles after ICV delivery of AAV vectors. Given the minimal levels of transduction of these regions of the brain using AAVrh.8 after ICV delivery, another alternative may be to use an AAV4 vector to deliver the therapeutic gene. AAV4 vectors have been shown to transduce ependymal cells very efficiently after ICV delivery in adult mice, and they have been used to achieve therapeutic levels of a lysosomal enzyme throughout the entire brain. 13 A number of parameters is likely to determine the final parenchymal concentration of recombinant proteins secreted into the CSF from vector-transduced ependymal cells such as their size, interactions with extracellular matrix components, cellular receptor densities, and half-life. While many of these parameters are likely to be different between lysosomal enzymes and hIFN-?, we anticipate that ICV infusion of an AAV4-hIFN-? vector would result in considerably higher hIFN-? levels in brain parenchyma than obtained with the vector used in this study because of higher transduction efficiency and secretion of hIFN-? directly into CSF in the lateral ventricles. Nonetheless, even with relatively low levels of transduction in the brain with ICV administered AAVrh.8, we show proof of concept that ICV injection of a viral vector encoding an anti-tumor protein is a viable approach for controlling brain tumors. Distribution of high levels of IFN-? throughout the brain via CSF could have potential risks given the pleotropic nature of this cytokine. 21 – 23 The absence of serious side effects in the present study could be misleading since human IFN-? has low affinity for murine interferon receptors. 24 Additional studies using AAV vectors encoding mouse IFN-? will be necessary to assess safety and may indeed dictate that this type of therapeutic approach be implemented for relatively short periods of time. This would require the use of AAV vectors capable of drug-regulated gene expression, 25 – 28 or IFN-? activation of protein kinase R may decrease translation of AAV-encoded IFN-? mRNA. 29 Further development of the global therapeutic approach investigated here may allow complete eradication of established tumors in mice. Scaling up the ICV injection which gave a therapeutic effect against established tumors 1000-fold for the human brain would result in a dose of 5x1014 which is achievable by today’s vector production capabilities (~1015 gc/ml). At these titers, ~500 ?l would be injected into the ventricle which is an accepted volume. While the dose of AAV vector will be readily achieved in terms of vector production and injection volume, the limiting factor will be IFN-?’s toxicity as mentioned above. Still, sub-therapeutic amounts of ICV-administered AAV-IFN-? may enhance tumor cells’ sensitivity to apoptosis by other agents (e.g. radiation, sTRAIL). This approach is most likely to provide maximal therapeutic benefit when used as a complementary modality following surgical debulking and injection of the AAV vector encoding hIFN-? into the peritumoral brain.4 The ICV delivery route of AAV vectors may also be the only means of efficient transduction when tumor is located in an inoperable region of the brain (e.g. brainstem). AAV vector-mediated CSF production of anti-tumor proteins could be used to prevent/delay the growth of glioblastoma cells that infiltrate normal brain tissue, migrate away from the main tumor mass, and give rise to tumor recurrences that are nearly impossible to treat with current post-surgical radiation and chemotherapeutic regimens.  Supplementary Material Figure S1 Supplementary Figure 1. Histological analysis of high-dose AAV-IFN-?-treated mice succumbing to tumor-burden in Figure 3. Hematoxylin and eosin stained histological brain sections from a representative mouse from this group. Asterisks indicate location of tumor tissue.  Supplementary Material Figure S1 Supplementary Figure 1. Histological analysis of high-dose AAV-IFN-?-treated mice succumbing to tumor-burden in Figure 3. Hematoxylin and eosin stained histological brain sections from a representative mouse from this group. Asterisks indicate location of tumor tissue.  Figures Figure 1 Striatal levels of hIFN-?. Two weeks following ICV infusion of 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-?, hIFN-b levels were measured in the contralateral (gray bar) or ipsilateral (white bar) striatum by ELISA. Mice in the control group were injected with AAV-ev vector (n = 3 per group). [N.D.] = Not detectable. Figure 2 Pre-treatment of mice by intraventricular injection of AAV-hIFN-? prevents U87 tumor growth. Proof-of-principle experiments showing prevention of glioma growth after intraventricular AAV-hIFN-? injection. (a) Overview of experimental procedure. AAV-hIFN-? was stereotaxically infused into the left lateral ventricle of six week-old athymic nude mice. Two weeks later 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells were implanted in the left or right striatum. (b) Mice were infused with 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? in the left ventricle. Two weeks later U87fluc-mCherry were implanted in the right or left striatum (gray and white bar respectively). The control group received 5×1010 gc of AAV-ev and tumor implantation in the left striatum (black bar). Mice were imaged for tumor-associated bioluminescent signal (TABS) at the indicated time points post-tumor injection (n= 5 per group). (c) Representative bioluminescent images of mice injected with AAV-ev (left image) or AAV-hIFN-? (contralateral tumor, middle image; ipsilateral tumor, right image) (d) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of mice injected with AAV-ev or AAV-hIFN-?. Mice infused with AAV-ev received U87 glioma cells in the ipsilateral hemisphere (solid black line). Mice treated with AAV-hIFN-? received U87 glioma cells in the contralateral or ipsilateral hemisphere (solid gray and dashed line, respectively) (e) Hematoxylin and eosin stained histological brain sections from a representative mouse from each group. All results shown are representative of three independently repeated experiments [N.D.] Not detectable; [*] = p< 0.01. Figure 3 Intraventricular AAV-hIFN-? injection in mice with established U87 tumor delays tumor growth. (a) In this experimental paradigm 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells were implanted in the left or right striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. AAV vectors were infused ICV via the left ventricle one week later. (b) U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells were injected in the left (ipsilateral) or right (contralateral) striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. One week later these mice received ICV infusion of 5×1010 gc (gray and white bar) or 5×1011 gc (gray-white striped bar) of AAV-hIFN-?. Control mice received tumor cells in the left striatum followed by ICV delivery of 5×1011 gc of AAV-ev (black bar). Mice were imaged for tumor-associated bioluminescent signal (TABS) at indicated time points post vector injection (n=3 per group). (c) Representative bioluminescent images of tumor-bearing mice injected with AAV-ev or AAV-hIFN-? (5×1010 gc and 5×1011 gc) (d) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of tumor-bearing mice treated with AAV-ev (solid black line), low dose AAV-hIFN-? (solid gray line, dashed black line) and high dose AAV-hIFN-? (dashed gray line). All results shown are representative of two independently repeated experiments. [N.D.] = Not detectable; [*] = p < 0.05 Figure 4 Distribution of AAV-transduced cells two weeks after ICV delivery of AAV-GFP vector. GFP distribution in the brain was analyzed two weeks after ICV delivery of 5×1010 gc of AAV-CBA-GFP vector in 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. (a) Montages of 40x pictures showing entire brain sections with GFP expression along the needle track (white arrow), corpus callosum, and septum (Figure 4a-left). In the contralateral hemisphere GFP-positive cells were seen in the septum only (Figure 4a-left). Fiber tracts in the fornix connecting the two hippocampi show bright GFP signal (Figure 4a-center). Consistent with this observation, GFP-positive cells were present in the pyramidal cell layer of the anterior CA1 and CA3 region of the hippocampus. GFP signal in the opposite hippocampus was associated with fibers in the oriens and radiatum layers rather than cell nuclei (Figure 4a-right). High magnification of GFP-positive cells are shown in the (b) ependyma along the ventricular wall, (c) subventricular zone, (d) septum, (e) corpus callosum, (f) cortical layer VI, (g) anterior CA1 region, (h) posterior CA1 region, (i) anterior CA3 region. [cc] = Corpus callosum; [dg] = Dentate gyrus; [hipp] = Hippocampus; [fx] = Fornix; [mb] = Mammilary bodies; [s] = Septum; [str] = Striatum; [SVZ] = subventricular zone. Scale bars = 100 ?m.  Figures Figure 1 Striatal levels of hIFN-?. Two weeks following ICV infusion of 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-?, hIFN-b levels were measured in the contralateral (gray bar) or ipsilateral (white bar) striatum by ELISA. Mice in the control group were injected with AAV-ev vector (n = 3 per group). [N.D.] = Not detectable. Figure 2 Pre-treatment of mice by intraventricular injection of AAV-hIFN-? prevents U87 tumor growth. Proof-of-principle experiments showing prevention of glioma growth after intraventricular AAV-hIFN-? injection. (a) Overview of experimental procedure. AAV-hIFN-? was stereotaxically infused into the left lateral ventricle of six week-old athymic nude mice. Two weeks later 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry cells were implanted in the left or right striatum. (b) Mice were infused with 5×1010 gc of AAV-hIFN-? in the left ventricle. Two weeks later U87fluc-mCherry were implanted in the right or left striatum (gray and white bar respectively). The control group received 5×1010 gc of AAV-ev and tumor implantation in the left striatum (black bar). Mice were imaged for tumor-associated bioluminescent signal (TABS) at the indicated time points post-tumor injection (n= 5 per group). (c) Representative bioluminescent images of mice injected with AAV-ev (left image) or AAV-hIFN-? (contralateral tumor, middle image; ipsilateral tumor, right image) (d) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of mice injected with AAV-ev or AAV-hIFN-?. Mice infused with AAV-ev received U87 glioma cells in the ipsilateral hemisphere (solid black line). Mice treated with AAV-hIFN-? received U87 glioma cells in the contralateral or ipsilateral hemisphere (solid gray and dashed line, respectively) (e) Hematoxylin and eosin stained histological brain sections from a representative mouse from each group. All results shown are representative of three independently repeated experiments [N.D.] Not detectable; [*] = p< 0.01. Figure 3 Intraventricular AAV-hIFN-? injection in mice with established U87 tumor delays tumor growth. (a) In this experimental paradigm 5×105 U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells were implanted in the left or right striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. AAV vectors were infused ICV via the left ventricle one week later. (b) U87fluc-mCherry glioma cells were injected in the left (ipsilateral) or right (contralateral) striatum of 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. One week later these mice received ICV infusion of 5×1010 gc (gray and white bar) or 5×1011 gc (gray-white striped bar) of AAV-hIFN-?. Control mice received tumor cells in the left striatum followed by ICV delivery of 5×1011 gc of AAV-ev (black bar). Mice were imaged for tumor-associated bioluminescent signal (TABS) at indicated time points post vector injection (n=3 per group). (c) Representative bioluminescent images of tumor-bearing mice injected with AAV-ev or AAV-hIFN-? (5×1010 gc and 5×1011 gc) (d) Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of tumor-bearing mice treated with AAV-ev (solid black line), low dose AAV-hIFN-? (solid gray line, dashed black line) and high dose AAV-hIFN-? (dashed gray line). All results shown are representative of two independently repeated experiments. [N.D.] = Not detectable; [*] = p < 0.05 Figure 4 Distribution of AAV-transduced cells two weeks after ICV delivery of AAV-GFP vector. GFP distribution in the brain was analyzed two weeks after ICV delivery of 5×1010 gc of AAV-CBA-GFP vector in 6–8 week-old athymic nude mice. (a) Montages of 40x pictures showing entire brain sections with GFP expression along the needle track (white arrow), corpus callosum, and septum (Figure 4a-left). In the contralateral hemisphere GFP-positive cells were seen in the septum only (Figure 4a-left). Fiber tracts in the fornix connecting the two hippocampi show bright GFP signal (Figure 4a-center). Consistent with this observation, GFP-positive cells were present in the pyramidal cell layer of the anterior CA1 and CA3 region of the hippocampus. GFP signal in the opposite hippocampus was associated with fibers in the oriens and radiatum layers rather than cell nuclei (Figure 4a-right). High magnification of GFP-positive cells are shown in the (b) ependyma along the ventricular wall, (c) subventricular zone, (d) septum, (e) corpus callosum, (f) cortical layer VI, (g) anterior CA1 region, (h) posterior CA1 region, (i) anterior CA3 region. [cc] = Corpus callosum; [dg] = Dentate gyrus; [hipp] = Hippocampus; [fx] = Fornix; [mb] = Mammilary bodies; [s] = Septum; [str] = Striatum; [SVZ] = subventricular zone. Scale bars = 100 ?m. 