Role of Jhdm2a in regulating metabolic gene expression and obesity resistance Recent studies indicate that the methylation state of histones can be dynamically regulated by histone methyltransferases and demethylases 1 , 2 . The H3K9-specific demethylase Jhdm2a (also known as Jmjd1a and Kdm3a) has an important role in nuclear hormone receptor-mediated gene activation and male germ cell development 3 , 4 . Through disruption of the Jhdm2a gene in mice, here we demonstrate that Jhdm2a is critically important in regulating the expression of metabolic genes. The loss of Jhdm2a function results in obesity and hyperlipidemia in mice. We provide evidence that the loss of Jhdm2a function disrupts ?-adrenergic-stimulated glycerol release and oxygen consumption in brown fat, and decreases fat oxidation and glycerol release in skeletal muscles. We show that Jhdm2a expression is induced by ?-adrenergic stimulation, and that Jhdm2a directly regulates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ? (Ppara) and Ucp1 expression. Furthermore, we demonstrate that ?-adrenergic activation-induced binding of Jhdm2a to the PPAR responsive element (PPRE) of the Ucp1 gene not only decreases levels of H3K9me2 (dimethylation of lysine 9 of histone H3) at the PPRE, but also facilitates the recruitment of Ppar? and Rxr? and their co-activators Pgc1a?(also known as Ppargc1a), CBP/ p300 (Crebbp) and Src1 (Ncoa1) to the PPRE. Our studies thus demonstrate an essential role for Jhdm2a in regulating metabolic gene expression and normal weight control in mice.  METHODS SUMMARY Animal experiments All animal experiments were performed according to procedures approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Cell culture, viral infection and differentiation Primary myoblasts were established from neonatal mice as reported 22 . To generate a Jhdm2a knockdown HIB1B cell line, undifferentiated cells were infected with a lentiviral virus expressing an shRNA for Jhdm2a or control. The shRNA sequence for Jhdm2a was 5’-GCAGGTGTCACTAGCCTTAAT-3’. The differentiation of HIB1B cells was performed as previously described 23 . For the overexpression of the human JHDM2A gene, cells were infected with a retroviral vector expressing Flag– JHDM2A or a control before the cells were subjected to differentiation. Statistics All results are presented as the mean and standard error. Statistical comparisons were by Student's t -tests. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.  Animal experiments All animal experiments were performed according to procedures approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  Cell culture, viral infection and differentiation Primary myoblasts were established from neonatal mice as reported 22 . To generate a Jhdm2a knockdown HIB1B cell line, undifferentiated cells were infected with a lentiviral virus expressing an shRNA for Jhdm2a or control. The shRNA sequence for Jhdm2a was 5’-GCAGGTGTCACTAGCCTTAAT-3’. The differentiation of HIB1B cells was performed as previously described 23 . For the overexpression of the human JHDM2A gene, cells were infected with a retroviral vector expressing Flag– JHDM2A or a control before the cells were subjected to differentiation.  Statistics All results are presented as the mean and standard error. Statistical comparisons were by Student's t -tests. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.  Supplementary Material Tateishi Full Methods Supp. 