Melatonin and breast cancer: cellular mechanisms, clinical studies and future perspectives Recent studies have suggested that the pineal hormone melatonin may protect against breast cancer, and the mechanisms underlying its actions are becoming clearer. Melatonin works through receptors and distinct second messenger pathways to reduce cellular proliferation and to induce cellular differentiation. In addition, independently of receptors melatonin can modulate oestrogen-dependent pathways and reduce free-radical formation, thus preventing mutation and cellular toxicity. The fact that melatonin works through a myriad of signalling cascades that are protective to cells makes this hormone a good candidate for use in the clinic for the prevention and/or treatment of cancer. This review summarises cellular mechanisms governing the action of melatonin and then considers the potential use of melatonin in breast cancer prevention and treatment, with an emphasis on improving clinical outcomes.  Expert opinion on the status of melatonin on breast cancer Melatonin and cancer treatment In a systematic review of randomised controlled trials of melatonin in solid-tumour cancer patients and on one-year survival, Mills et al. (Ref. 103 ) have shown that there is a positive benefit from the use of melatonin. These trials were all performed by the same group in the same hospital and are thus without independent confirmation from any other group; the results, although intriguing, are therefore difficult to assess. In addition, one-year survival is very short term in the context of many cancers such as breast (with a mean recurrence time of seven years) and a much longer trial would need to be conducted. The most significant finding is that no adverse outcomes were reported from the use of melatonin. There seems to be very limited toxicity of this chemical in the context of what can be very toxic exposures during chemotherapy. This characteristic would make larger clinical trials of melatonin feasible. Although it is a proven antioxidant, it is not clear that melatonin supplementation would have a significant protective effect in disease-free individuals, or a selective protective effect in cancer patients undergoing radio- or chemotherapy (Ref. 104 ). Melatonin supplementation has proven efficacy in mitigating the effects of shift work or sleep deprivation. Although the connection between disruption of the circadian rhythm and carcinogenesis has not been established mechanistically, studies suggest that it is probably the result of low circulating levels of melatonin. This chronobiotic hormone needs to be given at appropriate times of the day to achieve maximum efficacy on treating or preventing breast cancer. The possibility that its connection with regulation of the circadian rhythm would result in different effects of melatonin when administered at different times during the day has generally reduced the enthusiasm to develop it as a clinical treatment, and, if true, has also probably contributed to the ambiguity in clinical data. Probably the most important property of melatonin administration in humans, and the one that may eventually allow it to proceed to treatment, is its lack of toxicity. Thus, melatonin may be added to large clinical trials with a theoretical possibility of its improving the efficacy of treatment and with little concern that it will interfere with the action of the primary agent (genotoxic or immunological). Although recent studies by the Lissoni group have involved larger experimental populations (Ref. 105 ), ultimately, clinically beneficial effects of melatonin will be demonstrated only through its addition to large multicentre studies targeting specific tumour types in conjunction with specific types of therapy. Use of MCF-7 cells as a cancer cell model It is worth adding a comment on the widespread use of the established breast-cancer-derived cell line MCF-7. This cell line represents the product of a stage IV breast tumour metastasised to the pleural sack around the lung of a patient who eventually died of breast cancer. The cell line has also been in culture for over 20 years and has an amplification of the ER? gene of approximately 140 times the normal copy number (Ref. 106 ). The putative oncostatic/ antiproliferative properties of melatonin have been demonstrated primarily in these MCF-7 cells, as opposed to other cell lines from other tumour types (Refs 107 , 108 ). The theory that melatonin may exert its effects through its effect on ER may be affected by the fact that this cell line overexpresses the ER? gene. However, there are discrepancies within the MCF-7 melatonin literature, which may be explained by the chromosomal instability of MCF-7 (Refs 109 , 110 ). Use of other in vivo model systems to study melatonin and cancer Fewer studies using melatonin have utilised xenograft models or animal models of tumour growth as opposed to in vitro studies. These in vivo studies must be performed because the in vitro studies cannot deal with the possibility that tumours themselves may have circadian rhythms and may manifest peak times for treatment regimens. Tumours can also alter local and systemic regulatory systems. In addition, in vitro systems cannot simulate the complex interactions between host responses to the melatonin (natural and exogenous) and to the tumour itself. Modification of the design of future clinical trials If melatonin levels in urine or serum are indicative of cancer risk or prognosis, they would constitute a relatively simple and noninvasive method of population biomonitoring. However, based on the preliminary studies summarised above, it is likely that melatonin measurements would be more useful as part of a larger screening strategy that included a number of markers (Ref. 111 ). One way to develop such a screening panel would be through high-content, high-throughput analyses of tumours themselves (Ref. 112 ). For example, probes to measure the expression levels of several genes related to melatonin biosynthesis, metabolism and signal transduction are present in commercially available chips ( Table 1 ), and the data from such experiments are required to be deposited in open on-line databases upon publication. Thus, using such modern techniques, screening experiments targeting other markers concurrently provide data on the relevance of melatonin-related genes in cancer. Even if not ‘hypothesis-driven’, analysis of such studies is usually confined to only the few genes showing the greatest differences in expression, and such markers may not prove to be the most consistent and reproducible. However, even if changes in melatonin-related gene expression are directly and causally implicated in carcinogenesis, they themselves may not provide the best biomarker of the process. Similarly, measurements of melatonin itself and its metabolites are present in proteomic screens of blood and urine from cancer patients (Ref. 113 ), but here it may be more difficult to identify melatonin-related fragments unless they are specifically detected immunologically or by sequencing and taken at peak times of melatonin secretion. Future considerations for using melatonin as a therapy for breast cancer More fundamental research in the area of melatonin is imperative. It still needs to be determined what constitutes a physiological dose of melatonin, as discussed in Ref. 114 . Melatonin activates its membrane receptors and its lipophilic nature also allows it to traverse plasma membranes and accumulate within the cell. Even though circulating concentrations of melatonin at night range between 50 and 100 pg/ml (Ref. 1 ), nanomolar to micromolar concentrations of melatonin may be reached within or near the cell dependent upon the concentrating abilities of the tissue. Melatonin shows efficacy as an oncostatic agent using concentrations that range between high picomolar to low micromolar. Whether these levels are reached physiologically in tissue still needs to be ascertained, but for now these levels should be the therapeutic targets when designing future studies. More fundamental research with respect to determining the signalling mechanisms modulated by melatonin in tumours needs to be pursued, considering that the efficacy of melatonin to retard or prevent breast cancer is variable and may depend on the type of cancer (Ref. 66 ). Additionally, other models, both cellular and in vivo, should be used to verify the mechanisms underlying melatonin action as it relates to cellular differentiation. More translational research is warranted seeing that the World Health Organization (WHO) and International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classify night-shift work as a potential carcinogen. Elucidating how light at night affects breast cancer risk, and whether or not melatonin supplementation at night shows any efficacy to prevent and/or treat breast cancer, should be given top priority when conducting clinical trials to direct future research. The clinical trials should be expanded to include a more heterogeneous population of individuals from around the world and be hypothesis driven. Factors like dosage and timing of dose need to be ascertained and genomic endpoints determined with respect to the use of melatonin as a treatment for breast cancer ( Fig. 2 ; Table 1 ). The findings that melatonin inhibits the oestrogen-dependent signalling cascades should lead to more studies in this area (both basic and clinical) to determine if melatonin shows a synergistic interaction with mainstay therapies using tamoxifen, raloxifene or fulvestrant (Refs 29 , 40 , 115 ). The outcome(s) of these endeavours could lead to the novel use of melatonin in the clinic for the prevention and/ or treatment of breast cancer. The results of such studies could benefit many.  Melatonin and cancer treatment In a systematic review of randomised controlled trials of melatonin in solid-tumour cancer patients and on one-year survival, Mills et al. (Ref. 103 ) have shown that there is a positive benefit from the use of melatonin. These trials were all performed by the same group in the same hospital and are thus without independent confirmation from any other group; the results, although intriguing, are therefore difficult to assess. In addition, one-year survival is very short term in the context of many cancers such as breast (with a mean recurrence time of seven years) and a much longer trial would need to be conducted. The most significant finding is that no adverse outcomes were reported from the use of melatonin. There seems to be very limited toxicity of this chemical in the context of what can be very toxic exposures during chemotherapy. This characteristic would make larger clinical trials of melatonin feasible. Although it is a proven antioxidant, it is not clear that melatonin supplementation would have a significant protective effect in disease-free individuals, or a selective protective effect in cancer patients undergoing radio- or chemotherapy (Ref. 104 ). Melatonin supplementation has proven efficacy in mitigating the effects of shift work or sleep deprivation. Although the connection between disruption of the circadian rhythm and carcinogenesis has not been established mechanistically, studies suggest that it is probably the result of low circulating levels of melatonin. This chronobiotic hormone needs to be given at appropriate times of the day to achieve maximum efficacy on treating or preventing breast cancer. The possibility that its connection with regulation of the circadian rhythm would result in different effects of melatonin when administered at different times during the day has generally reduced the enthusiasm to develop it as a clinical treatment, and, if true, has also probably contributed to the ambiguity in clinical data. Probably the most important property of melatonin administration in humans, and the one that may eventually allow it to proceed to treatment, is its lack of toxicity. Thus, melatonin may be added to large clinical trials with a theoretical possibility of its improving the efficacy of treatment and with little concern that it will interfere with the action of the primary agent (genotoxic or immunological). Although recent studies by the Lissoni group have involved larger experimental populations (Ref. 105 ), ultimately, clinically beneficial effects of melatonin will be demonstrated only through its addition to large multicentre studies targeting specific tumour types in conjunction with specific types of therapy.  Use of MCF-7 cells as a cancer cell model It is worth adding a comment on the widespread use of the established breast-cancer-derived cell line MCF-7. This cell line represents the product of a stage IV breast tumour metastasised to the pleural sack around the lung of a patient who eventually died of breast cancer. The cell line has also been in culture for over 20 years and has an amplification of the ER? gene of approximately 140 times the normal copy number (Ref. 106 ). The putative oncostatic/ antiproliferative properties of melatonin have been demonstrated primarily in these MCF-7 cells, as opposed to other cell lines from other tumour types (Refs 107 , 108 ). The theory that melatonin may exert its effects through its effect on ER may be affected by the fact that this cell line overexpresses the ER? gene. However, there are discrepancies within the MCF-7 melatonin literature, which may be explained by the chromosomal instability of MCF-7 (Refs 109 , 110 ).  Use of other in vivo model systems to study melatonin and cancer Fewer studies using melatonin have utilised xenograft models or animal models of tumour growth as opposed to in vitro studies. These in vivo studies must be performed because the in vitro studies cannot deal with the possibility that tumours themselves may have circadian rhythms and may manifest peak times for treatment regimens. Tumours can also alter local and systemic regulatory systems. In addition, in vitro systems cannot simulate the complex interactions between host responses to the melatonin (natural and exogenous) and to the tumour itself.  Modification of the design of future clinical trials If melatonin levels in urine or serum are indicative of cancer risk or prognosis, they would constitute a relatively simple and noninvasive method of population biomonitoring. However, based on the preliminary studies summarised above, it is likely that melatonin measurements would be more useful as part of a larger screening strategy that included a number of markers (Ref. 111 ). One way to develop such a screening panel would be through high-content, high-throughput analyses of tumours themselves (Ref. 112 ). For example, probes to measure the expression levels of several genes related to melatonin biosynthesis, metabolism and signal transduction are present in commercially available chips ( Table 1 ), and the data from such experiments are required to be deposited in open on-line databases upon publication. Thus, using such modern techniques, screening experiments targeting other markers concurrently provide data on the relevance of melatonin-related genes in cancer. Even if not ‘hypothesis-driven’, analysis of such studies is usually confined to only the few genes showing the greatest differences in expression, and such markers may not prove to be the most consistent and reproducible. However, even if changes in melatonin-related gene expression are directly and causally implicated in carcinogenesis, they themselves may not provide the best biomarker of the process. Similarly, measurements of melatonin itself and its metabolites are present in proteomic screens of blood and urine from cancer patients (Ref. 113 ), but here it may be more difficult to identify melatonin-related fragments unless they are specifically detected immunologically or by sequencing and taken at peak times of melatonin secretion.  Future considerations for using melatonin as a therapy for breast cancer More fundamental research in the area of melatonin is imperative. It still needs to be determined what constitutes a physiological dose of melatonin, as discussed in Ref. 114 . Melatonin activates its membrane receptors and its lipophilic nature also allows it to traverse plasma membranes and accumulate within the cell. Even though circulating concentrations of melatonin at night range between 50 and 100 pg/ml (Ref. 1 ), nanomolar to micromolar concentrations of melatonin may be reached within or near the cell dependent upon the concentrating abilities of the tissue. Melatonin shows efficacy as an oncostatic agent using concentrations that range between high picomolar to low micromolar. Whether these levels are reached physiologically in tissue still needs to be ascertained, but for now these levels should be the therapeutic targets when designing future studies. More fundamental research with respect to determining the signalling mechanisms modulated by melatonin in tumours needs to be pursued, considering that the efficacy of melatonin to retard or prevent breast cancer is variable and may depend on the type of cancer (Ref. 66 ). Additionally, other models, both cellular and in vivo, should be used to verify the mechanisms underlying melatonin action as it relates to cellular differentiation. More translational research is warranted seeing that the World Health Organization (WHO) and International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classify night-shift work as a potential carcinogen. Elucidating how light at night affects breast cancer risk, and whether or not melatonin supplementation at night shows any efficacy to prevent and/or treat breast cancer, should be given top priority when conducting clinical trials to direct future research. The clinical trials should be expanded to include a more heterogeneous population of individuals from around the world and be hypothesis driven. Factors like dosage and timing of dose need to be ascertained and genomic endpoints determined with respect to the use of melatonin as a treatment for breast cancer ( Fig. 2 ; Table 1 ). The findings that melatonin inhibits the oestrogen-dependent signalling cascades should lead to more studies in this area (both basic and clinical) to determine if melatonin shows a synergistic interaction with mainstay therapies using tamoxifen, raloxifene or fulvestrant (Refs 29 , 40 , 115 ). The outcome(s) of these endeavours could lead to the novel use of melatonin in the clinic for the prevention and/ or treatment of breast cancer. The results of such studies could benefit many. 