Exercise and Quality of Life: Strengthening the Connections Exercise improves quality of life (QOL) in people with cancer. Most oncology healthcare providers recognize the statement to be true because the research literature provides strong support for the physical and psychological benefits of exercise. Because the terms exercise , QOL , and people with cancer have different meanings, the contextual connections in which they are used are important to understanding the relationship between exercise and QOL in people with cancer. This article explores the links between exercise and QOL in people with cancer and examines issues that impact the development, implementation, and evaluation of exercise programs for people with cancer. Issues related to exercise goal development, exercise prescription, exercise testing, exercise adherence, and methods to evaluate the efficacy of exercise in relation to QOL are discussed.  Designing an Exercise Program for People With Cancer Multiple exercise programs can be found to meet a wide range of healthcare needs simply by searching the Internet. Deciding on the best approach for people with cancer, however, requires detailed knowledge of the specific cancer, cancer treatment, and expected recovery patterns to address the potentially changing needs of the target group. Unfortunately, a cookbook approach for designing an exercise program for use in all people with cancer does not exist. Although extensive research investigating various exercise interventions has been conducted or currently is under way, questions addressing the best type of exercise for various cancer subpopulations have not been resolved. Goals One of the first steps to designing a successful exercise program is to clearly define the goals so that the specific needs of the cancer population can be met. In the normal, healthy population, exercise goals are directed at improving cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength, flexibility, and body composition. In people with cancer, the goals may be more explicitly defined, such as facilitating recovering from cancer by restoring physical function, alleviating symptoms, assisting people to adapt to a new level of wellness, and improving QOL. Because a wide range of potential health states exist across the cancer experience, the needs of the target group must be defined clearly so that appropriate goals can be formulated. For instance, the needs of people with lung cancer recovering from a surgical excision may be vastly different from the needs of long-term survivors of breast cancer; the goals of each program should reflect such nuances. In addition to developing overall goals, identifying specific goals for each patient that take into account his or her current physical abilities, past experience with exercise, and comorbid conditions is important for tailoring the exercise program. Exercise Prescriptions The stated goals of the exercise program and unique needs of the target cancer population guide the development of the exercise prescription. The five major components of exercise prescriptions are mode, intensity, duration, frequency, and progression of exercise ( Whaley et al., 2006 ). Mode refers to the type of exercise that is performed. Intensity refers to the body’s work output during an exercise session. Duration refers to the amount of time or number of sets prescribed during an exercise session. Frequency refers to the number of days per week to include exercise sessions, and exercise progression refers to the optimal level of stress or physical overload that should be achieved over time (e.g., when to increase weights or repetitions for strength training, when to increase time spent in moderate- or vigorous-intensity activity for aerobic exercises). In addition to general exercise principles, other factors to consider include the availability of physical and human resources. For instance, will participants be supervised in a health fitness or healthcare facility or unsupervised in the home setting? Multiple guidelines exist for prescribing exercise for healthy people and those with chronic illnesses ( American College of Sports Medicine, 1998 ; Kraemer et al., 2002 ; Skinner, 2005 ). Since 1982, the American College of Sports Medicine has developed a number of position stands on various aspects of exercise. 1 The guidelines developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ([ CDC], 2008 ) are among the most frequently cited. The CDC recommends a minimum of 30 minutes per day of moderate-intensity physical activity on most days of the week or 20 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity three days per week for adults to promote cardiorespiratory fitness. In addition, the recommendations include strength training exercises consisting of 6–8 exercises with 8–12 repetitions for each exercise to maintain or build muscular strength. Developing an exercise program for people with cancer introduces distinct challenges. A wide range of aerobic activities exist, such as indoor or outdoor walking, treadmill walking, cycling, running, swimming, and dancing. Although all of these activities have been implemented successfully in people with cancer, participation in some of them may be contraindicated in subgroups of people with cancer ( Coleman, Coon, et al., 2003 ; Courneya, Friedenreich, et al., 2003 ; Dimeo, Thomas, Raabe-Menssen, Propper, & Mathias, 2004 ; Fairey et al., 2003 ; Kolden et al., 2002 ; Mock et al., 1997 , 2001 ; Pickett et al., 2002 ). For example, people with laryngectomies will not be able to swim given the likelihood of aspiration and possible drowning. People who are neutropenic will not be able to go to a gym to participate in an aerobic dance class because of the risk of infection. Similar challenges exist for designing strength training programs for people with cancer. Multiple studies demonstrate the effectiveness of strength training interventions in building muscle strength and enhancing endurance in people with cancer ( Cunningham et al., 1986 ; Ott et al., 2004 ; Segal et al., 2003 ; Sprod, Drum, Bentz, Carter, & Schneider, 2005 ). Like aerobic activities, different methods may be used, such as free weights, specialized machines, elastic resistance bands, or walking poles. A one-size-fits-all approach, however, is not practical. For instance, in a current study being conducted by the author and colleagues of people who underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantations, elastic resistance bands for strength training were used instead of free weights. The decision was influenced by the need for each patient to have his or her own set of weight training devices to reduce the risk of infection. Other factors included portability of the bands, ease of use, and unlikelihood of causing serious injury if inadvertently dropped. Using elastic resistance bands gives people the opportunity to participate in strength training sessions during a clinic visit without the need for expensive weight training machines or heavy weights. Although designing an exercise program for people with cancer is not simple, most challenges can be overcome with good planning, adequate resources, and creativity. Whether the program is designed for use in a clinical or research setting, collaboration among oncology healthcare providers, researchers, and exercise specialists is key.  Goals One of the first steps to designing a successful exercise program is to clearly define the goals so that the specific needs of the cancer population can be met. In the normal, healthy population, exercise goals are directed at improving cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength, flexibility, and body composition. In people with cancer, the goals may be more explicitly defined, such as facilitating recovering from cancer by restoring physical function, alleviating symptoms, assisting people to adapt to a new level of wellness, and improving QOL. Because a wide range of potential health states exist across the cancer experience, the needs of the target group must be defined clearly so that appropriate goals can be formulated. For instance, the needs of people with lung cancer recovering from a surgical excision may be vastly different from the needs of long-term survivors of breast cancer; the goals of each program should reflect such nuances. In addition to developing overall goals, identifying specific goals for each patient that take into account his or her current physical abilities, past experience with exercise, and comorbid conditions is important for tailoring the exercise program.  Exercise Prescriptions The stated goals of the exercise program and unique needs of the target cancer population guide the development of the exercise prescription. The five major components of exercise prescriptions are mode, intensity, duration, frequency, and progression of exercise ( Whaley et al., 2006 ). Mode refers to the type of exercise that is performed. Intensity refers to the body’s work output during an exercise session. Duration refers to the amount of time or number of sets prescribed during an exercise session. Frequency refers to the number of days per week to include exercise sessions, and exercise progression refers to the optimal level of stress or physical overload that should be achieved over time (e.g., when to increase weights or repetitions for strength training, when to increase time spent in moderate- or vigorous-intensity activity for aerobic exercises). In addition to general exercise principles, other factors to consider include the availability of physical and human resources. For instance, will participants be supervised in a health fitness or healthcare facility or unsupervised in the home setting? Multiple guidelines exist for prescribing exercise for healthy people and those with chronic illnesses ( American College of Sports Medicine, 1998 ; Kraemer et al., 2002 ; Skinner, 2005 ). Since 1982, the American College of Sports Medicine has developed a number of position stands on various aspects of exercise. 1 The guidelines developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ([ CDC], 2008 ) are among the most frequently cited. The CDC recommends a minimum of 30 minutes per day of moderate-intensity physical activity on most days of the week or 20 minutes of vigorous-intensity activity three days per week for adults to promote cardiorespiratory fitness. In addition, the recommendations include strength training exercises consisting of 6–8 exercises with 8–12 repetitions for each exercise to maintain or build muscular strength. Developing an exercise program for people with cancer introduces distinct challenges. A wide range of aerobic activities exist, such as indoor or outdoor walking, treadmill walking, cycling, running, swimming, and dancing. Although all of these activities have been implemented successfully in people with cancer, participation in some of them may be contraindicated in subgroups of people with cancer ( Coleman, Coon, et al., 2003 ; Courneya, Friedenreich, et al., 2003 ; Dimeo, Thomas, Raabe-Menssen, Propper, & Mathias, 2004 ; Fairey et al., 2003 ; Kolden et al., 2002 ; Mock et al., 1997 , 2001 ; Pickett et al., 2002 ). For example, people with laryngectomies will not be able to swim given the likelihood of aspiration and possible drowning. People who are neutropenic will not be able to go to a gym to participate in an aerobic dance class because of the risk of infection. Similar challenges exist for designing strength training programs for people with cancer. Multiple studies demonstrate the effectiveness of strength training interventions in building muscle strength and enhancing endurance in people with cancer ( Cunningham et al., 1986 ; Ott et al., 2004 ; Segal et al., 2003 ; Sprod, Drum, Bentz, Carter, & Schneider, 2005 ). Like aerobic activities, different methods may be used, such as free weights, specialized machines, elastic resistance bands, or walking poles. A one-size-fits-all approach, however, is not practical. For instance, in a current study being conducted by the author and colleagues of people who underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantations, elastic resistance bands for strength training were used instead of free weights. The decision was influenced by the need for each patient to have his or her own set of weight training devices to reduce the risk of infection. Other factors included portability of the bands, ease of use, and unlikelihood of causing serious injury if inadvertently dropped. Using elastic resistance bands gives people the opportunity to participate in strength training sessions during a clinic visit without the need for expensive weight training machines or heavy weights. Although designing an exercise program for people with cancer is not simple, most challenges can be overcome with good planning, adequate resources, and creativity. Whether the program is designed for use in a clinical or research setting, collaboration among oncology healthcare providers, researchers, and exercise specialists is key.  Implementing Exercise in People With Cancer Exercise Testing One of the most efficient ways to avoid pitfalls associated with starting a new exercise program in people with cancer is to design a program that is acceptable and feasible and meets the needs of the target population. Exercise testing to establish people’s tolerance to exercise and ability to advance the exercise prescription is a vital component of any exercise program. The results from exercise testing determine the initial exercise prescription; periodic exercise testing following implementation determines the progression of exercise. Exercise testing generally consists of a battery of tests, such as health and functioning questionnaires, health history and physical examination, laboratory tests, body composition, functional field tests, aerobic capacity, and muscular strength. The American College of Sports Medicine’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription are an excellent resource for healthcare providers involved in testing ( Whaley et al., 2006 ). The exercise test battery is influenced heavily by the goals, mode, and intensity of the planned program. For instance, the exercise test battery for programs promoting cardiorespiratory fitness via vigorous-intensity aerobic exercise may be different than the test battery for low-intensity strength training. In people with cancer, the exercise test battery may be further influenced by cancer and its treatments. Although most people with cancer can safely perform many of the exercise tests, performing maximal exercise testing may not be feasible in people with metastatic disease, people with advanced disease, or people experiencing the acute side effects of cancer treatment ( Skinner, 2005 ). Ensuring the safety of people with cancer during exercise testing and exercise sessions is the leading priority for all healthcare providers. Adherence Adherence to exercise, defined as the extent to which individuals’ exercise behaviors correspond with the exercise prescription, remains one of the most complex problems to address for clinicians and researchers interested in implementing exercise programs. Adhering to an exercise program is difficult for healthy people; a cancer diagnosis may complicate matters further. In people with cancer, difficulty adhering to an exercise program may be related to the cancer, cancer treatment, potential short- and long-term effects of the treatment, time since treatment, and comorbid conditions. For example, feeling sick or fatigued, losing interest, and experiencing nausea and vomiting were the most frequently cited reasons for missing an exercise session in a study of women with breast cancer receiving adjuvant treatment ( Courneya et al., 2008 ). Other factors not specifically related to cancer also may influence exercise behaviors in people with cancer, such as desire to exercise, time to exercise, and belief in the ability to exercise ( Blanchard, Courneya, Rodgers, & Murnaghan, 2002 ; Courneya, Blanchard, & Laing, 2001 ; Courneya & Friedenreich, 1997 ; Ott et al., 2004 ). Following a cancer diagnosis, some people report exercising less even though they have made other healthy behavioral changes, illustrating the difficulty associated with exercise adherence ( Blanchard et al., 2003 ). Monitoring adherence to a recommended exercise prescription is an important component of implementation because the potential benefits of exercise in a research or clinical setting cannot be achieved without actually doing the work. Adherence rates vary, although many studies do not report adherence rates. The method of reporting adherence rates obscures matters further as adherence may be conveyed as the mean attendance at exercise sessions or mean number of minutes spent exercising. Attendance and time spent exercising do not convey the same information because participants may attend every session but not achieve their exercise goals. For instance, in a study involving women previously treated for breast cancer, 77% attended 70% of the exercise sessions; however, many women were not able to achieve their exercise goal of 30 minutes of aerobic activity ( Daley, Crank, Mutrie, Saxton, & Coleman, 2007 ). Monitoring exercise adherence becomes particularly salient in a research setting because adherence rates have a direct effect on the findings and future translation to clinical practice. Positive exercise research findings from high-quality studies are more likely to be implemented in a clinical setting if high adherence rates were demonstrated. Conversely, studies with low adherence rates, even if the findings were positive, may be less likely to be implemented in clinical practice if the exercise intervention is deemed too demanding for the target population or staff. Because several factors influence exercise adherence, a multipronged approach for increasing compliance is frequently needed. In a clinical setting, choosing an exercise routine that is enjoyable, working with a buddy, setting realistic goals, building exercise into daily routines, varying the exercise routine, and using social support networks may be helpful for enhancing exercise adherence. Setting unrealistic goals or “overdoing it,” especially during the initial phases of exercise adoption, are common mistakes. In people with cancer, the ability to adhere to different levels of exercise intensity may vary depending on the status of the disease. For instance, people with cancer actively undergoing treatment may be less likely to adhere or even begin a high-intensity program, especially if significant side effects from chemotherapy are expected. A lower-intensity program that is home-based, such as walking, may be preferred, as was the case in a group of women with breast cancer receiving adjuvant treatment ( Rogers, Courneya, Shah, Dunnington, & Hopkins-Price, 2007 ). A number of potential strategies to enhance exercise adherence have been documented in the cancer research literature, including keeping weekly phone contacts ( Courneya et al., 2005 ; Windsor, Nicol, & Potter, 2004 ), providing positive reinforcement ( Pinto, Frierson, Rabin, Trunzo, & Marcus, 2005 ), keeping weekly journals ( Coleman, Hall-Barrow, Coon, & Stewart, 2003 ), and assisting people with the identification of barriers to exercise (Pinto et al.).  Exercise Testing One of the most efficient ways to avoid pitfalls associated with starting a new exercise program in people with cancer is to design a program that is acceptable and feasible and meets the needs of the target population. Exercise testing to establish people’s tolerance to exercise and ability to advance the exercise prescription is a vital component of any exercise program. The results from exercise testing determine the initial exercise prescription; periodic exercise testing following implementation determines the progression of exercise. Exercise testing generally consists of a battery of tests, such as health and functioning questionnaires, health history and physical examination, laboratory tests, body composition, functional field tests, aerobic capacity, and muscular strength. The American College of Sports Medicine’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription are an excellent resource for healthcare providers involved in testing ( Whaley et al., 2006 ). The exercise test battery is influenced heavily by the goals, mode, and intensity of the planned program. For instance, the exercise test battery for programs promoting cardiorespiratory fitness via vigorous-intensity aerobic exercise may be different than the test battery for low-intensity strength training. In people with cancer, the exercise test battery may be further influenced by cancer and its treatments. Although most people with cancer can safely perform many of the exercise tests, performing maximal exercise testing may not be feasible in people with metastatic disease, people with advanced disease, or people experiencing the acute side effects of cancer treatment ( Skinner, 2005 ). Ensuring the safety of people with cancer during exercise testing and exercise sessions is the leading priority for all healthcare providers.  Adherence Adherence to exercise, defined as the extent to which individuals’ exercise behaviors correspond with the exercise prescription, remains one of the most complex problems to address for clinicians and researchers interested in implementing exercise programs. Adhering to an exercise program is difficult for healthy people; a cancer diagnosis may complicate matters further. In people with cancer, difficulty adhering to an exercise program may be related to the cancer, cancer treatment, potential short- and long-term effects of the treatment, time since treatment, and comorbid conditions. For example, feeling sick or fatigued, losing interest, and experiencing nausea and vomiting were the most frequently cited reasons for missing an exercise session in a study of women with breast cancer receiving adjuvant treatment ( Courneya et al., 2008 ). Other factors not specifically related to cancer also may influence exercise behaviors in people with cancer, such as desire to exercise, time to exercise, and belief in the ability to exercise ( Blanchard, Courneya, Rodgers, & Murnaghan, 2002 ; Courneya, Blanchard, & Laing, 2001 ; Courneya & Friedenreich, 1997 ; Ott et al., 2004 ). Following a cancer diagnosis, some people report exercising less even though they have made other healthy behavioral changes, illustrating the difficulty associated with exercise adherence ( Blanchard et al., 2003 ). Monitoring adherence to a recommended exercise prescription is an important component of implementation because the potential benefits of exercise in a research or clinical setting cannot be achieved without actually doing the work. Adherence rates vary, although many studies do not report adherence rates. The method of reporting adherence rates obscures matters further as adherence may be conveyed as the mean attendance at exercise sessions or mean number of minutes spent exercising. Attendance and time spent exercising do not convey the same information because participants may attend every session but not achieve their exercise goals. For instance, in a study involving women previously treated for breast cancer, 77% attended 70% of the exercise sessions; however, many women were not able to achieve their exercise goal of 30 minutes of aerobic activity ( Daley, Crank, Mutrie, Saxton, & Coleman, 2007 ). Monitoring exercise adherence becomes particularly salient in a research setting because adherence rates have a direct effect on the findings and future translation to clinical practice. Positive exercise research findings from high-quality studies are more likely to be implemented in a clinical setting if high adherence rates were demonstrated. Conversely, studies with low adherence rates, even if the findings were positive, may be less likely to be implemented in clinical practice if the exercise intervention is deemed too demanding for the target population or staff. Because several factors influence exercise adherence, a multipronged approach for increasing compliance is frequently needed. In a clinical setting, choosing an exercise routine that is enjoyable, working with a buddy, setting realistic goals, building exercise into daily routines, varying the exercise routine, and using social support networks may be helpful for enhancing exercise adherence. Setting unrealistic goals or “overdoing it,” especially during the initial phases of exercise adoption, are common mistakes. In people with cancer, the ability to adhere to different levels of exercise intensity may vary depending on the status of the disease. For instance, people with cancer actively undergoing treatment may be less likely to adhere or even begin a high-intensity program, especially if significant side effects from chemotherapy are expected. A lower-intensity program that is home-based, such as walking, may be preferred, as was the case in a group of women with breast cancer receiving adjuvant treatment ( Rogers, Courneya, Shah, Dunnington, & Hopkins-Price, 2007 ). A number of potential strategies to enhance exercise adherence have been documented in the cancer research literature, including keeping weekly phone contacts ( Courneya et al., 2005 ; Windsor, Nicol, & Potter, 2004 ), providing positive reinforcement ( Pinto, Frierson, Rabin, Trunzo, & Marcus, 2005 ), keeping weekly journals ( Coleman, Hall-Barrow, Coon, & Stewart, 2003 ), and assisting people with the identification of barriers to exercise (Pinto et al.).  Evaluating the Impact of Exercise on Quality of Life The single most important aspect of evaluating the impact of exercise on QOL in people with cancer is to promote the safety, health, and well-being of people while minimizing the potential risks associated with exercise. Multiple integrative reviews and meta-analyses have been published and the data synthesized to identify gaps in knowledge, present the evidence base for practice, and provide suggestions for future research ( Courneya, 2001 , 2003 ; Galvao & Newton, 2005 ; Knobf, Musanti, & Dorward, 2007 ; Knols et al., 2005 ; McTiernan, 2003 ; Pinto & Floyd, 2007 ; Stevinson et al., 2004 ; Young-McCaughan & Arzola, 2007 ). Although all of those reviews firmly establish the benefits of exercise in people across the cancer trajectory, questions still remain about the type of exercise that is best for achieving specific outcomes in various subgroups. Clearly articulating the scope of the exercise intervention, including information about exercise testing, the nature of the intervention, exercise adherence, and evaluative methods will help to advance the science and, more importantly, improve the care of people with cancer. Figure 3 lists examples of some commonly assessed patient health outcomes associated with QOL that may be used to evaluate the efficacy of an exercise program.  Evaluating the Impact of Exercise on Quality of Life The single most important aspect of evaluating the impact of exercise on QOL in people with cancer is to promote the safety, health, and well-being of people while minimizing the potential risks associated with exercise. Multiple integrative reviews and meta-analyses have been published and the data synthesized to identify gaps in knowledge, present the evidence base for practice, and provide suggestions for future research ( Courneya, 2001 , 2003 ; Galvao & Newton, 2005 ; Knobf, Musanti, & Dorward, 2007 ; Knols et al., 2005 ; McTiernan, 2003 ; Pinto & Floyd, 2007 ; Stevinson et al., 2004 ; Young-McCaughan & Arzola, 2007 ). Although all of those reviews firmly establish the benefits of exercise in people across the cancer trajectory, questions still remain about the type of exercise that is best for achieving specific outcomes in various subgroups. Clearly articulating the scope of the exercise intervention, including information about exercise testing, the nature of the intervention, exercise adherence, and evaluative methods will help to advance the science and, more importantly, improve the care of people with cancer. Figure 3 lists examples of some commonly assessed patient health outcomes associated with QOL that may be used to evaluate the efficacy of an exercise program.  Conclusions Oncology nurses are concerned with improving overall QOL of people and play a critical role related to encouraging regular exercise and physical activity. Understanding the various contexts in which the terms exercise , QOL , and people with cancer are used is paramount for translating exercise research into practice. Aerobic exercise promotes cardiorespiratory fitness, and strength training builds muscle strength and adherence. A one-size-fits-all approach for prescribing exercises in people with cancer is not practical as needs vary across disease groups and the cancer trajectory. Multiple issues specifically related to cancer and the treatment of cancer impact the development, implementation, and evaluation of exercise programs. Exercise research to improve QOL in people with cancer is becoming more sophisticated as researchers attempt to address the needs of various groups of people with cancer. Ongoing investigations with subsequent translations into clinical practice will further strengthen the connections between exercise and QOL in people with cancer. Effective collaboration across healthcare disciplines, such as oncology nursing, medicine, physical therapy, and exercise specialists, is the key to ensuring the safety of people with cancer beginning an exercise program. At a Glance The potential quality-of-life improvements associated with exercise in patients with cancer include diminished symptomatology, enhanced functional capacity, and improved perceptions of health. The Revised Wilson and Cleary Model for Health-Related Quality of Life provides a conceptual framework for approaching quality-of-life assessment, including outcomes associated with exercise in patients with cancer. The overall goals of the exercise program and unique needs of patients and the target cancer population guide the development of the tailored exercise prescription.  Figures Figure 1 Revised Wilson and Cleary Model for Health-Related Quality of Life Note . From “Conceptual Model of Health-Related Quality of Life,” by C.E. Ferrans, J.J. Zerwic, J.E. Wilbur, & J.L. Larson, 2005, Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 37 (4), p. 338. Copyright 2005 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Reprinted with permission. Figure 2 Ecological Framework for the university of Illinois at Chicago Cancer nursing Research Note . Copyright 2007 by the University of Illinois at Chicago College of Nursing Cancer Researchers Group. All rights reserved. Used with permission. Figure 3 Commonly Assessed Patient Health Outcomes Associated With Quality of Life Note . Based on information from Ferrans et al., 2005 ; Wilson & Cleary, 1995 . 