High intensity focused ultrasound surgery (HIFU) of the brain: A historical perspective, with modern applications The field of MRI-guided high intensity focused ultrasound surgery (MRgFUS) is a rapidly evolving one with many potential applications in neurosurgery. This is the first of three articles on MRgFUS, this paper focuses on the historical development of the technology and it's potential applications to modern neurosurgery. The evolution of MRgFUS has occurred in parallel with modern neurological surgery and the two seemingly distinct disciplines share many of the same pioneering figures. Early studies on focused ultrasound treatment in the 1940's and 1950's demonstrated the ability to perform precise lesioning in the human brain, with a favorable risk-benefit profile. However, the need for a craniotomy, as well as lack of sophisticated imaging technology resulted in limited growth of HIFU for neurosurgery. More recently, technological advances, have permitted the combination of HIFU along with MRI guidance to provide an opportunity to effectively treat a variety of CNS disorders. Although challenges remain, HIFU-mediated neurosurgery may offer the ability to target and treat CNS conditions that were previously extremely difficult to perform. The remaining two articles in this series will focus on the physical principles of modern MRgFUS as well as current and future avenues for investigation.  Conclusions The use of acoustic energy as a therapeutic tool is not new, and dates to the late nineteenth century. The potential of sound waves to treat disorders throughout the nervous system has also been explored, but in the past has been limited by the inability to target and monitor treatments, as well as the skull. More recent advances in acoustic energy delivery, diagnostic imaging, and in neurosurgical techniques however, have made it possible to selectively target regions of the brain using high-intensity acoustic energy with a high degree of precision, with minimal toxicity and through the intact skull. 