Gene-environment interactions across development: Exploring DRD2 genotype and prenatal smoking effects on self-regulation Genetic factors dynamically interact with both pre- and postnatal environmental influences to shape development. Considerable attention has been devoted to gene-environment interactions (GxE) on important outcomes ( Caspi & Moffitt, 2006 ). It is also important to consider the possibility that these GxE effects may vary across development, particularly for constructs like self-regulation that emerge slowly, depend on brain regions that change qualitatively in different developmental periods, and thus may be manifested differently. To illustrate one approach to explore such developmental patterns, the relation between variation in the Taq IA polymorphism, related to D2 dopamine receptor expression and availability, and prenatal exposure to tobacco, was examined in two exploratory studies. First, in 4-week-old neonates, genotype-exposure interactions were observed for attention and irritable reactivity, but not for stress dysregulation. Second, in preschool children, genotype was related to Trails-P task performance on conditions requiring executive control, and children with both the A1+ genotype and a history of prenatal tobacco exposure displayed disproportionately poor performance. Despite study limitations, these results illustrate the importance of examining the interplay between genetic and prenatal environmental factors across development.  Method Participants A sample of 98 healthy neonates was included in this study. Their mothers were enrolled in the study before the 28th week of pregnancy, with the majority (84%) recruited around the 16th week. Neonatal self-regulatory behavior was assessed when infants were approximately 4 weeks of age ( M = 4.15 weeks, range = 3.0 to 5.14). Mothers and neonates were participants in a larger ongoing project examining the sequelae of prenatal exposure to tobacco, and as such, smoking women were oversampled to comprise approximately 50% of the sample. Neonates were included in the present analysis if the 4-week assessment and genotyping were completed. All infants were of White-European background 1 . Infants with atypical illnesses or birth complications known to affect developmental outcomes (e.g., neonatal seizures), preterm delivery before 37 weeks, prenatal exposure to illicit drugs, or whose mothers reported drinking more than 2 alcoholic drinks per occasion before pregnancy detection, were excluded from participation. Most women in the sample (75%) reported some alcohol consumption around their last menstrual period before becoming pregnant. Of women who drank alcohol, nearly all (91%) reported termination of alcohol use by the sixteenth week of pregnancy. Furthermore, the amount of alcohol use in those who reported use was no more than 1 drink at a sitting in the remaining 5 months of pregnancy for all but 2 women. Sample demographic information is provided in Table 1 . As expected, maternally reported and biochemical indicators of tobacco exposure differed between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed infants. There was also a small, but significant, difference in education between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed groups, and a difference in birthweight and sex distribution between genotype groups. Procedures Prenatal tobacco exposure was assessed prospectively via standardized interview at 14 and 28 weeks gestation by a research staff member in a private office within the research laboratory. Women reported their average and maximum daily smoking during each month of pregnancy, utilizing trimester information and pregnancy landmarks ( Day & Robles, 1989 ). Because self-reported prenatal tobacco use may underestimate true use ( Bardy, Kataja, & Pikkarainen, 1993 ), maternal urine samples were collected at each interview to provide biochemical verification via analysis of cotinine levels using the DRI® Cotinine Assay. Cotinine is a byproduct of nicotine, and urinanalysis was conducted by US Drug Testing Laboratories (Des Plaines, Illinois). Women were also interviewed about their health and behavior, including use of alcohol and prescription medications. Within 12 to 48 hours of infants' delivery, women completed the final standardized interview to report last trimester smoking, and a meconium sample was collected from the baby's diaper. Meconium cotinine levels index nicotine exposure in the last 20 to 24 weeks of pregnancy, and were analyzed by U. S. Drug Testing Laboratories. Buccal samples were taken from the infant using Catch-All™ Sample Collection Swabs (Epicentre Biotechnologies, Madison, Wisconsin), for subsequent genotyping. The Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) and primers 5?-GTCTAAATTTCCATCTCCGGCTC-3? and 5?-GGCAAATACCTGATCTGCAAG-3? were used to amplify DRD2-specific sequences by polymerase chain reactions. TaqIA restriction-length polymorphisms were assessed as described by Spitz et al. (1998) . The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 0.03, d.f. = 1, p = .86. When neonates were approximately 4 weeks of age, the Neonatal Temperament Assessment (NTA; Riese, 1983 ) was administered in the infant's home. This measure was chosen because of its demonstrated sensitivity to neuropsychological deficits related to prenatal substance exposure ( Riese, 1989 ) and later outcome ( Matheny, Riese, & Wilson, 1985 ; Riese, 1987 ). One research staff member interviewed the mother about her infant's postnatal tobacco exposure and other health issues, while another staff member, who was blind to the infant's prenatal exposure group, administered the NTA in a separate room. Assessments were conducted approximately 30-60 minutes after feeding. A brief overview of the NTA is provided here, and a more detailed description is available in Espy, Stopp, Wiebe, Clayton, and Respass (2008) . NTA items were administered in several modules: attention/orientation, stress reactivity, soothability, elicitation of reflexes, and summary ratings of infant behavior and state at set points throughout the assessment. Infant orientation to auditory (e.g., bell), visual (e.g., bulls-eye) and auditory-visual stimuli (e.g., face and voice) was rated on a 4-point scale. Stress reactivity was assessed by ratings of the infant's response to repeated application of a metal disc, cooled by immersion in ice water, against the infant's thigh, and ratings of infant reactivity to orientation and reflex elicitation procedures. Level of irritability (rated on a 6-point scale) and latency to fuss or cry were scored. Between stress reactivity trials, the examiner actively soothed the baby if necessary, and scored the latency to soothe. Soothability and stress reactivity also were assessed via repeated pacifier presentation and withdrawal. Inter-observer reliability was checked on 5% of assessments by having a second examiner co-score all items. Correlation coefficients were computed for each module of items. Average correlations were calculated for attention ( M = .92; range .72 - 1.00), stress reactivity ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), pacifier presentation/ withdrawal ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), soothability ( M = .99; range .91 - 1.00); and summary scores ( M = .89; range .48 - 1.00). Reliability across all items was .95 (range .85 - 1.00).  Participants A sample of 98 healthy neonates was included in this study. Their mothers were enrolled in the study before the 28th week of pregnancy, with the majority (84%) recruited around the 16th week. Neonatal self-regulatory behavior was assessed when infants were approximately 4 weeks of age ( M = 4.15 weeks, range = 3.0 to 5.14). Mothers and neonates were participants in a larger ongoing project examining the sequelae of prenatal exposure to tobacco, and as such, smoking women were oversampled to comprise approximately 50% of the sample. Neonates were included in the present analysis if the 4-week assessment and genotyping were completed. All infants were of White-European background 1 . Infants with atypical illnesses or birth complications known to affect developmental outcomes (e.g., neonatal seizures), preterm delivery before 37 weeks, prenatal exposure to illicit drugs, or whose mothers reported drinking more than 2 alcoholic drinks per occasion before pregnancy detection, were excluded from participation. Most women in the sample (75%) reported some alcohol consumption around their last menstrual period before becoming pregnant. Of women who drank alcohol, nearly all (91%) reported termination of alcohol use by the sixteenth week of pregnancy. Furthermore, the amount of alcohol use in those who reported use was no more than 1 drink at a sitting in the remaining 5 months of pregnancy for all but 2 women. Sample demographic information is provided in Table 1 . As expected, maternally reported and biochemical indicators of tobacco exposure differed between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed infants. There was also a small, but significant, difference in education between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed groups, and a difference in birthweight and sex distribution between genotype groups.  Procedures Prenatal tobacco exposure was assessed prospectively via standardized interview at 14 and 28 weeks gestation by a research staff member in a private office within the research laboratory. Women reported their average and maximum daily smoking during each month of pregnancy, utilizing trimester information and pregnancy landmarks ( Day & Robles, 1989 ). Because self-reported prenatal tobacco use may underestimate true use ( Bardy, Kataja, & Pikkarainen, 1993 ), maternal urine samples were collected at each interview to provide biochemical verification via analysis of cotinine levels using the DRI® Cotinine Assay. Cotinine is a byproduct of nicotine, and urinanalysis was conducted by US Drug Testing Laboratories (Des Plaines, Illinois). Women were also interviewed about their health and behavior, including use of alcohol and prescription medications. Within 12 to 48 hours of infants' delivery, women completed the final standardized interview to report last trimester smoking, and a meconium sample was collected from the baby's diaper. Meconium cotinine levels index nicotine exposure in the last 20 to 24 weeks of pregnancy, and were analyzed by U. S. Drug Testing Laboratories. Buccal samples were taken from the infant using Catch-All™ Sample Collection Swabs (Epicentre Biotechnologies, Madison, Wisconsin), for subsequent genotyping. The Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) and primers 5?-GTCTAAATTTCCATCTCCGGCTC-3? and 5?-GGCAAATACCTGATCTGCAAG-3? were used to amplify DRD2-specific sequences by polymerase chain reactions. TaqIA restriction-length polymorphisms were assessed as described by Spitz et al. (1998) . The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 0.03, d.f. = 1, p = .86. When neonates were approximately 4 weeks of age, the Neonatal Temperament Assessment (NTA; Riese, 1983 ) was administered in the infant's home. This measure was chosen because of its demonstrated sensitivity to neuropsychological deficits related to prenatal substance exposure ( Riese, 1989 ) and later outcome ( Matheny, Riese, & Wilson, 1985 ; Riese, 1987 ). One research staff member interviewed the mother about her infant's postnatal tobacco exposure and other health issues, while another staff member, who was blind to the infant's prenatal exposure group, administered the NTA in a separate room. Assessments were conducted approximately 30-60 minutes after feeding. A brief overview of the NTA is provided here, and a more detailed description is available in Espy, Stopp, Wiebe, Clayton, and Respass (2008) . NTA items were administered in several modules: attention/orientation, stress reactivity, soothability, elicitation of reflexes, and summary ratings of infant behavior and state at set points throughout the assessment. Infant orientation to auditory (e.g., bell), visual (e.g., bulls-eye) and auditory-visual stimuli (e.g., face and voice) was rated on a 4-point scale. Stress reactivity was assessed by ratings of the infant's response to repeated application of a metal disc, cooled by immersion in ice water, against the infant's thigh, and ratings of infant reactivity to orientation and reflex elicitation procedures. Level of irritability (rated on a 6-point scale) and latency to fuss or cry were scored. Between stress reactivity trials, the examiner actively soothed the baby if necessary, and scored the latency to soothe. Soothability and stress reactivity also were assessed via repeated pacifier presentation and withdrawal. Inter-observer reliability was checked on 5% of assessments by having a second examiner co-score all items. Correlation coefficients were computed for each module of items. Average correlations were calculated for attention ( M = .92; range .72 - 1.00), stress reactivity ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), pacifier presentation/ withdrawal ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), soothability ( M = .99; range .91 - 1.00); and summary scores ( M = .89; range .48 - 1.00). Reliability across all items was .95 (range .85 - 1.00).  Statistical Methods All analyses were conducted using SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina). SAS's Proc Factor was utilized to reduce the obtained data to summary factor scores using principal axis factor analysis with Promax rotation. Factor analyses were conducted using the larger sample of neonates (including those not yet genotyped), to provide a more stable estimate of factor loadings (see Espy et al., 2008 , for details). Items and factor loadings for the best-fitting, 3-factor solution are listed in Table 2 , along with inter-factor correlations for the present sample. Based on the items loading on each factor, the factors were labeled Irritable Reactivity, Attention, and Stress Dysregulation. SAS's Proc Mixed was used to analyze the effects of Taq IA genotype (A1+, A1-), prenatal tobacco exposure (dichotomously coded as PTE, NE 2 ), and their interaction on each factor separately. Interactions were interpreted using simple effects. Sex and age at assessment were included as covariates in all models because they have been shown in other studies to relate to neonatal behavior (e.g., Riese, 1984 ). Maternal education and infant birthweight were controlled statistically in all analyses because they differed by exposure group and genotype, respectively, and because in several previous studies, birthweight mediated the effect of PTE on behavior outcome ( Huijbregts, Séguin, Zelazo, Parent, Japel, & Tremblay, 2006 ; Nigg & Breslau, 2007 ), although there were no differences in birthweight between exposure groups in the present sample.  Method Participants The sample included 58 typically-developing preschool children (mean age 4 years 6 months, range 3 years 0 months to 6 years 1 month). Demographic information is summarized in Table 3 . As in Study 1, all children included in the present analysis were of White-European ethnicity (see Footnote 1 ). Procedure All children were assessed individually in a child research laboratory. Parents provided written informed consent for their children's participation, and then children completed a task battery that included the Trails-P. Buccal cells were collected through a child-friendly “lollipop taste test” game ( Espy & Hamby, 2002 ). Parents completed a brief interview, including information about maternal educational attainment and smoking during pregnancy. The Preschool Trail Making Test (Trails-P), is administered in a storybook format, where each condition is composed of an array of stimuli (a family of dogs that vary in size) distributed on a page. Children completed the task by marking the stimuli in order from smallest to biggest with a happy-face stamper. Before beginning the task, they were given practice using the stamper and identifying the dogs in order of size on a practice page. In the Control condition, children marked dogs only, whereas in the Switch condition, children alternated between dogs and bones. In the Inhibit condition, children again stamped dogs only, but bones were also present on the page, serving as potential distractors. Each page required 6 responses. As in the adult version of the Trail Making Test, feedback was given and children were required to correct any errors, so that all stimuli were marked to complete a condition. The examiner scored the number of errors and latency to complete each condition during the assessment. Several children had missing data for one or more conditions ( n = 1, 2, and 5 for the Control, Switch, and Inhibit conditions respectively) due to examiner error or because the child refused to complete all task conditions. Genotyping was conducted using procedures identical to those in Study 1. The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 1.80, d.f. = 1, p = .18. Prenatal tobacco exposure status was determined retrospectively, based on maternal self-report at the time of the preschool assessment. Retrospective recall may have resulted in underreporting of prenatal smoking ( Bardy et al., 1993 ), although some studies have found that retrospective reporting of smoking is consistent with prospective data as long as 4 years later ( Jacobson, Chiodo, Sokol, & Jacobson, 2002 ). Because this study sample was typically-developing and not selected on the basis of prenatal risk factors, reported smoking during pregnancy was substantially less frequent (14%) than in Study 1, resembling the rate reported in non-selected samples to reflect prevalence in the general population ( CDC, 2005 ). Importantly, the proportion of mothers who reported smoking during pregnancy did not differ by child Taq IA genotype or sex, ?2 = .04 and 0.18, d.f. = 1, p s > .67, respectively.  Participants The sample included 58 typically-developing preschool children (mean age 4 years 6 months, range 3 years 0 months to 6 years 1 month). Demographic information is summarized in Table 3 . As in Study 1, all children included in the present analysis were of White-European ethnicity (see Footnote 1 ).  Procedure All children were assessed individually in a child research laboratory. Parents provided written informed consent for their children's participation, and then children completed a task battery that included the Trails-P. Buccal cells were collected through a child-friendly “lollipop taste test” game ( Espy & Hamby, 2002 ). Parents completed a brief interview, including information about maternal educational attainment and smoking during pregnancy. The Preschool Trail Making Test (Trails-P), is administered in a storybook format, where each condition is composed of an array of stimuli (a family of dogs that vary in size) distributed on a page. Children completed the task by marking the stimuli in order from smallest to biggest with a happy-face stamper. Before beginning the task, they were given practice using the stamper and identifying the dogs in order of size on a practice page. In the Control condition, children marked dogs only, whereas in the Switch condition, children alternated between dogs and bones. In the Inhibit condition, children again stamped dogs only, but bones were also present on the page, serving as potential distractors. Each page required 6 responses. As in the adult version of the Trail Making Test, feedback was given and children were required to correct any errors, so that all stimuli were marked to complete a condition. The examiner scored the number of errors and latency to complete each condition during the assessment. Several children had missing data for one or more conditions ( n = 1, 2, and 5 for the Control, Switch, and Inhibit conditions respectively) due to examiner error or because the child refused to complete all task conditions. Genotyping was conducted using procedures identical to those in Study 1. The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 1.80, d.f. = 1, p = .18. Prenatal tobacco exposure status was determined retrospectively, based on maternal self-report at the time of the preschool assessment. Retrospective recall may have resulted in underreporting of prenatal smoking ( Bardy et al., 1993 ), although some studies have found that retrospective reporting of smoking is consistent with prospective data as long as 4 years later ( Jacobson, Chiodo, Sokol, & Jacobson, 2002 ). Because this study sample was typically-developing and not selected on the basis of prenatal risk factors, reported smoking during pregnancy was substantially less frequent (14%) than in Study 1, resembling the rate reported in non-selected samples to reflect prevalence in the general population ( CDC, 2005 ). Importantly, the proportion of mothers who reported smoking during pregnancy did not differ by child Taq IA genotype or sex, ?2 = .04 and 0.18, d.f. = 1, p s > .67, respectively.  Study 1: Neonatal self-regulation The effects of Taq IA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure on self-regulation very early in life were examined in an at-risk sample of neonates. In this study, prenatal tobacco exposure had been assessed during pregnancy, including biochemical verification of self-reported smoking, and neonates were genotyped on the Taq IA polymorphism. Attention, reactivity, and regulatory behaviors were assessed when neonates were approximately 4 weeks old. Method Participants A sample of 98 healthy neonates was included in this study. Their mothers were enrolled in the study before the 28th week of pregnancy, with the majority (84%) recruited around the 16th week. Neonatal self-regulatory behavior was assessed when infants were approximately 4 weeks of age ( M = 4.15 weeks, range = 3.0 to 5.14). Mothers and neonates were participants in a larger ongoing project examining the sequelae of prenatal exposure to tobacco, and as such, smoking women were oversampled to comprise approximately 50% of the sample. Neonates were included in the present analysis if the 4-week assessment and genotyping were completed. All infants were of White-European background 1 . Infants with atypical illnesses or birth complications known to affect developmental outcomes (e.g., neonatal seizures), preterm delivery before 37 weeks, prenatal exposure to illicit drugs, or whose mothers reported drinking more than 2 alcoholic drinks per occasion before pregnancy detection, were excluded from participation. Most women in the sample (75%) reported some alcohol consumption around their last menstrual period before becoming pregnant. Of women who drank alcohol, nearly all (91%) reported termination of alcohol use by the sixteenth week of pregnancy. Furthermore, the amount of alcohol use in those who reported use was no more than 1 drink at a sitting in the remaining 5 months of pregnancy for all but 2 women. Sample demographic information is provided in Table 1 . As expected, maternally reported and biochemical indicators of tobacco exposure differed between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed infants. There was also a small, but significant, difference in education between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed groups, and a difference in birthweight and sex distribution between genotype groups. Procedures Prenatal tobacco exposure was assessed prospectively via standardized interview at 14 and 28 weeks gestation by a research staff member in a private office within the research laboratory. Women reported their average and maximum daily smoking during each month of pregnancy, utilizing trimester information and pregnancy landmarks ( Day & Robles, 1989 ). Because self-reported prenatal tobacco use may underestimate true use ( Bardy, Kataja, & Pikkarainen, 1993 ), maternal urine samples were collected at each interview to provide biochemical verification via analysis of cotinine levels using the DRI® Cotinine Assay. Cotinine is a byproduct of nicotine, and urinanalysis was conducted by US Drug Testing Laboratories (Des Plaines, Illinois). Women were also interviewed about their health and behavior, including use of alcohol and prescription medications. Within 12 to 48 hours of infants' delivery, women completed the final standardized interview to report last trimester smoking, and a meconium sample was collected from the baby's diaper. Meconium cotinine levels index nicotine exposure in the last 20 to 24 weeks of pregnancy, and were analyzed by U. S. Drug Testing Laboratories. Buccal samples were taken from the infant using Catch-All™ Sample Collection Swabs (Epicentre Biotechnologies, Madison, Wisconsin), for subsequent genotyping. The Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) and primers 5?-GTCTAAATTTCCATCTCCGGCTC-3? and 5?-GGCAAATACCTGATCTGCAAG-3? were used to amplify DRD2-specific sequences by polymerase chain reactions. TaqIA restriction-length polymorphisms were assessed as described by Spitz et al. (1998) . The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 0.03, d.f. = 1, p = .86. When neonates were approximately 4 weeks of age, the Neonatal Temperament Assessment (NTA; Riese, 1983 ) was administered in the infant's home. This measure was chosen because of its demonstrated sensitivity to neuropsychological deficits related to prenatal substance exposure ( Riese, 1989 ) and later outcome ( Matheny, Riese, & Wilson, 1985 ; Riese, 1987 ). One research staff member interviewed the mother about her infant's postnatal tobacco exposure and other health issues, while another staff member, who was blind to the infant's prenatal exposure group, administered the NTA in a separate room. Assessments were conducted approximately 30-60 minutes after feeding. A brief overview of the NTA is provided here, and a more detailed description is available in Espy, Stopp, Wiebe, Clayton, and Respass (2008) . NTA items were administered in several modules: attention/orientation, stress reactivity, soothability, elicitation of reflexes, and summary ratings of infant behavior and state at set points throughout the assessment. Infant orientation to auditory (e.g., bell), visual (e.g., bulls-eye) and auditory-visual stimuli (e.g., face and voice) was rated on a 4-point scale. Stress reactivity was assessed by ratings of the infant's response to repeated application of a metal disc, cooled by immersion in ice water, against the infant's thigh, and ratings of infant reactivity to orientation and reflex elicitation procedures. Level of irritability (rated on a 6-point scale) and latency to fuss or cry were scored. Between stress reactivity trials, the examiner actively soothed the baby if necessary, and scored the latency to soothe. Soothability and stress reactivity also were assessed via repeated pacifier presentation and withdrawal. Inter-observer reliability was checked on 5% of assessments by having a second examiner co-score all items. Correlation coefficients were computed for each module of items. Average correlations were calculated for attention ( M = .92; range .72 - 1.00), stress reactivity ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), pacifier presentation/ withdrawal ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), soothability ( M = .99; range .91 - 1.00); and summary scores ( M = .89; range .48 - 1.00). Reliability across all items was .95 (range .85 - 1.00). Statistical Methods All analyses were conducted using SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina). SAS's Proc Factor was utilized to reduce the obtained data to summary factor scores using principal axis factor analysis with Promax rotation. Factor analyses were conducted using the larger sample of neonates (including those not yet genotyped), to provide a more stable estimate of factor loadings (see Espy et al., 2008 , for details). Items and factor loadings for the best-fitting, 3-factor solution are listed in Table 2 , along with inter-factor correlations for the present sample. Based on the items loading on each factor, the factors were labeled Irritable Reactivity, Attention, and Stress Dysregulation. SAS's Proc Mixed was used to analyze the effects of Taq IA genotype (A1+, A1-), prenatal tobacco exposure (dichotomously coded as PTE, NE 2 ), and their interaction on each factor separately. Interactions were interpreted using simple effects. Sex and age at assessment were included as covariates in all models because they have been shown in other studies to relate to neonatal behavior (e.g., Riese, 1984 ). Maternal education and infant birthweight were controlled statistically in all analyses because they differed by exposure group and genotype, respectively, and because in several previous studies, birthweight mediated the effect of PTE on behavior outcome ( Huijbregts, Séguin, Zelazo, Parent, Japel, & Tremblay, 2006 ; Nigg & Breslau, 2007 ), although there were no differences in birthweight between exposure groups in the present sample. Results For the Attention factor, there was a main effect of Taq IA genotype, F (1, 90) = 4.34, p < .05, that was qualified by a significant interaction between genotype and exposure status, F (1, 90) = 8.73, p < .005. This interaction is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1 . Among NE neonates, those with the at-risk, A1+ genotype were more attentive to stimuli than were those with the A1- genotype F (1, 90) = 13.83, p < .0005. In contrast, among PTE infants, the Attention factor scores were comparable in A1+ and A1- infants, F (1, 90) = 0.32, p > .57. There was no main effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = .08, p > .77. The maternal education covariate accounted for significant variance in Attention scores, F (1, 90) = 5.93, p < .05, and the effect of birthweight approached significance, F (1, 90) = 2.86, p < .10. Higher levels of education and higher birthweights were associated with increased Attention scores. The other covariates were unrelated to Attention score ( p s > .95). For the Irritable Reactivity factor, there was a significant interaction between genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure paralleling that seen for Attention, F (1, 90) = 7.20, p < .01. Genotype-related differences in reactivity were pronounced in NE infants, F (1, 90) = 10.02, p < .005, but not in PTE infants, F (1, 90) = 0.50, p > .48. The main effect for genotype did not reach significance, F (1, 90) = 2.58, p > .11, and there was no effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = 0.01, p > .93. Irritable Reactivity scores were unrelated to any covariate (all p s > .39). For the Stress Dysregulation factor, neither the main effects of genotype or exposure status, nor their interaction, were significant ( p s > .34). There was a significant sex difference, F (1, 90) = 5.49, p < .05. Girls had higher factor scores ( M = 0.61, SE = 0.155) than boys ( M = .19, SE = 0.162), indicating that they were less able to regulate their stress responses to assessment procedures and were less responsive to active soothing by the examiner. Stress Dysregulation scores were not related to the remaining covariates ( p s > .27). Discussion For two dimensions of neonatal behavior, attention and irritable reactivity, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure differed by Taq IA genotype. In non-exposed neonates, those with the A1+ genotype, typically identified as the higher-risk allele, were more attentive to the auditory and visual stimuli and were less irritable to these stimuli and routine handling, relative to those with the A1- allele. In neonates who were exposed to tobacco during pregnancy, there were no differences in these behaviors between infants with and without the A1 allele. At first glance, the direction of the effect observed in non-exposed infants was unexpected. One explanation may lie in genotype-related differences in processing of novel information. The A1+ genotype has been associated with higher levels of novelty seeking ( Berman et al., 2002 ). The Attention factor score was comprised primarily of items indexing orientation to unfamiliar stimuli, such as the examiner's face and voice, rattle, bell, and bulls-eye. Observed differences in attention to novel information early in development may reflect variation in nervous system responsivity that is a precursor to novelty-seeking personality observable later in life. Prenatal exposure to nicotine has been associated with decreased response to novelty in rats ( Vaglenova et al., 2004 ) and non-human primates ( Golub, Slotkin, Tarantal, & Pinkerton, 2007 ). Prenatal tobacco exposure may attenuate the increased attentiveness to novelty in neonates with the A1+ genotype, resulting in no difference from those PTE infants with the A1- genotype. Furthermore, the parallel findings observed for the Attention and Irritable Reactivity domains may be connected—beginning late in the first year of life, redirection of attention becomes an important strategy for emotion regulation, as children distract themselves from unpleasant, yet uncontrollable, circumstances to reduce distress ( Bridges & Grolnick, 1995 ; Wilson & Gottman, 1996 ). Kopp (1989) has suggested that attention and emotion regulation are closely interrelated in early development. Consistent with this postulation, the Attention and Irritable Reactivity factors are significantly correlated ( r = -.55), with almost 30% shared variance. Critically, this shared variability is not due to shared items, in that there is very little overlap in items that load highly on these two factors. Rather, many of the items tapped differing aspects of the same NTA assessment modules (e.g., infants' orientation response and rated irritability to visual stimuli). It may be that infants who respond to novel stimuli with an obligatory orienting response are less likely to become irritable, as their increased attentiveness serves to modulate negative emotionality (albeit without effortful control on the part of the neonate). Admittedly, these findings were unexpected and as such, replication and further studies to elucidate possible underlying mechanisms will be critical.  Study 1: Neonatal self-regulation The effects of Taq IA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure on self-regulation very early in life were examined in an at-risk sample of neonates. In this study, prenatal tobacco exposure had been assessed during pregnancy, including biochemical verification of self-reported smoking, and neonates were genotyped on the Taq IA polymorphism. Attention, reactivity, and regulatory behaviors were assessed when neonates were approximately 4 weeks old. Method Participants A sample of 98 healthy neonates was included in this study. Their mothers were enrolled in the study before the 28th week of pregnancy, with the majority (84%) recruited around the 16th week. Neonatal self-regulatory behavior was assessed when infants were approximately 4 weeks of age ( M = 4.15 weeks, range = 3.0 to 5.14). Mothers and neonates were participants in a larger ongoing project examining the sequelae of prenatal exposure to tobacco, and as such, smoking women were oversampled to comprise approximately 50% of the sample. Neonates were included in the present analysis if the 4-week assessment and genotyping were completed. All infants were of White-European background 1 . Infants with atypical illnesses or birth complications known to affect developmental outcomes (e.g., neonatal seizures), preterm delivery before 37 weeks, prenatal exposure to illicit drugs, or whose mothers reported drinking more than 2 alcoholic drinks per occasion before pregnancy detection, were excluded from participation. Most women in the sample (75%) reported some alcohol consumption around their last menstrual period before becoming pregnant. Of women who drank alcohol, nearly all (91%) reported termination of alcohol use by the sixteenth week of pregnancy. Furthermore, the amount of alcohol use in those who reported use was no more than 1 drink at a sitting in the remaining 5 months of pregnancy for all but 2 women. Sample demographic information is provided in Table 1 . As expected, maternally reported and biochemical indicators of tobacco exposure differed between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed infants. There was also a small, but significant, difference in education between tobacco-exposed and non-exposed groups, and a difference in birthweight and sex distribution between genotype groups. Procedures Prenatal tobacco exposure was assessed prospectively via standardized interview at 14 and 28 weeks gestation by a research staff member in a private office within the research laboratory. Women reported their average and maximum daily smoking during each month of pregnancy, utilizing trimester information and pregnancy landmarks ( Day & Robles, 1989 ). Because self-reported prenatal tobacco use may underestimate true use ( Bardy, Kataja, & Pikkarainen, 1993 ), maternal urine samples were collected at each interview to provide biochemical verification via analysis of cotinine levels using the DRI® Cotinine Assay. Cotinine is a byproduct of nicotine, and urinanalysis was conducted by US Drug Testing Laboratories (Des Plaines, Illinois). Women were also interviewed about their health and behavior, including use of alcohol and prescription medications. Within 12 to 48 hours of infants' delivery, women completed the final standardized interview to report last trimester smoking, and a meconium sample was collected from the baby's diaper. Meconium cotinine levels index nicotine exposure in the last 20 to 24 weeks of pregnancy, and were analyzed by U. S. Drug Testing Laboratories. Buccal samples were taken from the infant using Catch-All™ Sample Collection Swabs (Epicentre Biotechnologies, Madison, Wisconsin), for subsequent genotyping. The Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) and primers 5?-GTCTAAATTTCCATCTCCGGCTC-3? and 5?-GGCAAATACCTGATCTGCAAG-3? were used to amplify DRD2-specific sequences by polymerase chain reactions. TaqIA restriction-length polymorphisms were assessed as described by Spitz et al. (1998) . The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 0.03, d.f. = 1, p = .86. When neonates were approximately 4 weeks of age, the Neonatal Temperament Assessment (NTA; Riese, 1983 ) was administered in the infant's home. This measure was chosen because of its demonstrated sensitivity to neuropsychological deficits related to prenatal substance exposure ( Riese, 1989 ) and later outcome ( Matheny, Riese, & Wilson, 1985 ; Riese, 1987 ). One research staff member interviewed the mother about her infant's postnatal tobacco exposure and other health issues, while another staff member, who was blind to the infant's prenatal exposure group, administered the NTA in a separate room. Assessments were conducted approximately 30-60 minutes after feeding. A brief overview of the NTA is provided here, and a more detailed description is available in Espy, Stopp, Wiebe, Clayton, and Respass (2008) . NTA items were administered in several modules: attention/orientation, stress reactivity, soothability, elicitation of reflexes, and summary ratings of infant behavior and state at set points throughout the assessment. Infant orientation to auditory (e.g., bell), visual (e.g., bulls-eye) and auditory-visual stimuli (e.g., face and voice) was rated on a 4-point scale. Stress reactivity was assessed by ratings of the infant's response to repeated application of a metal disc, cooled by immersion in ice water, against the infant's thigh, and ratings of infant reactivity to orientation and reflex elicitation procedures. Level of irritability (rated on a 6-point scale) and latency to fuss or cry were scored. Between stress reactivity trials, the examiner actively soothed the baby if necessary, and scored the latency to soothe. Soothability and stress reactivity also were assessed via repeated pacifier presentation and withdrawal. Inter-observer reliability was checked on 5% of assessments by having a second examiner co-score all items. Correlation coefficients were computed for each module of items. Average correlations were calculated for attention ( M = .92; range .72 - 1.00), stress reactivity ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), pacifier presentation/ withdrawal ( M = .99; range .98 - 1.00), soothability ( M = .99; range .91 - 1.00); and summary scores ( M = .89; range .48 - 1.00). Reliability across all items was .95 (range .85 - 1.00). Statistical Methods All analyses were conducted using SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina). SAS's Proc Factor was utilized to reduce the obtained data to summary factor scores using principal axis factor analysis with Promax rotation. Factor analyses were conducted using the larger sample of neonates (including those not yet genotyped), to provide a more stable estimate of factor loadings (see Espy et al., 2008 , for details). Items and factor loadings for the best-fitting, 3-factor solution are listed in Table 2 , along with inter-factor correlations for the present sample. Based on the items loading on each factor, the factors were labeled Irritable Reactivity, Attention, and Stress Dysregulation. SAS's Proc Mixed was used to analyze the effects of Taq IA genotype (A1+, A1-), prenatal tobacco exposure (dichotomously coded as PTE, NE 2 ), and their interaction on each factor separately. Interactions were interpreted using simple effects. Sex and age at assessment were included as covariates in all models because they have been shown in other studies to relate to neonatal behavior (e.g., Riese, 1984 ). Maternal education and infant birthweight were controlled statistically in all analyses because they differed by exposure group and genotype, respectively, and because in several previous studies, birthweight mediated the effect of PTE on behavior outcome ( Huijbregts, Séguin, Zelazo, Parent, Japel, & Tremblay, 2006 ; Nigg & Breslau, 2007 ), although there were no differences in birthweight between exposure groups in the present sample. Results For the Attention factor, there was a main effect of Taq IA genotype, F (1, 90) = 4.34, p < .05, that was qualified by a significant interaction between genotype and exposure status, F (1, 90) = 8.73, p < .005. This interaction is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1 . Among NE neonates, those with the at-risk, A1+ genotype were more attentive to stimuli than were those with the A1- genotype F (1, 90) = 13.83, p < .0005. In contrast, among PTE infants, the Attention factor scores were comparable in A1+ and A1- infants, F (1, 90) = 0.32, p > .57. There was no main effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = .08, p > .77. The maternal education covariate accounted for significant variance in Attention scores, F (1, 90) = 5.93, p < .05, and the effect of birthweight approached significance, F (1, 90) = 2.86, p < .10. Higher levels of education and higher birthweights were associated with increased Attention scores. The other covariates were unrelated to Attention score ( p s > .95). For the Irritable Reactivity factor, there was a significant interaction between genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure paralleling that seen for Attention, F (1, 90) = 7.20, p < .01. Genotype-related differences in reactivity were pronounced in NE infants, F (1, 90) = 10.02, p < .005, but not in PTE infants, F (1, 90) = 0.50, p > .48. The main effect for genotype did not reach significance, F (1, 90) = 2.58, p > .11, and there was no effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = 0.01, p > .93. Irritable Reactivity scores were unrelated to any covariate (all p s > .39). For the Stress Dysregulation factor, neither the main effects of genotype or exposure status, nor their interaction, were significant ( p s > .34). There was a significant sex difference, F (1, 90) = 5.49, p < .05. Girls had higher factor scores ( M = 0.61, SE = 0.155) than boys ( M = .19, SE = 0.162), indicating that they were less able to regulate their stress responses to assessment procedures and were less responsive to active soothing by the examiner. Stress Dysregulation scores were not related to the remaining covariates ( p s > .27). Discussion For two dimensions of neonatal behavior, attention and irritable reactivity, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure differed by Taq IA genotype. In non-exposed neonates, those with the A1+ genotype, typically identified as the higher-risk allele, were more attentive to the auditory and visual stimuli and were less irritable to these stimuli and routine handling, relative to those with the A1- allele. In neonates who were exposed to tobacco during pregnancy, there were no differences in these behaviors between infants with and without the A1 allele. At first glance, the direction of the effect observed in non-exposed infants was unexpected. One explanation may lie in genotype-related differences in processing of novel information. The A1+ genotype has been associated with higher levels of novelty seeking ( Berman et al., 2002 ). The Attention factor score was comprised primarily of items indexing orientation to unfamiliar stimuli, such as the examiner's face and voice, rattle, bell, and bulls-eye. Observed differences in attention to novel information early in development may reflect variation in nervous system responsivity that is a precursor to novelty-seeking personality observable later in life. Prenatal exposure to nicotine has been associated with decreased response to novelty in rats ( Vaglenova et al., 2004 ) and non-human primates ( Golub, Slotkin, Tarantal, & Pinkerton, 2007 ). Prenatal tobacco exposure may attenuate the increased attentiveness to novelty in neonates with the A1+ genotype, resulting in no difference from those PTE infants with the A1- genotype. Furthermore, the parallel findings observed for the Attention and Irritable Reactivity domains may be connected—beginning late in the first year of life, redirection of attention becomes an important strategy for emotion regulation, as children distract themselves from unpleasant, yet uncontrollable, circumstances to reduce distress ( Bridges & Grolnick, 1995 ; Wilson & Gottman, 1996 ). Kopp (1989) has suggested that attention and emotion regulation are closely interrelated in early development. Consistent with this postulation, the Attention and Irritable Reactivity factors are significantly correlated ( r = -.55), with almost 30% shared variance. Critically, this shared variability is not due to shared items, in that there is very little overlap in items that load highly on these two factors. Rather, many of the items tapped differing aspects of the same NTA assessment modules (e.g., infants' orientation response and rated irritability to visual stimuli). It may be that infants who respond to novel stimuli with an obligatory orienting response are less likely to become irritable, as their increased attentiveness serves to modulate negative emotionality (albeit without effortful control on the part of the neonate). Admittedly, these findings were unexpected and as such, replication and further studies to elucidate possible underlying mechanisms will be critical.  Results For the Attention factor, there was a main effect of Taq IA genotype, F (1, 90) = 4.34, p < .05, that was qualified by a significant interaction between genotype and exposure status, F (1, 90) = 8.73, p < .005. This interaction is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1 . Among NE neonates, those with the at-risk, A1+ genotype were more attentive to stimuli than were those with the A1- genotype F (1, 90) = 13.83, p < .0005. In contrast, among PTE infants, the Attention factor scores were comparable in A1+ and A1- infants, F (1, 90) = 0.32, p > .57. There was no main effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = .08, p > .77. The maternal education covariate accounted for significant variance in Attention scores, F (1, 90) = 5.93, p < .05, and the effect of birthweight approached significance, F (1, 90) = 2.86, p < .10. Higher levels of education and higher birthweights were associated with increased Attention scores. The other covariates were unrelated to Attention score ( p s > .95). For the Irritable Reactivity factor, there was a significant interaction between genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure paralleling that seen for Attention, F (1, 90) = 7.20, p < .01. Genotype-related differences in reactivity were pronounced in NE infants, F (1, 90) = 10.02, p < .005, but not in PTE infants, F (1, 90) = 0.50, p > .48. The main effect for genotype did not reach significance, F (1, 90) = 2.58, p > .11, and there was no effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = 0.01, p > .93. Irritable Reactivity scores were unrelated to any covariate (all p s > .39). For the Stress Dysregulation factor, neither the main effects of genotype or exposure status, nor their interaction, were significant ( p s > .34). There was a significant sex difference, F (1, 90) = 5.49, p < .05. Girls had higher factor scores ( M = 0.61, SE = 0.155) than boys ( M = .19, SE = 0.162), indicating that they were less able to regulate their stress responses to assessment procedures and were less responsive to active soothing by the examiner. Stress Dysregulation scores were not related to the remaining covariates ( p s > .27).  Results For the Attention factor, there was a main effect of Taq IA genotype, F (1, 90) = 4.34, p < .05, that was qualified by a significant interaction between genotype and exposure status, F (1, 90) = 8.73, p < .005. This interaction is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 1 . Among NE neonates, those with the at-risk, A1+ genotype were more attentive to stimuli than were those with the A1- genotype F (1, 90) = 13.83, p < .0005. In contrast, among PTE infants, the Attention factor scores were comparable in A1+ and A1- infants, F (1, 90) = 0.32, p > .57. There was no main effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = .08, p > .77. The maternal education covariate accounted for significant variance in Attention scores, F (1, 90) = 5.93, p < .05, and the effect of birthweight approached significance, F (1, 90) = 2.86, p < .10. Higher levels of education and higher birthweights were associated with increased Attention scores. The other covariates were unrelated to Attention score ( p s > .95). For the Irritable Reactivity factor, there was a significant interaction between genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure paralleling that seen for Attention, F (1, 90) = 7.20, p < .01. Genotype-related differences in reactivity were pronounced in NE infants, F (1, 90) = 10.02, p < .005, but not in PTE infants, F (1, 90) = 0.50, p > .48. The main effect for genotype did not reach significance, F (1, 90) = 2.58, p > .11, and there was no effect of exposure status, F (1, 90) = 0.01, p > .93. Irritable Reactivity scores were unrelated to any covariate (all p s > .39). For the Stress Dysregulation factor, neither the main effects of genotype or exposure status, nor their interaction, were significant ( p s > .34). There was a significant sex difference, F (1, 90) = 5.49, p < .05. Girls had higher factor scores ( M = 0.61, SE = 0.155) than boys ( M = .19, SE = 0.162), indicating that they were less able to regulate their stress responses to assessment procedures and were less responsive to active soothing by the examiner. Stress Dysregulation scores were not related to the remaining covariates ( p s > .27).  Discussion For two dimensions of neonatal behavior, attention and irritable reactivity, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure differed by Taq IA genotype. In non-exposed neonates, those with the A1+ genotype, typically identified as the higher-risk allele, were more attentive to the auditory and visual stimuli and were less irritable to these stimuli and routine handling, relative to those with the A1- allele. In neonates who were exposed to tobacco during pregnancy, there were no differences in these behaviors between infants with and without the A1 allele. At first glance, the direction of the effect observed in non-exposed infants was unexpected. One explanation may lie in genotype-related differences in processing of novel information. The A1+ genotype has been associated with higher levels of novelty seeking ( Berman et al., 2002 ). The Attention factor score was comprised primarily of items indexing orientation to unfamiliar stimuli, such as the examiner's face and voice, rattle, bell, and bulls-eye. Observed differences in attention to novel information early in development may reflect variation in nervous system responsivity that is a precursor to novelty-seeking personality observable later in life. Prenatal exposure to nicotine has been associated with decreased response to novelty in rats ( Vaglenova et al., 2004 ) and non-human primates ( Golub, Slotkin, Tarantal, & Pinkerton, 2007 ). Prenatal tobacco exposure may attenuate the increased attentiveness to novelty in neonates with the A1+ genotype, resulting in no difference from those PTE infants with the A1- genotype. Furthermore, the parallel findings observed for the Attention and Irritable Reactivity domains may be connected—beginning late in the first year of life, redirection of attention becomes an important strategy for emotion regulation, as children distract themselves from unpleasant, yet uncontrollable, circumstances to reduce distress ( Bridges & Grolnick, 1995 ; Wilson & Gottman, 1996 ). Kopp (1989) has suggested that attention and emotion regulation are closely interrelated in early development. Consistent with this postulation, the Attention and Irritable Reactivity factors are significantly correlated ( r = -.55), with almost 30% shared variance. Critically, this shared variability is not due to shared items, in that there is very little overlap in items that load highly on these two factors. Rather, many of the items tapped differing aspects of the same NTA assessment modules (e.g., infants' orientation response and rated irritability to visual stimuli). It may be that infants who respond to novel stimuli with an obligatory orienting response are less likely to become irritable, as their increased attentiveness serves to modulate negative emotionality (albeit without effortful control on the part of the neonate). Admittedly, these findings were unexpected and as such, replication and further studies to elucidate possible underlying mechanisms will be critical.  Discussion For two dimensions of neonatal behavior, attention and irritable reactivity, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure differed by Taq IA genotype. In non-exposed neonates, those with the A1+ genotype, typically identified as the higher-risk allele, were more attentive to the auditory and visual stimuli and were less irritable to these stimuli and routine handling, relative to those with the A1- allele. In neonates who were exposed to tobacco during pregnancy, there were no differences in these behaviors between infants with and without the A1 allele. At first glance, the direction of the effect observed in non-exposed infants was unexpected. One explanation may lie in genotype-related differences in processing of novel information. The A1+ genotype has been associated with higher levels of novelty seeking ( Berman et al., 2002 ). The Attention factor score was comprised primarily of items indexing orientation to unfamiliar stimuli, such as the examiner's face and voice, rattle, bell, and bulls-eye. Observed differences in attention to novel information early in development may reflect variation in nervous system responsivity that is a precursor to novelty-seeking personality observable later in life. Prenatal exposure to nicotine has been associated with decreased response to novelty in rats ( Vaglenova et al., 2004 ) and non-human primates ( Golub, Slotkin, Tarantal, & Pinkerton, 2007 ). Prenatal tobacco exposure may attenuate the increased attentiveness to novelty in neonates with the A1+ genotype, resulting in no difference from those PTE infants with the A1- genotype. Furthermore, the parallel findings observed for the Attention and Irritable Reactivity domains may be connected—beginning late in the first year of life, redirection of attention becomes an important strategy for emotion regulation, as children distract themselves from unpleasant, yet uncontrollable, circumstances to reduce distress ( Bridges & Grolnick, 1995 ; Wilson & Gottman, 1996 ). Kopp (1989) has suggested that attention and emotion regulation are closely interrelated in early development. Consistent with this postulation, the Attention and Irritable Reactivity factors are significantly correlated ( r = -.55), with almost 30% shared variance. Critically, this shared variability is not due to shared items, in that there is very little overlap in items that load highly on these two factors. Rather, many of the items tapped differing aspects of the same NTA assessment modules (e.g., infants' orientation response and rated irritability to visual stimuli). It may be that infants who respond to novel stimuli with an obligatory orienting response are less likely to become irritable, as their increased attentiveness serves to modulate negative emotionality (albeit without effortful control on the part of the neonate). Admittedly, these findings were unexpected and as such, replication and further studies to elucidate possible underlying mechanisms will be critical.  Study 2: Preschool executive control The preschool years are an important period in the maturation of frontal structures and their connections to cortical and subcortical regions ( Giedd et al., 1999 ; Thatcher, 1994 ), and the concomitant development of executive control of cognition and behavior. During this transition, young children are increasingly required to regulate their cognitive processes and affective expression in the course of their everyday lives in contexts outside the family and home environment, and must modulate their behavior to participate in group settings (e.g., day care or preschool) or public places (e.g., the grocery store), for example when they are required to tolerate delays for gratification. The Trail Making Test ( Reitan, 1955 ) was developed to assess frontal lobe dysfunction in adult patient populations. In this task, participants connect stimuli on a page in sequence. In the Control condition (Condition A), participants connect letters only, whereas in the Switch condition (Condition B), participants must alternate between letters and numbers in sequence. The standard form of this task has been used successfully in older children and adolescents ( Emerson, Mollet, & Harrison, 2005 ). However, because preschool children have emergent literacy and numeracy skills, the standard test lacks validity in young children. Recently, Espy and Cwik (2004) developed an adaptation for use with preschool children, the Trails-P. In the present study, typically-developing preschool children completed the Trails-P and were genotyped on the Taq IA allele. Information was collected retrospectively about PTE, permitting exploratory analyses of GxE interactive effects. However, the proportion of children who had been prenatally exposed to tobacco was substantially lower than in Study 1. The original goal of the preschool study was not related to prenatal exposure, and thus there was not oversampling for exposure. Therefore, retrospective interview may have led to underreporting of prenatal exposure, which must be considered in interpreting the obtained results. Method Participants The sample included 58 typically-developing preschool children (mean age 4 years 6 months, range 3 years 0 months to 6 years 1 month). Demographic information is summarized in Table 3 . As in Study 1, all children included in the present analysis were of White-European ethnicity (see Footnote 1 ). Procedure All children were assessed individually in a child research laboratory. Parents provided written informed consent for their children's participation, and then children completed a task battery that included the Trails-P. Buccal cells were collected through a child-friendly “lollipop taste test” game ( Espy & Hamby, 2002 ). Parents completed a brief interview, including information about maternal educational attainment and smoking during pregnancy. The Preschool Trail Making Test (Trails-P), is administered in a storybook format, where each condition is composed of an array of stimuli (a family of dogs that vary in size) distributed on a page. Children completed the task by marking the stimuli in order from smallest to biggest with a happy-face stamper. Before beginning the task, they were given practice using the stamper and identifying the dogs in order of size on a practice page. In the Control condition, children marked dogs only, whereas in the Switch condition, children alternated between dogs and bones. In the Inhibit condition, children again stamped dogs only, but bones were also present on the page, serving as potential distractors. Each page required 6 responses. As in the adult version of the Trail Making Test, feedback was given and children were required to correct any errors, so that all stimuli were marked to complete a condition. The examiner scored the number of errors and latency to complete each condition during the assessment. Several children had missing data for one or more conditions ( n = 1, 2, and 5 for the Control, Switch, and Inhibit conditions respectively) due to examiner error or because the child refused to complete all task conditions. Genotyping was conducted using procedures identical to those in Study 1. The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 1.80, d.f. = 1, p = .18. Prenatal tobacco exposure status was determined retrospectively, based on maternal self-report at the time of the preschool assessment. Retrospective recall may have resulted in underreporting of prenatal smoking ( Bardy et al., 1993 ), although some studies have found that retrospective reporting of smoking is consistent with prospective data as long as 4 years later ( Jacobson, Chiodo, Sokol, & Jacobson, 2002 ). Because this study sample was typically-developing and not selected on the basis of prenatal risk factors, reported smoking during pregnancy was substantially less frequent (14%) than in Study 1, resembling the rate reported in non-selected samples to reflect prevalence in the general population ( CDC, 2005 ). Importantly, the proportion of mothers who reported smoking during pregnancy did not differ by child Taq IA genotype or sex, ?2 = .04 and 0.18, d.f. = 1, p s > .67, respectively. Results The number of errors was analyzed using Proc Mixed in SAS 9.1. Taq IA genotype (A1+, A1-), Trails-P condition (Control, Switch, Inhibit), prenatal tobacco exposure status (tobacco-exposed, non-exposed), and their interactions were modeled as fixed effects, and subject was modeled as a random effect. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates to control for their potential influence on performance. Models were trimmed in a in a backwards stepwise manner, where non-significant interactions ( p > .10) were dropped from the model. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates in each model to control for their potential influence on performance., there was a significant genotype by task condition interaction, F (2, 54) = 3.07, p = .05, and a main effect of genotype, F (1, 54) = 4.27, p < .05, but no main effect of task condition, F (2, 54) = 1.31, p > .28. As shown in Figure 2 , analyses of the simple effects of genotype within each condition showed that children with the A1+ allele made significantly more errors than children with the A1- allele in the Switch condition, F (1, 54) = 5.06, p < .03, and in the Inhibit condition, F (1, 54) = 4.80, p < .04, but errors were equivalent between genotype groups for the Control condition, F (1, 54) = 0.55, p = .46. Number of errors was only marginally related to age, F (1, 54) = 3.26, p < .08, and was unrelated to maternal education, F (1, 54) = 0.63, p > .43. Further exploratory analyses were conducted including prenatal tobacco exposure status, but these results must be taken with caution because of the low frequency of tobacco exposure in this sample. When prenatal tobacco exposure status was added to the model, the genotype by task condition remained significant, and there was no hint of a 3-way interaction with PTE ( p > .66). There was a significant interaction of Taq IA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure status, F (1, 52) = 6.97, p < .02. This interaction is shown in Figure 3 . For children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy, the effect of Taq IA genotype was significant, F (1, 52) = 10.62, p < .005. Collapsed across all conditions, children with the A1+ genotype made more errors than children with the A1- genotype. For children whose mothers did not report smoking during pregnancy, there was no difference in the number of errors between genotype groups F (1, 52) = 1.15, p > .29. Viewed another way, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure status was specific to children with the A1+ genotype, F (1, 52) = 6.00, p < .02, and A1- children performed equivalently independent of prenatal exposure status, F (1, 52) = 1.30, p > 0.26. Parallel analyses were conducted for response latencies, and these revealed no significant effects of genotype ( p > .29) or PTE ( p > .23). Discussion As predicted, children's Trails-P performance, a task with substantial demands for executive control of cognition, differed by the child's Taq IA genotype. Children with the A1+ genotype made more errors, but only in those task conditions posited to require greater executive control (i.e., Switch and Inhibit). Taq IA genotype is associated with variation in DRD2 receptor expression in the basal ganglia, which likely supports differences in the efficiency of dopaminergic neurotransmission in these regions. Variations in signaling efficiency might contribute to failure to maintain the stimulus-response rules for the executive conditions, indicated by errors in stamping the stimuli out of sequence. These condition-specific differences were evident even though overall numbers of errors did not differ by condition, and were robust when PTE was added to the model. The exploratory analyses incorporating PTE must be interpreted with caution because of the small number of children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy. Retrospective report of PTE depends on the accuracy of mothers' memories and their willingness to disclose smoking during pregnancy. Preschoolers whose mothers failed to report smoking would have been misclassified as non-exposed, reducing apparent differences between the groups, and working against our hypotheses. The finding of a statistically significant interaction between PTE and DRD2 genotype, where preschoolers with both PTE exposure and the high-risk A1 allele made the most errors in the task across all task conditions regardless of executive control requirements. Although this finding is intriguing, replication in a larger, prospective sample is required before any conclusions are made. In future work, children should be assessed within more narrow age bands to examine whether the genotype by exposure interaction varies at discrete ages within the preschool period. Although the present study did not reveal evidence for such variation, children were recruited to cover the preschool period more broadly, which precluded formally testing this hypothesis.  Study 2: Preschool executive control The preschool years are an important period in the maturation of frontal structures and their connections to cortical and subcortical regions ( Giedd et al., 1999 ; Thatcher, 1994 ), and the concomitant development of executive control of cognition and behavior. During this transition, young children are increasingly required to regulate their cognitive processes and affective expression in the course of their everyday lives in contexts outside the family and home environment, and must modulate their behavior to participate in group settings (e.g., day care or preschool) or public places (e.g., the grocery store), for example when they are required to tolerate delays for gratification. The Trail Making Test ( Reitan, 1955 ) was developed to assess frontal lobe dysfunction in adult patient populations. In this task, participants connect stimuli on a page in sequence. In the Control condition (Condition A), participants connect letters only, whereas in the Switch condition (Condition B), participants must alternate between letters and numbers in sequence. The standard form of this task has been used successfully in older children and adolescents ( Emerson, Mollet, & Harrison, 2005 ). However, because preschool children have emergent literacy and numeracy skills, the standard test lacks validity in young children. Recently, Espy and Cwik (2004) developed an adaptation for use with preschool children, the Trails-P. In the present study, typically-developing preschool children completed the Trails-P and were genotyped on the Taq IA allele. Information was collected retrospectively about PTE, permitting exploratory analyses of GxE interactive effects. However, the proportion of children who had been prenatally exposed to tobacco was substantially lower than in Study 1. The original goal of the preschool study was not related to prenatal exposure, and thus there was not oversampling for exposure. Therefore, retrospective interview may have led to underreporting of prenatal exposure, which must be considered in interpreting the obtained results. Method Participants The sample included 58 typically-developing preschool children (mean age 4 years 6 months, range 3 years 0 months to 6 years 1 month). Demographic information is summarized in Table 3 . As in Study 1, all children included in the present analysis were of White-European ethnicity (see Footnote 1 ). Procedure All children were assessed individually in a child research laboratory. Parents provided written informed consent for their children's participation, and then children completed a task battery that included the Trails-P. Buccal cells were collected through a child-friendly “lollipop taste test” game ( Espy & Hamby, 2002 ). Parents completed a brief interview, including information about maternal educational attainment and smoking during pregnancy. The Preschool Trail Making Test (Trails-P), is administered in a storybook format, where each condition is composed of an array of stimuli (a family of dogs that vary in size) distributed on a page. Children completed the task by marking the stimuli in order from smallest to biggest with a happy-face stamper. Before beginning the task, they were given practice using the stamper and identifying the dogs in order of size on a practice page. In the Control condition, children marked dogs only, whereas in the Switch condition, children alternated between dogs and bones. In the Inhibit condition, children again stamped dogs only, but bones were also present on the page, serving as potential distractors. Each page required 6 responses. As in the adult version of the Trail Making Test, feedback was given and children were required to correct any errors, so that all stimuli were marked to complete a condition. The examiner scored the number of errors and latency to complete each condition during the assessment. Several children had missing data for one or more conditions ( n = 1, 2, and 5 for the Control, Switch, and Inhibit conditions respectively) due to examiner error or because the child refused to complete all task conditions. Genotyping was conducted using procedures identical to those in Study 1. The observed allele frequencies did not differ from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, ?2 = 1.80, d.f. = 1, p = .18. Prenatal tobacco exposure status was determined retrospectively, based on maternal self-report at the time of the preschool assessment. Retrospective recall may have resulted in underreporting of prenatal smoking ( Bardy et al., 1993 ), although some studies have found that retrospective reporting of smoking is consistent with prospective data as long as 4 years later ( Jacobson, Chiodo, Sokol, & Jacobson, 2002 ). Because this study sample was typically-developing and not selected on the basis of prenatal risk factors, reported smoking during pregnancy was substantially less frequent (14%) than in Study 1, resembling the rate reported in non-selected samples to reflect prevalence in the general population ( CDC, 2005 ). Importantly, the proportion of mothers who reported smoking during pregnancy did not differ by child Taq IA genotype or sex, ?2 = .04 and 0.18, d.f. = 1, p s > .67, respectively. Results The number of errors was analyzed using Proc Mixed in SAS 9.1. Taq IA genotype (A1+, A1-), Trails-P condition (Control, Switch, Inhibit), prenatal tobacco exposure status (tobacco-exposed, non-exposed), and their interactions were modeled as fixed effects, and subject was modeled as a random effect. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates to control for their potential influence on performance. Models were trimmed in a in a backwards stepwise manner, where non-significant interactions ( p > .10) were dropped from the model. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates in each model to control for their potential influence on performance., there was a significant genotype by task condition interaction, F (2, 54) = 3.07, p = .05, and a main effect of genotype, F (1, 54) = 4.27, p < .05, but no main effect of task condition, F (2, 54) = 1.31, p > .28. As shown in Figure 2 , analyses of the simple effects of genotype within each condition showed that children with the A1+ allele made significantly more errors than children with the A1- allele in the Switch condition, F (1, 54) = 5.06, p < .03, and in the Inhibit condition, F (1, 54) = 4.80, p < .04, but errors were equivalent between genotype groups for the Control condition, F (1, 54) = 0.55, p = .46. Number of errors was only marginally related to age, F (1, 54) = 3.26, p < .08, and was unrelated to maternal education, F (1, 54) = 0.63, p > .43. Further exploratory analyses were conducted including prenatal tobacco exposure status, but these results must be taken with caution because of the low frequency of tobacco exposure in this sample. When prenatal tobacco exposure status was added to the model, the genotype by task condition remained significant, and there was no hint of a 3-way interaction with PTE ( p > .66). There was a significant interaction of Taq IA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure status, F (1, 52) = 6.97, p < .02. This interaction is shown in Figure 3 . For children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy, the effect of Taq IA genotype was significant, F (1, 52) = 10.62, p < .005. Collapsed across all conditions, children with the A1+ genotype made more errors than children with the A1- genotype. For children whose mothers did not report smoking during pregnancy, there was no difference in the number of errors between genotype groups F (1, 52) = 1.15, p > .29. Viewed another way, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure status was specific to children with the A1+ genotype, F (1, 52) = 6.00, p < .02, and A1- children performed equivalently independent of prenatal exposure status, F (1, 52) = 1.30, p > 0.26. Parallel analyses were conducted for response latencies, and these revealed no significant effects of genotype ( p > .29) or PTE ( p > .23). Discussion As predicted, children's Trails-P performance, a task with substantial demands for executive control of cognition, differed by the child's Taq IA genotype. Children with the A1+ genotype made more errors, but only in those task conditions posited to require greater executive control (i.e., Switch and Inhibit). Taq IA genotype is associated with variation in DRD2 receptor expression in the basal ganglia, which likely supports differences in the efficiency of dopaminergic neurotransmission in these regions. Variations in signaling efficiency might contribute to failure to maintain the stimulus-response rules for the executive conditions, indicated by errors in stamping the stimuli out of sequence. These condition-specific differences were evident even though overall numbers of errors did not differ by condition, and were robust when PTE was added to the model. The exploratory analyses incorporating PTE must be interpreted with caution because of the small number of children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy. Retrospective report of PTE depends on the accuracy of mothers' memories and their willingness to disclose smoking during pregnancy. Preschoolers whose mothers failed to report smoking would have been misclassified as non-exposed, reducing apparent differences between the groups, and working against our hypotheses. The finding of a statistically significant interaction between PTE and DRD2 genotype, where preschoolers with both PTE exposure and the high-risk A1 allele made the most errors in the task across all task conditions regardless of executive control requirements. Although this finding is intriguing, replication in a larger, prospective sample is required before any conclusions are made. In future work, children should be assessed within more narrow age bands to examine whether the genotype by exposure interaction varies at discrete ages within the preschool period. Although the present study did not reveal evidence for such variation, children were recruited to cover the preschool period more broadly, which precluded formally testing this hypothesis.  Results The number of errors was analyzed using Proc Mixed in SAS 9.1. Taq IA genotype (A1+, A1-), Trails-P condition (Control, Switch, Inhibit), prenatal tobacco exposure status (tobacco-exposed, non-exposed), and their interactions were modeled as fixed effects, and subject was modeled as a random effect. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates to control for their potential influence on performance. Models were trimmed in a in a backwards stepwise manner, where non-significant interactions ( p > .10) were dropped from the model. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates in each model to control for their potential influence on performance., there was a significant genotype by task condition interaction, F (2, 54) = 3.07, p = .05, and a main effect of genotype, F (1, 54) = 4.27, p < .05, but no main effect of task condition, F (2, 54) = 1.31, p > .28. As shown in Figure 2 , analyses of the simple effects of genotype within each condition showed that children with the A1+ allele made significantly more errors than children with the A1- allele in the Switch condition, F (1, 54) = 5.06, p < .03, and in the Inhibit condition, F (1, 54) = 4.80, p < .04, but errors were equivalent between genotype groups for the Control condition, F (1, 54) = 0.55, p = .46. Number of errors was only marginally related to age, F (1, 54) = 3.26, p < .08, and was unrelated to maternal education, F (1, 54) = 0.63, p > .43. Further exploratory analyses were conducted including prenatal tobacco exposure status, but these results must be taken with caution because of the low frequency of tobacco exposure in this sample. When prenatal tobacco exposure status was added to the model, the genotype by task condition remained significant, and there was no hint of a 3-way interaction with PTE ( p > .66). There was a significant interaction of Taq IA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure status, F (1, 52) = 6.97, p < .02. This interaction is shown in Figure 3 . For children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy, the effect of Taq IA genotype was significant, F (1, 52) = 10.62, p < .005. Collapsed across all conditions, children with the A1+ genotype made more errors than children with the A1- genotype. For children whose mothers did not report smoking during pregnancy, there was no difference in the number of errors between genotype groups F (1, 52) = 1.15, p > .29. Viewed another way, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure status was specific to children with the A1+ genotype, F (1, 52) = 6.00, p < .02, and A1- children performed equivalently independent of prenatal exposure status, F (1, 52) = 1.30, p > 0.26. Parallel analyses were conducted for response latencies, and these revealed no significant effects of genotype ( p > .29) or PTE ( p > .23).  Results The number of errors was analyzed using Proc Mixed in SAS 9.1. Taq IA genotype (A1+, A1-), Trails-P condition (Control, Switch, Inhibit), prenatal tobacco exposure status (tobacco-exposed, non-exposed), and their interactions were modeled as fixed effects, and subject was modeled as a random effect. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates to control for their potential influence on performance. Models were trimmed in a in a backwards stepwise manner, where non-significant interactions ( p > .10) were dropped from the model. Child age (in months) and maternal education were included as fixed effect covariates in each model to control for their potential influence on performance., there was a significant genotype by task condition interaction, F (2, 54) = 3.07, p = .05, and a main effect of genotype, F (1, 54) = 4.27, p < .05, but no main effect of task condition, F (2, 54) = 1.31, p > .28. As shown in Figure 2 , analyses of the simple effects of genotype within each condition showed that children with the A1+ allele made significantly more errors than children with the A1- allele in the Switch condition, F (1, 54) = 5.06, p < .03, and in the Inhibit condition, F (1, 54) = 4.80, p < .04, but errors were equivalent between genotype groups for the Control condition, F (1, 54) = 0.55, p = .46. Number of errors was only marginally related to age, F (1, 54) = 3.26, p < .08, and was unrelated to maternal education, F (1, 54) = 0.63, p > .43. Further exploratory analyses were conducted including prenatal tobacco exposure status, but these results must be taken with caution because of the low frequency of tobacco exposure in this sample. When prenatal tobacco exposure status was added to the model, the genotype by task condition remained significant, and there was no hint of a 3-way interaction with PTE ( p > .66). There was a significant interaction of Taq IA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure status, F (1, 52) = 6.97, p < .02. This interaction is shown in Figure 3 . For children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy, the effect of Taq IA genotype was significant, F (1, 52) = 10.62, p < .005. Collapsed across all conditions, children with the A1+ genotype made more errors than children with the A1- genotype. For children whose mothers did not report smoking during pregnancy, there was no difference in the number of errors between genotype groups F (1, 52) = 1.15, p > .29. Viewed another way, the effect of prenatal tobacco exposure status was specific to children with the A1+ genotype, F (1, 52) = 6.00, p < .02, and A1- children performed equivalently independent of prenatal exposure status, F (1, 52) = 1.30, p > 0.26. Parallel analyses were conducted for response latencies, and these revealed no significant effects of genotype ( p > .29) or PTE ( p > .23).  Discussion As predicted, children's Trails-P performance, a task with substantial demands for executive control of cognition, differed by the child's Taq IA genotype. Children with the A1+ genotype made more errors, but only in those task conditions posited to require greater executive control (i.e., Switch and Inhibit). Taq IA genotype is associated with variation in DRD2 receptor expression in the basal ganglia, which likely supports differences in the efficiency of dopaminergic neurotransmission in these regions. Variations in signaling efficiency might contribute to failure to maintain the stimulus-response rules for the executive conditions, indicated by errors in stamping the stimuli out of sequence. These condition-specific differences were evident even though overall numbers of errors did not differ by condition, and were robust when PTE was added to the model. The exploratory analyses incorporating PTE must be interpreted with caution because of the small number of children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy. Retrospective report of PTE depends on the accuracy of mothers' memories and their willingness to disclose smoking during pregnancy. Preschoolers whose mothers failed to report smoking would have been misclassified as non-exposed, reducing apparent differences between the groups, and working against our hypotheses. The finding of a statistically significant interaction between PTE and DRD2 genotype, where preschoolers with both PTE exposure and the high-risk A1 allele made the most errors in the task across all task conditions regardless of executive control requirements. Although this finding is intriguing, replication in a larger, prospective sample is required before any conclusions are made. In future work, children should be assessed within more narrow age bands to examine whether the genotype by exposure interaction varies at discrete ages within the preschool period. Although the present study did not reveal evidence for such variation, children were recruited to cover the preschool period more broadly, which precluded formally testing this hypothesis.  Discussion As predicted, children's Trails-P performance, a task with substantial demands for executive control of cognition, differed by the child's Taq IA genotype. Children with the A1+ genotype made more errors, but only in those task conditions posited to require greater executive control (i.e., Switch and Inhibit). Taq IA genotype is associated with variation in DRD2 receptor expression in the basal ganglia, which likely supports differences in the efficiency of dopaminergic neurotransmission in these regions. Variations in signaling efficiency might contribute to failure to maintain the stimulus-response rules for the executive conditions, indicated by errors in stamping the stimuli out of sequence. These condition-specific differences were evident even though overall numbers of errors did not differ by condition, and were robust when PTE was added to the model. The exploratory analyses incorporating PTE must be interpreted with caution because of the small number of children whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy. Retrospective report of PTE depends on the accuracy of mothers' memories and their willingness to disclose smoking during pregnancy. Preschoolers whose mothers failed to report smoking would have been misclassified as non-exposed, reducing apparent differences between the groups, and working against our hypotheses. The finding of a statistically significant interaction between PTE and DRD2 genotype, where preschoolers with both PTE exposure and the high-risk A1 allele made the most errors in the task across all task conditions regardless of executive control requirements. Although this finding is intriguing, replication in a larger, prospective sample is required before any conclusions are made. In future work, children should be assessed within more narrow age bands to examine whether the genotype by exposure interaction varies at discrete ages within the preschool period. Although the present study did not reveal evidence for such variation, children were recruited to cover the preschool period more broadly, which precluded formally testing this hypothesis.  General Discussion Genes have their effect on behavioral outcomes through expression across development, modulated by environmental factors ( Caspi & Moffitt, 2006 ). However, few studies have examined the interaction between genetic and environmental factors at different critical periods in development. In this study, we explored the interaction between DRD2 genotype and PTE within two distinct developmental periods. In early infancy, behavioral regulation is primarily accomplished by early-maturing neural systems responsible for alertness and orienting ( Posner & Rothbart, 2007 ), whereas in the preschool period, the prefrontal circuits underlying executive control are undergoing rapid development, although maturation is not complete until late adolescence ( Giedd et al., 1999 ). At 4 weeks, neonates with the A1+ genotype showed greater attention and less irritable reactivity to auditory/visual stimuli in the absence of prenatal tobacco exposure, whereas for infants whose mothers did not smoke during pregnancy, these genotype-related differences were not apparent. In contrast, preschool children with the A1+ genotype, associated with decreased DRD2 expression and availability, made more errors on Trails-P conditions requiring executive control, suggesting that they had difficulty updating and maintaining the current condition rule. In the subsample of children who had the higher-risk A1+ genotype and whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy, increased difficulties were observed across all task conditions. A fundamental question is that of how early functioning relates to later outcomes. Fundamental differences in neural microstructure and synaptic efficiency, and associated behavioral phenotypes, likely bias the course of later development directly and through further interactions with the environment (e.g., through eliciting particular types of caregiving behavior in the case of irritable temperament). Understanding these pathways is critical in that it will allow identification of children who are most at risk and may benefit from intervention. However, the findings across the two studies presented here are not directly comparable because of the differences in sampling and methods. In Study 1, non-exposed infants with the A1+ genotype evidenced from might be considered “better” performance, that is, higher levels of attention and less irritable reactivity. Within the context of neonatal assessment, where a strange adult has taken charge of the infant to administer a variety of unfamiliar procedures, the most adaptive response might in fact be irritable reactivity, in order to summon the caregiver's assistance. Even in typically developing children, relations between early and later assessments are not always straightforward. For example, infants who performed better on the A-not-B task at age 9 months performed more poorly on an interference control task at age 2 years ( Holmboe, Fearon, Csibra, Tucker, & Johnson, 2008 ). Similarly, precocious reading ability may be a marker for autism spectrum disorder ( Nation, Clarke, Wright, & Williams, 2006 ). Longitudinal studies are necessary to permit consideration of findings in early development in light of later functional outcomes. To begin to address this issue, further follow-up of the Study 1 neonatal sample is planned. More broadly, other postnatal environmental factors must be considered as moderators of the effects of genetic and prenatal environmental risk factors on developmental outcomes. In the research presented here, we attempted to reduce the influence of other environmental factors such as socioeconomic status, birthweight, or prenatal alcohol exposure, through targeted recruitment and selective enrollment in Study 1 and through statistical control in both studies. These procedures, though, do not ensure complete equivalence among exposure groups on measured and unmeasured variables. For example, postnatal tobacco exposure is inevitably correlated with prenatal exposure, and also is associated independently with behavioral outcomes ( Day et al., 2000 ; Herrmann, King, & Weitzman, 2008 ). In Study 1, the amount of tobacco exposure postnatally is likely minimal relative to that incurred prenatally, in that behavioral assessment took place only weeks after birth when many women who quit prenatally have not yet relapsed. In the present sample, 61% of mothers in the TE group reported that they had not smoked any cigarettes between their baby's birth and the time of the infant assessment, and all but one mother reported restrictions on cigarette smoking in the home. Substantiating the veracity of maternal report, infants' urine cotinine levels at the time of assessment did not differ significantly by exposure group, F (1, 83) = 2.69, p > .10. Unfortunately, data on postnatal exposure are not available for the Study 2 sample. Sociocultural factors are particularly important to consider in emerging self-regulation because children's regulatory competence has been linked to parenting style/home characteristics ( Calkins et al., 1998 ; Diener, Mangelsdorf, McHale, & Frosch, 2002 ; Noble et al., 2005 ). Children's executive control skill is responsive to school-based intervention, providing further evidence for plasticity ( Diamond, Barnett, Thomas, & Munro, 2007 ). Contextual factors may affect some children more than others, depending on their genetic liability ( Caspi et al., 2002 ). Child-driven effects are also plausible. For example, early differences in temperament, resulting from the interplay of genetic factors and the prenatal environment, might elicit differences in caregiver responsivity and hence the quality of parent-child interaction (cf. Scarr & McCartney, 1983 ). This discussion has centered on the DRD2 TaqI A genotype, the effect of any candidate gene is undoubtedly qualified by other genetic and environmental influences. The dopaminergic system involves the interplay of many receptor subtypes, along with molecules involved in the production of dopamine and regulation of synaptic dopamine levels. Multiple genes likely are involved, and designs involving multiple candidate genes may reveal gene-gene interactions (e.g., Eisenberg et al., 2007 ). Variations in genotype may also contribute to prenatal exposure effects. Women who smoke throughout pregnancy, women who quit smoking during pregnancy, and women who do not smoke, differ in genetic liability ( Agrawal et al., 2008 ) and the A1+ genotype is in itself associated with nicotine dependence ( Gelernter et al., 2006 ). Unmeasured genetic liability that is shared between mother and offspring cannot be distinguished from prenatal exposure effects in the current study design. Despite these challenges, the field has made tremendous progress in conceptualizing how genes and environment interact to shape developmental outcomes. Such steps foward have resulted in part from technological advances in genetics, and the identification of specific candidate genes related to behavioral phenotypes. However, genetic studies must be accompanied by careful consideration of prenatal risk factors such as maternal smoking, and postnatal environmental factors such as parenting and postnatal tobacco exposure, which further shape the emergence of behavioral competencies, including the capacity to regulate cognition and emotion. To truly understand the dynamic developmental unfolding of these abilities, however, constructs must be measured across time, preferably utilizing longitudinal designs, as the interaction of nature and nurture may differ in its expression in different critical maturational periods  General Discussion Genes have their effect on behavioral outcomes through expression across development, modulated by environmental factors ( Caspi & Moffitt, 2006 ). However, few studies have examined the interaction between genetic and environmental factors at different critical periods in development. In this study, we explored the interaction between DRD2 genotype and PTE within two distinct developmental periods. In early infancy, behavioral regulation is primarily accomplished by early-maturing neural systems responsible for alertness and orienting ( Posner & Rothbart, 2007 ), whereas in the preschool period, the prefrontal circuits underlying executive control are undergoing rapid development, although maturation is not complete until late adolescence ( Giedd et al., 1999 ). At 4 weeks, neonates with the A1+ genotype showed greater attention and less irritable reactivity to auditory/visual stimuli in the absence of prenatal tobacco exposure, whereas for infants whose mothers did not smoke during pregnancy, these genotype-related differences were not apparent. In contrast, preschool children with the A1+ genotype, associated with decreased DRD2 expression and availability, made more errors on Trails-P conditions requiring executive control, suggesting that they had difficulty updating and maintaining the current condition rule. In the subsample of children who had the higher-risk A1+ genotype and whose mothers reported smoking during pregnancy, increased difficulties were observed across all task conditions. A fundamental question is that of how early functioning relates to later outcomes. Fundamental differences in neural microstructure and synaptic efficiency, and associated behavioral phenotypes, likely bias the course of later development directly and through further interactions with the environment (e.g., through eliciting particular types of caregiving behavior in the case of irritable temperament). Understanding these pathways is critical in that it will allow identification of children who are most at risk and may benefit from intervention. However, the findings across the two studies presented here are not directly comparable because of the differences in sampling and methods. In Study 1, non-exposed infants with the A1+ genotype evidenced from might be considered “better” performance, that is, higher levels of attention and less irritable reactivity. Within the context of neonatal assessment, where a strange adult has taken charge of the infant to administer a variety of unfamiliar procedures, the most adaptive response might in fact be irritable reactivity, in order to summon the caregiver's assistance. Even in typically developing children, relations between early and later assessments are not always straightforward. For example, infants who performed better on the A-not-B task at age 9 months performed more poorly on an interference control task at age 2 years ( Holmboe, Fearon, Csibra, Tucker, & Johnson, 2008 ). Similarly, precocious reading ability may be a marker for autism spectrum disorder ( Nation, Clarke, Wright, & Williams, 2006 ). Longitudinal studies are necessary to permit consideration of findings in early development in light of later functional outcomes. To begin to address this issue, further follow-up of the Study 1 neonatal sample is planned. More broadly, other postnatal environmental factors must be considered as moderators of the effects of genetic and prenatal environmental risk factors on developmental outcomes. In the research presented here, we attempted to reduce the influence of other environmental factors such as socioeconomic status, birthweight, or prenatal alcohol exposure, through targeted recruitment and selective enrollment in Study 1 and through statistical control in both studies. These procedures, though, do not ensure complete equivalence among exposure groups on measured and unmeasured variables. For example, postnatal tobacco exposure is inevitably correlated with prenatal exposure, and also is associated independently with behavioral outcomes ( Day et al., 2000 ; Herrmann, King, & Weitzman, 2008 ). In Study 1, the amount of tobacco exposure postnatally is likely minimal relative to that incurred prenatally, in that behavioral assessment took place only weeks after birth when many women who quit prenatally have not yet relapsed. In the present sample, 61% of mothers in the TE group reported that they had not smoked any cigarettes between their baby's birth and the time of the infant assessment, and all but one mother reported restrictions on cigarette smoking in the home. Substantiating the veracity of maternal report, infants' urine cotinine levels at the time of assessment did not differ significantly by exposure group, F (1, 83) = 2.69, p > .10. Unfortunately, data on postnatal exposure are not available for the Study 2 sample. Sociocultural factors are particularly important to consider in emerging self-regulation because children's regulatory competence has been linked to parenting style/home characteristics ( Calkins et al., 1998 ; Diener, Mangelsdorf, McHale, & Frosch, 2002 ; Noble et al., 2005 ). Children's executive control skill is responsive to school-based intervention, providing further evidence for plasticity ( Diamond, Barnett, Thomas, & Munro, 2007 ). Contextual factors may affect some children more than others, depending on their genetic liability ( Caspi et al., 2002 ). Child-driven effects are also plausible. For example, early differences in temperament, resulting from the interplay of genetic factors and the prenatal environment, might elicit differences in caregiver responsivity and hence the quality of parent-child interaction (cf. Scarr & McCartney, 1983 ). This discussion has centered on the DRD2 TaqI A genotype, the effect of any candidate gene is undoubtedly qualified by other genetic and environmental influences. The dopaminergic system involves the interplay of many receptor subtypes, along with molecules involved in the production of dopamine and regulation of synaptic dopamine levels. Multiple genes likely are involved, and designs involving multiple candidate genes may reveal gene-gene interactions (e.g., Eisenberg et al., 2007 ). Variations in genotype may also contribute to prenatal exposure effects. Women who smoke throughout pregnancy, women who quit smoking during pregnancy, and women who do not smoke, differ in genetic liability ( Agrawal et al., 2008 ) and the A1+ genotype is in itself associated with nicotine dependence ( Gelernter et al., 2006 ). Unmeasured genetic liability that is shared between mother and offspring cannot be distinguished from prenatal exposure effects in the current study design. Despite these challenges, the field has made tremendous progress in conceptualizing how genes and environment interact to shape developmental outcomes. Such steps foward have resulted in part from technological advances in genetics, and the identification of specific candidate genes related to behavioral phenotypes. However, genetic studies must be accompanied by careful consideration of prenatal risk factors such as maternal smoking, and postnatal environmental factors such as parenting and postnatal tobacco exposure, which further shape the emergence of behavioral competencies, including the capacity to regulate cognition and emotion. To truly understand the dynamic developmental unfolding of these abilities, however, constructs must be measured across time, preferably utilizing longitudinal designs, as the interaction of nature and nurture may differ in its expression in different critical maturational periods  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Neonatal Attention and Irritable Reactivity, by TaqIA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure, controlling for maternal education, sex, and age at assessment Figure 2 Trails-P error rate, by task condition and TaqIA genotype, controlling for maternal education and age at assessment Figure 3 Trails-P error rate, by TaqIA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure, controlling for maternal education and age at assessment Table 1 Sample demographics and measures of tobacco exposure, by TaqIA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure group Demographic variable A1 Carriers (A1A1 n = 4; A1A2 n = 33) A1 Non-carriers ( n = 61) Tobacco-exposed ( n = 15) Non-exposed ( n = 22) Tobacco-exposed ( n = 27) Non-exposed ( n = 34) M SD M SD M SD M SD Infant sex (% female) † 53.3 -- 36.4 -- 59.3 -- 67.7 -- Birth weight (g) 3447.80 259.70 3262.23 487.07 3522.70 455.11 3571.35 446.91 Gestational age (weeks) † 38.90 1.25 38.98 1.35 39.46 1.22 39.34 1.11 Age at NTA assessment (weeks) 4.20 0.45 4.08 0.50 4.12 0.39 4.20 0.48 Maternal age at delivery (years) 29.92 5.94 26.16 4.83 25.97 5.82 29.49 5.56 Maternal education (years) * 13.80 2.01 14.05 2.06 13.70 1.88 14.94 1.65 Self-reported smoking (cigarettes/day): ?Before last menstrual period 8.38 ( n = 14) 7.05 -- -- 9.34 ( n = 26) 8.31 -- -- ?16 weeks 4.10 ( n = 10) 6.61 -- -- 3.21 ( n = 24) 6.86 -- -- ?28 weeks 2.47 4.19 -- -- 2.38 ( n = 26) 4.25 -- -- ?At delivery 2.27 3.94 -- -- 1.81 ( n = 26) 3.41 -- -- ?At NTA assessment 1.79 ( n = 14) 3.72 -- -- 2.10 3.78 -- -- Cotinine levels: ?16 weeks (maternal urine; ng/mL) * 552.73 ( n = 11) 799.11 2.74 ( n = 19) 6.15 289.08 ( n = 25) 579.53 2.93 ( n = 27) 11.87 ?28 weeks (maternal urine; ng/mL) * 398.80 697.51 6.14 12.46 307.59 571.45 10.82 23.03 ?At delivery (infant meconium; ng/g) 122.27 231.41 0.00 ( n = 21) 0.00 136.08 ( n = 25) 603.88 1.80 ( n = 30) 7.25 ?At NTA assessment (infant urine; ng/mL) 16.92 ( n = 14) 24.13 11.68 ( n = 19) 18.83 20.00 ( n = 22) 25.96 10.18 ( n = 30) 21.28 * differs significantly by exposure group, p ? .05; † differs significantly by genotype group Table 2 Neonatal Temperament Assessment factor structure and observed inter-factor correlations Factor Label Irritable Reactivity Attention Dysregulation to Stress NTA Item Factor Loadings Irritability before feeding 0.401 0.043 0.791 Irritability to visual stimuli 0.879 -0.172 0.422 Irritability to auditory stimuli 0.799 -0.239 0.361 Irritability to physical manipulation 0.897 -0.158 0.424 Irritability to reflex elicitation 0.902 -0.117 0.433 Latency to soothe after Moro reflex 0.669 -0.038 0.366 Soothability after reflex elicitation 0.876 -0.173 0.436 Mean visual following - bullseye -0.252 0.735 0.038 Mean auditory orienting - rattle -0.103 0.859 0.063 Mean auditory orienting - bell -0.051 0.855 0.091 Mean auditory orienting - voice -0.189 0.886 0.110 Mean visual following - face and voice -0.153 0.643 0.103 Overall alertness summary -0.259 0.875 0.045 Stress task soothability summary 0.461 0.046 0.646 Pacifier withdrawal soothability summary 0.400 0.106 0.801 Responsivity to soothing techniques summary 0.405 0.070 0.888 Rated reinforcement value -0.663 0.338 -0.319 Factor Label Sample Factor Score Correlations Irritable Reactivity -- Attention -0.546 *** -- Dysregulation to Stress 0.432 *** -0.085 -- *** p < .0001 Note: Factor loadings above .60 are presented in bold. Table 3 Sample demographics, by TaqIA genotype group Demographic variable A1 Carriers (A1A1, n = 2; A1A2, n = 25) A1 Non-carriers (A2A2, n = 31) M SD M SD Gender (% female) 59% -- 55% -- Age at assessment (years) 4.5 0.77 4.6 0.79 Maternal education (years) * 12.9 1.82 14.9 2.64 Prenatal tobacco exposure (% exposed) 15% -- 13% -- * differs significantly by genotype group, p ? .05.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Neonatal Attention and Irritable Reactivity, by TaqIA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure, controlling for maternal education, sex, and age at assessment Figure 2 Trails-P error rate, by task condition and TaqIA genotype, controlling for maternal education and age at assessment Figure 3 Trails-P error rate, by TaqIA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure, controlling for maternal education and age at assessment Table 1 Sample demographics and measures of tobacco exposure, by TaqIA genotype and prenatal tobacco exposure group Demographic variable A1 Carriers (A1A1 n = 4; A1A2 n = 33) A1 Non-carriers ( n = 61) Tobacco-exposed ( n = 15) Non-exposed ( n = 22) Tobacco-exposed ( n = 27) Non-exposed ( n = 34) M SD M SD M SD M SD Infant sex (% female) † 53.3 -- 36.4 -- 59.3 -- 67.7 -- Birth weight (g) 3447.80 259.70 3262.23 487.07 3522.70 455.11 3571.35 446.91 Gestational age (weeks) † 38.90 1.25 38.98 1.35 39.46 1.22 39.34 1.11 Age at NTA assessment (weeks) 4.20 0.45 4.08 0.50 4.12 0.39 4.20 0.48 Maternal age at delivery (years) 29.92 5.94 26.16 4.83 25.97 5.82 29.49 5.56 Maternal education (years) * 13.80 2.01 14.05 2.06 13.70 1.88 14.94 1.65 Self-reported smoking (cigarettes/day): ?Before last menstrual period 8.38 ( n = 14) 7.05 -- -- 9.34 ( n = 26) 8.31 -- -- ?16 weeks 4.10 ( n = 10) 6.61 -- -- 3.21 ( n = 24) 6.86 -- -- ?28 weeks 2.47 4.19 -- -- 2.38 ( n = 26) 4.25 -- -- ?At delivery 2.27 3.94 -- -- 1.81 ( n = 26) 3.41 -- -- ?At NTA assessment 1.79 ( n = 14) 3.72 -- -- 2.10 3.78 -- -- Cotinine levels: ?16 weeks (maternal urine; ng/mL) * 552.73 ( n = 11) 799.11 2.74 ( n = 19) 6.15 289.08 ( n = 25) 579.53 2.93 ( n = 27) 11.87 ?28 weeks (maternal urine; ng/mL) * 398.80 697.51 6.14 12.46 307.59 571.45 10.82 23.03 ?At delivery (infant meconium; ng/g) 122.27 231.41 0.00 ( n = 21) 0.00 136.08 ( n = 25) 603.88 1.80 ( n = 30) 7.25 ?At NTA assessment (infant urine; ng/mL) 16.92 ( n = 14) 24.13 11.68 ( n = 19) 18.83 20.00 ( n = 22) 25.96 10.18 ( n = 30) 21.28 * differs significantly by exposure group, p ? .05; † differs significantly by genotype group Table 2 Neonatal Temperament Assessment factor structure and observed inter-factor correlations Factor Label Irritable Reactivity Attention Dysregulation to Stress NTA Item Factor Loadings Irritability before feeding 0.401 0.043 0.791 Irritability to visual stimuli 0.879 -0.172 0.422 Irritability to auditory stimuli 0.799 -0.239 0.361 Irritability to physical manipulation 0.897 -0.158 0.424 Irritability to reflex elicitation 0.902 -0.117 0.433 Latency to soothe after Moro reflex 0.669 -0.038 0.366 Soothability after reflex elicitation 0.876 -0.173 0.436 Mean visual following - bullseye -0.252 0.735 0.038 Mean auditory orienting - rattle -0.103 0.859 0.063 Mean auditory orienting - bell -0.051 0.855 0.091 Mean auditory orienting - voice -0.189 0.886 0.110 Mean visual following - face and voice -0.153 0.643 0.103 Overall alertness summary -0.259 0.875 0.045 Stress task soothability summary 0.461 0.046 0.646 Pacifier withdrawal soothability summary 0.400 0.106 0.801 Responsivity to soothing techniques summary 0.405 0.070 0.888 Rated reinforcement value -0.663 0.338 -0.319 Factor Label Sample Factor Score Correlations Irritable Reactivity -- Attention -0.546 *** -- Dysregulation to Stress 0.432 *** -0.085 -- *** p < .0001 Note: Factor loadings above .60 are presented in bold. Table 3 Sample demographics, by TaqIA genotype group Demographic variable A1 Carriers (A1A1, n = 2; A1A2, n = 25) A1 Non-carriers (A2A2, n = 31) M SD M SD Gender (% female) 59% -- 55% -- Age at assessment (years) 4.5 0.77 4.6 0.79 Maternal education (years) * 12.9 1.82 14.9 2.64 Prenatal tobacco exposure (% exposed) 15% -- 13% -- * differs significantly by genotype group, p ? .05. 