Geriatric Assessment in Older Patients with Breast Cancer Most cases of breast cancer are diagnosed in older adults. Compared with younger women, older women as a group are at increased risk for breast-cancer-specific mortality and at higher risk for treatment-associated morbidity as well. At the same time, older women are less likely to be offered preventive care or adjuvant therapy for this disease. There are major gaps in evidence regarding the optimal evaluation and treatment of older women with breast cancer due to significant under-representation in clinical trials. Chronologic age alone is an inadequate predictor of treatment tolerance and benefit in this heterogeneous population. Multiple issues uniquely associated with aging have an impact on cancer care, including functional impairment, comorbidity, social support, cognitive function, psychological state, and financial stress. Applying geriatric principles and assessment to this older adult population would inform decision-making, by providing estimates of life expectancy and identifying individuals most vulnerable to morbidity. Ongoing research is seeking to identify which assessment tools can best predict outcomes in this population, and thus guide us in tailoring treatments to maximize benefits in older adults with breast cancer.  Conclusions Most breast cancers occur in older adults. Factors other than chronological age, which are addressed in a geriatric assessment, independently predict morbidity and mortality and can alter the spectrum of cancer care from diagnosis to treatment to outcome. In this article, we discuss the standard components of a geriatric assessment and highlight screening tools that can be used in daily practice to measure each of the domains. Further research is needed to identify which domains, as well as specific questions within each domain, most effectively predict morbidity and mortality among older adults with breast cancer, and to develop interventions that will help vulnerable older adults with breast cancer receive quality cancer care. Further study that integrates geriatric and oncology care principles should provide us with the guidelines we need. 