Does ORIF of an OCD Loose Body Result in Healing and Long Term Maintenance of Knee Function? Background Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) can progress to loose body formation resulting in a Grade IV defect. The decision to fix versus excise the loose body is controversial. Published operative fixation outcomes are small case series with short follow-up. Hypothesis Operative fixation (ORIF) of the loose body into the grade IV defect will heal and approximate “normal” knee function at long-term follow-up. Study Design Case series Methods Twelve patients were identified who underwent ORIF of a knee OCD loose body into the Grade IV osteochondral defects ranging in size from 2.0 to 8.0 cm2 (mean 3.5 cm2). After 12 weeks, hardware was removed and healing was assessed. Long-term outcomes were assessed with a Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) and a Marx activity score. Results Arthroscopy for screw removal revealed stable healing in 92% (11/12) of patients. No patients required subsequent surgery for a loose body. At an average of 9.2 years follow-up (range 3.8-15.8 years) 83 % (10/12) of patients completed the KOOS. KOOS subscale scores for pain (mean 87.8, range 67-100), other symptoms (mean 81.8, range 61-96), function in activities of daily living (mean 93.1, range 72-100), and sports and recreation function (mean 74.0, range 40-100) were not significantly lower than published age matched controls. However the KOOS subscale for knee related quality of life (mean 61.9, range 31-88) was significantly lower (p = 0.003). Conclusions Operative fixation of Grade IV OCD loose bodies results in stable fixation. At an average 9 years after surgery, patients did not have symptoms of osteoarthritis pain and had normal function in activities of daily life. However, patients reported significantly lower knee related quality of life. Operative fixation of OCD loose bodies is a better alternative to lesion excision.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Identification of patients A search of billing records at our institution was undertaken to identify all patients who underwent operative fixation of osteochondritis dissecans lesions by the senior author between January 1, 1991, and December 31, 2006. A search for CPT codes 29885 (Drilling for osteochondritis dissecans with bone grafting with or without internal fixation) and 29887 (Drilling for intact osteochondritis dissecans lesion with internal fixation) identified 36 patients. Medical records of these patients were reviewed and 24 patients were excluded because the lesion had not progressed to a loose body and remained in the defect (14 patients), because they underwent drilling of the lesion without fixation of the loose body (5 patients), or because the defect was purely chondral without attached subchondral bone (5 patients). The remaining 12 patients had Grade IV defects and underwent fixation of the loose body into the defect. These patients form the study group. Operative Technique and Post-operative Protocol A diagnostic arthroscopy was performed in each case to localize the OCD lesion and to find and assess the loose bodies. The anteromedial or anterolateral portal was then extended into a mini-arthrotomy to visualize the lesions located on the medial or lateral femoral condyles or trochlea. In two cases the lesion was located on the medial facet of the patella, requiring a larger arthrotomy and complete eversion of the patella to gain access to the lesion. In each instance the loose body was extracted from the knee and all fibrous tissue removed. The OCD defect was then drilled with a Kirschner wire and curetted to bleeding bone. The loose body was then positioned in the defect to assess its relative size. When the loose body was large than the defect, it was trimmed appropriately to fit the defect. If the defect was larger than the loose body, proximal tibial cancellous autograft was packed in the lesion until the size of the defect matched that of the loose body. The loose body was then positioned in the defect and fixed in place using one to four metal cortex screws (Synthes USA, West Chester, PA) ranging in size from 1.5 to 2.7 mm. Screws were sunk until the head was flush with the articular cartilage. Post-operatively, patients were allowed full range of motion but kept non-weightbearing status on the operative extremity for 12 weeks. Continuous passive motion (CPM) devices were not utilized. Arthroscopy for Removal of Hardware All patients returned to the operating room 12 weeks after the index procedure for diagnostic arthroscopy and screw removal. The repaired lesion was identified and probed arthroscopically and the stability of the replaced loose body was noted. Hardware was removed from fifteen patients arthroscopically, while the two patients with patellar defects required mini-arthrotomy for hardware removal. Lesion stability was again assessed after hardware removal. One patient with an incompletely healed lesion underwent repeat fixation with subsequent hardware removal 12 weeks later. Follow-up After approval by our institutional review board, attempts were made to contact the 12 patients identified above by telephone. Those patients who were located were asked if they required subsequent surgery on the operative knee and operative reports were obtained for any subsequent procedures. Additionally, the patients were asked to complete a questionnaire which allowed calculation of a Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) 53 and a Marx activity score. 45 Data Analysis A KOOS and Marx activity score were calculated for each patient that completed the questionnaire. A mean and standard deviation was then calculated for the Marx activity score as well as the five components of the KOOS. The five KOOS components were then compared to previously published reference data 50 for patients in this age group using a t-test. Statistical analysis was performed using Medcalc (Mariakerke, Belgium).  Identification of patients A search of billing records at our institution was undertaken to identify all patients who underwent operative fixation of osteochondritis dissecans lesions by the senior author between January 1, 1991, and December 31, 2006. A search for CPT codes 29885 (Drilling for osteochondritis dissecans with bone grafting with or without internal fixation) and 29887 (Drilling for intact osteochondritis dissecans lesion with internal fixation) identified 36 patients. Medical records of these patients were reviewed and 24 patients were excluded because the lesion had not progressed to a loose body and remained in the defect (14 patients), because they underwent drilling of the lesion without fixation of the loose body (5 patients), or because the defect was purely chondral without attached subchondral bone (5 patients). The remaining 12 patients had Grade IV defects and underwent fixation of the loose body into the defect. These patients form the study group.  Operative Technique and Post-operative Protocol A diagnostic arthroscopy was performed in each case to localize the OCD lesion and to find and assess the loose bodies. The anteromedial or anterolateral portal was then extended into a mini-arthrotomy to visualize the lesions located on the medial or lateral femoral condyles or trochlea. In two cases the lesion was located on the medial facet of the patella, requiring a larger arthrotomy and complete eversion of the patella to gain access to the lesion. In each instance the loose body was extracted from the knee and all fibrous tissue removed. The OCD defect was then drilled with a Kirschner wire and curetted to bleeding bone. The loose body was then positioned in the defect to assess its relative size. When the loose body was large than the defect, it was trimmed appropriately to fit the defect. If the defect was larger than the loose body, proximal tibial cancellous autograft was packed in the lesion until the size of the defect matched that of the loose body. The loose body was then positioned in the defect and fixed in place using one to four metal cortex screws (Synthes USA, West Chester, PA) ranging in size from 1.5 to 2.7 mm. Screws were sunk until the head was flush with the articular cartilage. Post-operatively, patients were allowed full range of motion but kept non-weightbearing status on the operative extremity for 12 weeks. Continuous passive motion (CPM) devices were not utilized.  Arthroscopy for Removal of Hardware All patients returned to the operating room 12 weeks after the index procedure for diagnostic arthroscopy and screw removal. The repaired lesion was identified and probed arthroscopically and the stability of the replaced loose body was noted. Hardware was removed from fifteen patients arthroscopically, while the two patients with patellar defects required mini-arthrotomy for hardware removal. Lesion stability was again assessed after hardware removal. One patient with an incompletely healed lesion underwent repeat fixation with subsequent hardware removal 12 weeks later.  Follow-up After approval by our institutional review board, attempts were made to contact the 12 patients identified above by telephone. Those patients who were located were asked if they required subsequent surgery on the operative knee and operative reports were obtained for any subsequent procedures. Additionally, the patients were asked to complete a questionnaire which allowed calculation of a Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) 53 and a Marx activity score. 45  Data Analysis A KOOS and Marx activity score were calculated for each patient that completed the questionnaire. A mean and standard deviation was then calculated for the Marx activity score as well as the five components of the KOOS. The five KOOS components were then compared to previously published reference data 50 for patients in this age group using a t-test. Statistical analysis was performed using Medcalc (Mariakerke, Belgium).  RESULTS Patient Demographics The 12 patients identified above included 6 males (50 %) and ranged in age from 12 to 34 years (mean 19.2 years) at the time of surgery. Seven patients (58 %) were skeletally mature at the time of the procedure. Duration of symptoms ranged from 0.5 to 18 months (mean 4.7 months). Defects ranged in size from 2.0 to 8.0 cm2 (mean 3.5 cm2). Lesions were located on the medial femoral condyle (42 %), lateral femoral condyle (25 %), lateral trochlea (17 %), and medial facet of the patella (17 %). All twelve repaired loose bodies were osteochondral fragments with bone attached. These data are summarized in Table 1 . Follow-up Twelve patients (100 %) returned to the operating room for arthroscopic hardware removal 12 weeks post-operatively. We were able to contact 11 patients (92 %) at a mean of 9.5 (range 3.8 – 15.8) years post-operative and inquire about further surgical intervention on the index knee. Our outcome questionnaire was completed and returned by 10 patients (83 %). One patient was unable to complete the questionnaire due to severe mental illness and one patient was not located. Findings at Removal of Hardware as 12 Weeks Each repaired defect was examined after removal of hardware at 12 weeks post-operative. Sixteen of seventeen lesions were noted to be completely healed and stable to probing. One patient with a large (8 cm2) lesion was noted to be partially healed. Approximately 75 % of the lesion had fully healed while the remaining 25 % was noted to be loose This portion was removed, the bed was curetted to bleeding bone, and the piece was attached again with screws. At repeat arthroscopy 12 weeks later the entire lesion was noted to be healed and stable. Repeat Surgery The eleven patients who were contacted by telephone were asked if they had undergone any surgery on the index knee after removal of hardware. Only one patient had undergone additional surgery on the knee because of pain after a re-injury. Review of the operative report indicated that the repaired lesion was stable and grade II fibrillation of the surrounding articular cartilage was noted and debrided. Clinical Outcome The ten patients that completed the questionnaire had a mean Marx activity score of 4.6. KOOS subscale scores for pain (mean 87.8, range 67-100), other symptoms (mean 81.8, range 61-96), function in activities of daily living (mean 93.1, range 72-100), and sports and recreation function (mean 74.0, range 40-100) were not significantly different from published age-matched controls. However the KOOS subscale score for knee related quality of life (mean 61.9, range 31-88) was significantly different from published age-matched controls (p = 0.003). These data are presented in full in Table 2 . No correlation was noted between Marx activity score and any KOOS subscale. Complications No patients experienced any perioperative complications at either the index surgery or subsequent removal of hardware. Two patients (17 %) were noted to have minor scuffing of the articular cartilage of the tibial plateau adjacent to the repaired lesion  RESULTS Patient Demographics The 12 patients identified above included 6 males (50 %) and ranged in age from 12 to 34 years (mean 19.2 years) at the time of surgery. Seven patients (58 %) were skeletally mature at the time of the procedure. Duration of symptoms ranged from 0.5 to 18 months (mean 4.7 months). Defects ranged in size from 2.0 to 8.0 cm2 (mean 3.5 cm2). Lesions were located on the medial femoral condyle (42 %), lateral femoral condyle (25 %), lateral trochlea (17 %), and medial facet of the patella (17 %). All twelve repaired loose bodies were osteochondral fragments with bone attached. These data are summarized in Table 1 . Follow-up Twelve patients (100 %) returned to the operating room for arthroscopic hardware removal 12 weeks post-operatively. We were able to contact 11 patients (92 %) at a mean of 9.5 (range 3.8 – 15.8) years post-operative and inquire about further surgical intervention on the index knee. Our outcome questionnaire was completed and returned by 10 patients (83 %). One patient was unable to complete the questionnaire due to severe mental illness and one patient was not located. Findings at Removal of Hardware as 12 Weeks Each repaired defect was examined after removal of hardware at 12 weeks post-operative. Sixteen of seventeen lesions were noted to be completely healed and stable to probing. One patient with a large (8 cm2) lesion was noted to be partially healed. Approximately 75 % of the lesion had fully healed while the remaining 25 % was noted to be loose This portion was removed, the bed was curetted to bleeding bone, and the piece was attached again with screws. At repeat arthroscopy 12 weeks later the entire lesion was noted to be healed and stable. Repeat Surgery The eleven patients who were contacted by telephone were asked if they had undergone any surgery on the index knee after removal of hardware. Only one patient had undergone additional surgery on the knee because of pain after a re-injury. Review of the operative report indicated that the repaired lesion was stable and grade II fibrillation of the surrounding articular cartilage was noted and debrided. Clinical Outcome The ten patients that completed the questionnaire had a mean Marx activity score of 4.6. KOOS subscale scores for pain (mean 87.8, range 67-100), other symptoms (mean 81.8, range 61-96), function in activities of daily living (mean 93.1, range 72-100), and sports and recreation function (mean 74.0, range 40-100) were not significantly different from published age-matched controls. However the KOOS subscale score for knee related quality of life (mean 61.9, range 31-88) was significantly different from published age-matched controls (p = 0.003). These data are presented in full in Table 2 . No correlation was noted between Marx activity score and any KOOS subscale. Complications No patients experienced any perioperative complications at either the index surgery or subsequent removal of hardware. Two patients (17 %) were noted to have minor scuffing of the articular cartilage of the tibial plateau adjacent to the repaired lesion  Patient Demographics The 12 patients identified above included 6 males (50 %) and ranged in age from 12 to 34 years (mean 19.2 years) at the time of surgery. Seven patients (58 %) were skeletally mature at the time of the procedure. Duration of symptoms ranged from 0.5 to 18 months (mean 4.7 months). Defects ranged in size from 2.0 to 8.0 cm2 (mean 3.5 cm2). Lesions were located on the medial femoral condyle (42 %), lateral femoral condyle (25 %), lateral trochlea (17 %), and medial facet of the patella (17 %). All twelve repaired loose bodies were osteochondral fragments with bone attached. These data are summarized in Table 1 .  Patient Demographics The 12 patients identified above included 6 males (50 %) and ranged in age from 12 to 34 years (mean 19.2 years) at the time of surgery. Seven patients (58 %) were skeletally mature at the time of the procedure. Duration of symptoms ranged from 0.5 to 18 months (mean 4.7 months). Defects ranged in size from 2.0 to 8.0 cm2 (mean 3.5 cm2). Lesions were located on the medial femoral condyle (42 %), lateral femoral condyle (25 %), lateral trochlea (17 %), and medial facet of the patella (17 %). All twelve repaired loose bodies were osteochondral fragments with bone attached. These data are summarized in Table 1 .  Follow-up Twelve patients (100 %) returned to the operating room for arthroscopic hardware removal 12 weeks post-operatively. We were able to contact 11 patients (92 %) at a mean of 9.5 (range 3.8 – 15.8) years post-operative and inquire about further surgical intervention on the index knee. Our outcome questionnaire was completed and returned by 10 patients (83 %). One patient was unable to complete the questionnaire due to severe mental illness and one patient was not located.  Follow-up Twelve patients (100 %) returned to the operating room for arthroscopic hardware removal 12 weeks post-operatively. We were able to contact 11 patients (92 %) at a mean of 9.5 (range 3.8 – 15.8) years post-operative and inquire about further surgical intervention on the index knee. Our outcome questionnaire was completed and returned by 10 patients (83 %). One patient was unable to complete the questionnaire due to severe mental illness and one patient was not located.  Findings at Removal of Hardware as 12 Weeks Each repaired defect was examined after removal of hardware at 12 weeks post-operative. Sixteen of seventeen lesions were noted to be completely healed and stable to probing. One patient with a large (8 cm2) lesion was noted to be partially healed. Approximately 75 % of the lesion had fully healed while the remaining 25 % was noted to be loose This portion was removed, the bed was curetted to bleeding bone, and the piece was attached again with screws. At repeat arthroscopy 12 weeks later the entire lesion was noted to be healed and stable.  Findings at Removal of Hardware as 12 Weeks Each repaired defect was examined after removal of hardware at 12 weeks post-operative. Sixteen of seventeen lesions were noted to be completely healed and stable to probing. One patient with a large (8 cm2) lesion was noted to be partially healed. Approximately 75 % of the lesion had fully healed while the remaining 25 % was noted to be loose This portion was removed, the bed was curetted to bleeding bone, and the piece was attached again with screws. At repeat arthroscopy 12 weeks later the entire lesion was noted to be healed and stable.  Repeat Surgery The eleven patients who were contacted by telephone were asked if they had undergone any surgery on the index knee after removal of hardware. Only one patient had undergone additional surgery on the knee because of pain after a re-injury. Review of the operative report indicated that the repaired lesion was stable and grade II fibrillation of the surrounding articular cartilage was noted and debrided.  Repeat Surgery The eleven patients who were contacted by telephone were asked if they had undergone any surgery on the index knee after removal of hardware. Only one patient had undergone additional surgery on the knee because of pain after a re-injury. Review of the operative report indicated that the repaired lesion was stable and grade II fibrillation of the surrounding articular cartilage was noted and debrided.  Clinical Outcome The ten patients that completed the questionnaire had a mean Marx activity score of 4.6. KOOS subscale scores for pain (mean 87.8, range 67-100), other symptoms (mean 81.8, range 61-96), function in activities of daily living (mean 93.1, range 72-100), and sports and recreation function (mean 74.0, range 40-100) were not significantly different from published age-matched controls. However the KOOS subscale score for knee related quality of life (mean 61.9, range 31-88) was significantly different from published age-matched controls (p = 0.003). These data are presented in full in Table 2 . No correlation was noted between Marx activity score and any KOOS subscale.  Clinical Outcome The ten patients that completed the questionnaire had a mean Marx activity score of 4.6. KOOS subscale scores for pain (mean 87.8, range 67-100), other symptoms (mean 81.8, range 61-96), function in activities of daily living (mean 93.1, range 72-100), and sports and recreation function (mean 74.0, range 40-100) were not significantly different from published age-matched controls. However the KOOS subscale score for knee related quality of life (mean 61.9, range 31-88) was significantly different from published age-matched controls (p = 0.003). These data are presented in full in Table 2 . No correlation was noted between Marx activity score and any KOOS subscale.  Complications No patients experienced any perioperative complications at either the index surgery or subsequent removal of hardware. Two patients (17 %) were noted to have minor scuffing of the articular cartilage of the tibial plateau adjacent to the repaired lesion  Complications No patients experienced any perioperative complications at either the index surgery or subsequent removal of hardware. Two patients (17 %) were noted to have minor scuffing of the articular cartilage of the tibial plateau adjacent to the repaired lesion  DISCUSSION Treatment of patients with grade IV OCD lesions is complicated by a lack of published data on the outcomes of different treatment options. Good short term results have been reported with excision of the loose body and treatment of the defect with drilling, microfracture, or abrasion. Ewing and Voto noted 79 % of patients had satisfactory results at 1 year while Denoncourt et al demonstrated the presence of fibrocartilage in the defect at 5-15 months after surgery. 15 , 19 However, significantly poorer results have been noted with longer term follow-up. 2 , 4 , 61 Several authors have attempted articular chondrocyte implantation (ACI) in conjunction with loose body excision for the treatment of osteochondritis dissecans. All have shown significantly worse results in these patients than patient with osteochondral defects from other etiologies, with failure rates ranging from 14 to 67 %. 38 , 51 , 52 One case study documented a good result when repaired the lesion with an osteochondral autograft 6 while other authors have found that results of osteochondral autograft transfer are similar in patients with osteochondritis dissecans to those with defects from other etiologies. 33 Multiple authors have opined that when possible, replacement and fixation of the loose body in the defect provides the best opportunity for the restoration of normal anatomy and function. A review of the literature on this subject yielded 19 case reports and case series describing fixation of OCD lesions that included at least one grade IV defect. These studies are summarized in Table 3 . 3 , 11 , 16 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 31 , 32 , 36 , 37 , 41 , 42 , 46 , 47 , 49 , 55 - 57 , 62 The results reported in these series are generally good, although incompletely reported. Many studies do not describe the number of lesions initially treated, instead reporting only the number evaluated in follow-up. Lesion size is frequently omitted and follow-up is short or of unreported duration. Outcome measures are limited to radiographic assessments of union and clinical outcomes generally described as excellent, good, fair, or poor. The current series provides short-term arthroscopic evaluation of union as well as long-term follow-up using validated clinical outcome tools with greater than 80 % follow-up. Our data indicate that ORIF of the loose bodies in grade IV OCD results in stable union in 92 % of cases at 12 weeks. Long-term follow-up demonstrates that these patients have not required subsequent surgery on the index knee for loose bodies and are able to function at a nearly normal level in activities of daily living without significant pain or knee symptoms. However, it is clear that these patients’ knees are not normal, as evidenced by the statistically significant departure from normal controls in the knee related quality of life subscale of the KOOS. This finding likely represents a true clinical difference as well, as the difference exceeds minimum perceptible change in KOOS subscale which is felt to be 10 points. 17 , 53 While no rigid KOOS score cutoff exists that defines a symptomatic knee, Englund et al attempted to develop such criteria in a series of patients followed for 16 years after partial meniscectomy. 18 They defined a “symptomatic knee” as those in which the knee related quality of life and at least 2 of the other 4 subscales exhibited a decrease in score consistent with at least half of the questions being answered with at least a 1 point decrease from the best response. By these criteria, 50 % of their patients had a “symptomatic knee.” However, only half of these patients also showed radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis. Utilizing the KOOS subscale cutoffs described above, four of the ten patients in our series have a “symptomatic knee” at 8 year follow-up. Significant limitations exist in this study. First, our utilization of a mailed questionnaire to obtain long-term follow-up exposes the study to certain biases. As was demonstrated by Kim et al , patients with poorer outcomes are less likely to return questionnaires and tend to take longer to return them when they do so. 35 We attempted to minimize this possible bias by being persistent in our data gathering but our failure to obtain 100 % follow-up must be considered when interpreting data from a small cohort of patients. Further, our long-term results consist only of patient reported outcomes and a determination of whether the patient required subsequent surgery on the index knee. No imaging was obtained to verify the position of the repaired loose body long-term. We believe that given the size and bony nature of the loose bodies, they would be symptomatic and require excision or repeat fixation if they were to again become loose bodies. This supposition is supported by the fact the patients initially had sufficient symptoms from these loose bodies that they required operative fixation. Additionally, we describe one method of treatment for this patient group without inclusion of a control group or comparison with another treatment method. However, previous authors have demonstrated poor outcomes or evidence of osteoarthritis in 50 to 75 % of patients at 5-15 year follow-up. 2 , 4 , 27 , 61 We feel this series demonstrates a viable alternative to lesion excision by operative fixation of loose bodies. Finally, the relatively small number of patients included in the study limits the accuracy of correlations made between patient and lesion characteristics and outcome. Specifically, our study only included two patients with patellar defects and one was lost to follow-up. The patient with a patellar defect available for long-term follow-up demonstrated the lowest scores in nearly all KOOS subscales and the lowest Marx activity score. Given the relatively poor results of treatment of articular cartilage defects of the patella with multiple techniques, 9 , 26 increased difficulty in treating OCD lesions in this location are not unexpected. Similarly, we were unable to demonstrate any relationship between lesion size and clinical outcome as has been previously described. 10 , 28 , 29 Outcome data on more patients are necessary to determine the influence of lesion size and location on clinical outcome.  DISCUSSION Treatment of patients with grade IV OCD lesions is complicated by a lack of published data on the outcomes of different treatment options. Good short term results have been reported with excision of the loose body and treatment of the defect with drilling, microfracture, or abrasion. Ewing and Voto noted 79 % of patients had satisfactory results at 1 year while Denoncourt et al demonstrated the presence of fibrocartilage in the defect at 5-15 months after surgery. 15 , 19 However, significantly poorer results have been noted with longer term follow-up. 2 , 4 , 61 Several authors have attempted articular chondrocyte implantation (ACI) in conjunction with loose body excision for the treatment of osteochondritis dissecans. All have shown significantly worse results in these patients than patient with osteochondral defects from other etiologies, with failure rates ranging from 14 to 67 %. 38 , 51 , 52 One case study documented a good result when repaired the lesion with an osteochondral autograft 6 while other authors have found that results of osteochondral autograft transfer are similar in patients with osteochondritis dissecans to those with defects from other etiologies. 33 Multiple authors have opined that when possible, replacement and fixation of the loose body in the defect provides the best opportunity for the restoration of normal anatomy and function. A review of the literature on this subject yielded 19 case reports and case series describing fixation of OCD lesions that included at least one grade IV defect. These studies are summarized in Table 3 . 3 , 11 , 16 , 22 , 23 , 25 , 31 , 32 , 36 , 37 , 41 , 42 , 46 , 47 , 49 , 55 - 57 , 62 The results reported in these series are generally good, although incompletely reported. Many studies do not describe the number of lesions initially treated, instead reporting only the number evaluated in follow-up. Lesion size is frequently omitted and follow-up is short or of unreported duration. Outcome measures are limited to radiographic assessments of union and clinical outcomes generally described as excellent, good, fair, or poor. The current series provides short-term arthroscopic evaluation of union as well as long-term follow-up using validated clinical outcome tools with greater than 80 % follow-up. Our data indicate that ORIF of the loose bodies in grade IV OCD results in stable union in 92 % of cases at 12 weeks. Long-term follow-up demonstrates that these patients have not required subsequent surgery on the index knee for loose bodies and are able to function at a nearly normal level in activities of daily living without significant pain or knee symptoms. However, it is clear that these patients’ knees are not normal, as evidenced by the statistically significant departure from normal controls in the knee related quality of life subscale of the KOOS. This finding likely represents a true clinical difference as well, as the difference exceeds minimum perceptible change in KOOS subscale which is felt to be 10 points. 17 , 53 While no rigid KOOS score cutoff exists that defines a symptomatic knee, Englund et al attempted to develop such criteria in a series of patients followed for 16 years after partial meniscectomy. 18 They defined a “symptomatic knee” as those in which the knee related quality of life and at least 2 of the other 4 subscales exhibited a decrease in score consistent with at least half of the questions being answered with at least a 1 point decrease from the best response. By these criteria, 50 % of their patients had a “symptomatic knee.” However, only half of these patients also showed radiographic evidence of osteoarthritis. Utilizing the KOOS subscale cutoffs described above, four of the ten patients in our series have a “symptomatic knee” at 8 year follow-up. Significant limitations exist in this study. First, our utilization of a mailed questionnaire to obtain long-term follow-up exposes the study to certain biases. As was demonstrated by Kim et al , patients with poorer outcomes are less likely to return questionnaires and tend to take longer to return them when they do so. 35 We attempted to minimize this possible bias by being persistent in our data gathering but our failure to obtain 100 % follow-up must be considered when interpreting data from a small cohort of patients. Further, our long-term results consist only of patient reported outcomes and a determination of whether the patient required subsequent surgery on the index knee. No imaging was obtained to verify the position of the repaired loose body long-term. We believe that given the size and bony nature of the loose bodies, they would be symptomatic and require excision or repeat fixation if they were to again become loose bodies. This supposition is supported by the fact the patients initially had sufficient symptoms from these loose bodies that they required operative fixation. Additionally, we describe one method of treatment for this patient group without inclusion of a control group or comparison with another treatment method. However, previous authors have demonstrated poor outcomes or evidence of osteoarthritis in 50 to 75 % of patients at 5-15 year follow-up. 2 , 4 , 27 , 61 We feel this series demonstrates a viable alternative to lesion excision by operative fixation of loose bodies. Finally, the relatively small number of patients included in the study limits the accuracy of correlations made between patient and lesion characteristics and outcome. Specifically, our study only included two patients with patellar defects and one was lost to follow-up. The patient with a patellar defect available for long-term follow-up demonstrated the lowest scores in nearly all KOOS subscales and the lowest Marx activity score. Given the relatively poor results of treatment of articular cartilage defects of the patella with multiple techniques, 9 , 26 increased difficulty in treating OCD lesions in this location are not unexpected. Similarly, we were unable to demonstrate any relationship between lesion size and clinical outcome as has been previously described. 10 , 28 , 29 Outcome data on more patients are necessary to determine the influence of lesion size and location on clinical outcome.  CONCLUSIONS Operative fixation of Grade IV OCD loose bodies resulted in stable fixation in 92 % of patients at 12 weeks after surgery. At an average 9 years after surgery, patients had minimal pain and exhibited normal function in activities of daily life. However, patients reported significantly lower knee related quality of life. Only prospective comparative studies can determine relative advantages of the available treatment choices for these lesions. 