Carbon Nanotubes Protect DNA Strands During Cellular Delivery To protect against nuclease digestion, or single-strand binding protein interactions, oligonucleotides for targeted delivery into intracellular systems must be stable. To accomplish this, we have developed single-walled carbon nanotubes as a carrier for single-stranded DNA probe delivery. This has resulted in superior biostability for intracellular application, and, hence, has achieved the desired protective attributes, which are particularly important when DNA probes are used for intracellular measurements. Specifically, when bound to single-walled carbon nanotubes, DNA probes are protected from enzymatic cleavage and interference from nucleic acid binding proteins. Moreover, and equally important, our study shows that a single-walled carbon nanotube-modified DNA probe, which targets a specific mRNA inside living cells, has increased self-delivery capability and intracellular biostability when compared to free DNA probes. Therefore, this new conjugate provides significant advantages for basic genomic studies in which DNA probes are used to monitor intracellular levels of molecules.  Experimental Methods Materials and Instruments The sequences of DNA and RNA oligonucleotides prepared are listed in Table 1 . DNA synthesis reagents were purchased from Glen Research (Sterling, VA). The SWNTs were purchased from Unidym, Inc. with <5wt% ash content (CAS number: 7782-42-5). An ABI3400 DNA/RNA synthesizer (Applied Biosystmes, Foster City, CA) was used for all MB probes and DNA target preparation. A ProStar HPLC (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA) with a C18 column (Econosil, 5?, 250×4.6 mm) from Alltech (Deerfield, IL) was used for probe purification. A Cary Bio-300 UV spectrometer (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA) was used to measure absorbance for probe quantitation. Fluorescence measurements were performed on a Fluorolog-Tau-3 spectrofluorometer (Jobin Yvon, Inc., Edison, NJ). Cell images were conducted with a confocal microscope setup consisting of an Olympus IX-81 inverted microscope with an Olympus FluoView 500 confocal scanning system. A 40× 0.6 NA air objective was used. Molecular probes synthesis All oligonucleotides were synthesized based on solid-state phosphoramidite chemistry at a 1 ?mol scale. Both molecular probes listed in Table 1 were synthesized with controlled-pore glass columns with a 3?-Black Hole Quencher 2 molecule (BHQ2) covalently linked to the CPG substrate. The complete MB sequences were then deprotected in concentrated ammonia hydroxide at room temperature overnight and further purified with reverse phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) on a C-18 column with a linear elution gradient with TEAA (triethylammonium acetate) in acetonitrile changing from 20% to 70% over a 30 min period. The collection from the first HPLC separation was then vacuum dried, incubated in 200 ?l 80% acetic acid for 15 min, incubated with 200 ?l of ethanol and vacuum dried before the second round of HPLC. The HPLC was performed on a ProStar HPLC Station (Varian, CA) equipped with a fluorescent and a photodiode array detector. Synthesis of GT/SWNT Because of radioactive safety concerns and lab facility limitations, the SWNTs were cut before complexing with radioisotope-labeled GT sequence. The SWNTs were treated with strong acid mixture (nitric acid : sulfic acid = 3:1) and sonicated for 24 hours. After washing with water, 1mg/L treated SWNT was mixed with 0.1uM GT sequence labeled with 32P at room temperature and rocked for 24 hours. The resulting complex was directly used for the digestion test. Synthesis of MnSOD probe/SWNTs Since neutral SWNTs are the popular form for cellular application, we wanted to investigate its protection ability during cellular delivery. The SWNTs were ultrasonicated by sonic dismembrator (Fisher Scientific, Model 100) for 1 hour. Then about 200 mg/liter SWNT was mixed with 20 uM MnSOD probe aqueous solution. The mixture was sonicated for another 45 min to 1 hour. Then the probe/nanotube solution was centrifuged at 22,000 × g for 6 hours. The pellet comprised of impurities and aggregates of nanotubes at the bottom of the centrifuge tube was discarded, and the supernatant was collected and ultracentrifuged for another 6 hours at 22,000 × g. The supernatant is the MnSOD probe/SWNTs, which turned out to be soluble. After dialysis, the complex was stored at 4°C. The solubilized SWNTs are not well-dispersed individual nanotubes, but the mixture of nanotube bundles and individual nanotubes. Cellular experimental procedures MDA-MB-231 cells (ATCC, HTB-26™) were cultured in Leibovitz's L-15 medium with 2 mM L-glutamine supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (all reagents from Invitrogen). Cells were plated into chambered coverslides one day before the experiments so that cells would be about 90% confluence during the experiments. The concentrated MnSOD probe/SWNTs were added to each well at a final concentration of about 25 mg/liter. The incubations were carried out at 37°C air atmosphere for 12 hours. After incubation, the cell medium was decanted from the well, and the cells were washed thoroughly. To stimulate MnSOD mRNA expression, cells were incubated in 1 ?g/mL LPS from E. coli serotype 055:B5 (Sigma) for 4 hours prior to cellular imaging. The control experiments were conducted under the same conditions, but without LPS stimulation.  Materials and Instruments The sequences of DNA and RNA oligonucleotides prepared are listed in Table 1 . DNA synthesis reagents were purchased from Glen Research (Sterling, VA). The SWNTs were purchased from Unidym, Inc. with <5wt% ash content (CAS number: 7782-42-5). An ABI3400 DNA/RNA synthesizer (Applied Biosystmes, Foster City, CA) was used for all MB probes and DNA target preparation. A ProStar HPLC (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA) with a C18 column (Econosil, 5?, 250×4.6 mm) from Alltech (Deerfield, IL) was used for probe purification. A Cary Bio-300 UV spectrometer (Varian, Walnut Creek, CA) was used to measure absorbance for probe quantitation. Fluorescence measurements were performed on a Fluorolog-Tau-3 spectrofluorometer (Jobin Yvon, Inc., Edison, NJ). Cell images were conducted with a confocal microscope setup consisting of an Olympus IX-81 inverted microscope with an Olympus FluoView 500 confocal scanning system. A 40× 0.6 NA air objective was used.  Molecular probes synthesis All oligonucleotides were synthesized based on solid-state phosphoramidite chemistry at a 1 ?mol scale. Both molecular probes listed in Table 1 were synthesized with controlled-pore glass columns with a 3?-Black Hole Quencher 2 molecule (BHQ2) covalently linked to the CPG substrate. The complete MB sequences were then deprotected in concentrated ammonia hydroxide at room temperature overnight and further purified with reverse phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) on a C-18 column with a linear elution gradient with TEAA (triethylammonium acetate) in acetonitrile changing from 20% to 70% over a 30 min period. The collection from the first HPLC separation was then vacuum dried, incubated in 200 ?l 80% acetic acid for 15 min, incubated with 200 ?l of ethanol and vacuum dried before the second round of HPLC. The HPLC was performed on a ProStar HPLC Station (Varian, CA) equipped with a fluorescent and a photodiode array detector.  Synthesis of GT/SWNT Because of radioactive safety concerns and lab facility limitations, the SWNTs were cut before complexing with radioisotope-labeled GT sequence. The SWNTs were treated with strong acid mixture (nitric acid : sulfic acid = 3:1) and sonicated for 24 hours. After washing with water, 1mg/L treated SWNT was mixed with 0.1uM GT sequence labeled with 32P at room temperature and rocked for 24 hours. The resulting complex was directly used for the digestion test.  Synthesis of MnSOD probe/SWNTs Since neutral SWNTs are the popular form for cellular application, we wanted to investigate its protection ability during cellular delivery. The SWNTs were ultrasonicated by sonic dismembrator (Fisher Scientific, Model 100) for 1 hour. Then about 200 mg/liter SWNT was mixed with 20 uM MnSOD probe aqueous solution. The mixture was sonicated for another 45 min to 1 hour. Then the probe/nanotube solution was centrifuged at 22,000 × g for 6 hours. The pellet comprised of impurities and aggregates of nanotubes at the bottom of the centrifuge tube was discarded, and the supernatant was collected and ultracentrifuged for another 6 hours at 22,000 × g. The supernatant is the MnSOD probe/SWNTs, which turned out to be soluble. After dialysis, the complex was stored at 4°C. The solubilized SWNTs are not well-dispersed individual nanotubes, but the mixture of nanotube bundles and individual nanotubes.  Cellular experimental procedures MDA-MB-231 cells (ATCC, HTB-26™) were cultured in Leibovitz's L-15 medium with 2 mM L-glutamine supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (all reagents from Invitrogen). Cells were plated into chambered coverslides one day before the experiments so that cells would be about 90% confluence during the experiments. The concentrated MnSOD probe/SWNTs were added to each well at a final concentration of about 25 mg/liter. The incubations were carried out at 37°C air atmosphere for 12 hours. After incubation, the cell medium was decanted from the well, and the cells were washed thoroughly. To stimulate MnSOD mRNA expression, cells were incubated in 1 ?g/mL LPS from E. coli serotype 055:B5 (Sigma) for 4 hours prior to cellular imaging. The control experiments were conducted under the same conditions, but without LPS stimulation.  Figures and Table Figure 1 PolyAcrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (PAGE) of free GT sequence and GT/SWNT complexes by 15% gel. Lanes 1 and 2 are the intact GT sequence and GT/SWNT complexes; lanes 3 to 5 are the GT sequence after DNase I digestion for 5 min, 15 min and 1 hour; lanes 6 to 8 are the GT/SWNT complexes after DNase I digestion for 5 min, 15 min, and 1 hour; lane 9 is the 10-base pair DNA marker. The gel band intensity for each lane was plotted in the upper left corner graph. Figure 2 Emission fluorescence spectrum of MnSOD probe/SWNTs with and without the presence of 10-fold excess target complementary DNA. Figure 3 (A) Fluorescence signal enhancements of both free MnSOD probes and MnSOD probe/SWNTs upon the addition of 1U DNase I. (B) Fluorescence signal enhancements of both probes upon the addition of SSB. Final concentration ratio of probe : SSB = 1:5. Figure 4 Bright field and fluorescent images of MnSOD probe/SWNTs inside the MDA-MB-231 cells, (A) without LPS stimulation and (B) with LPS stimulation. All the scale bars shown in the graph are 50um. Figure 5 Bright field and fluorescent images of free MnSOD probes inside MDA-MB-231 cells, (A) without LPS stimulation and (B) with LPS stimulation. All the scale bars shown in the graph are 50 ?m. Scheme 1 (A) The scheme of possible interaction between MnSOD probes, the SWNTs and target mRNA. (B) TEM image of MnSOD probe/SWNTs. The scale bar represents 100nm. (C) Absorption spectrum of the probe in H2O. Table 1 Probes and oligonucleotides used in this work Name Sequence MnSOD probe 5?-TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT(CH2CH2O)36Cy3- CGAGC CAGTTACATTCTCCCAGTTGATT GCTCGG –BHQ2 -3? Random DNA probe 5?-Cy3- CCTAGC TCTAAATCACTATGGTCGC GCTAGG -BHQ2-3? MnSOD cDNA 5?- AATCAACTGGGAGAATGTAACTG -3? GT 5?- GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGT-3? [a] The bases underlined are complementary to form the stems of the probes.  Conclusions In summary, when bound to SWNTs, DNA probes are protected from enzymatic cleavage and interference from nucleic acid binding proteins. These protective properties are particularly important for applications in which DNA probes are used for intracellular measurements. Our study shows that a SWNT-modified DNA probe, which targets a specific mRNA inside living cells, has increased self-delivery capability and intracellular biostability when compared to free DNA probes. Therefore, this novel material provides significant advantages for basic genomic studies in which DNA probes are used to monitor intracellular levels of molecules and ions. Additionally, for cytoplasmic gene detection by DNA probes, nuclear sequestration is a major cause of reduced sensitivity. 22 The DNA/SWNT complexes, however, stay within the cytoplasm, enabling cytoplasmic mRNAs to be detected and imaged. Furthermore, DNA/SWNT complexes should prove useful as therapeutic agents since they exhibit excellent self-delivery properties that could allow DNA-based drugs to exert their therapeutic presence for longer time before being degraded by cells. 