Sphingosine-1-phosphate mobilizes osteoclast precursors and regulates bone homeostasis Osteoclasts (OCs) are bone-resorbing multinuclear giant cells that differentiate from mononuclear macrophage/monocyte-lineage hematopoietic precursors. Although many molecules are known to contribute to OC differentiation, RANKL chief among them, the mechanisms controlling the recruitment and homing of OC precursors (OPs) to the bone surface have not been elucidated. Here we report that sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) controls the movement of OPs between the blood and their site of differentiation. Cells with the properties of OPs express functional S1P1 receptors and exhibit positive chemotaxis along an S1P gradient in vitro . Intravital two-photon imaging of bone tissues revealed that a potent S1P1 agonist, SEW2871, stimulated motility of OP-containing monocytoid populations in vivo . OC/monocyte (CD11b) lineage-specific conditional S1P1 knockout mice showed osteoporotic changes due to increased OC attachment to bone surface, suggesting a crucial role of the S1P-S1P1 system in recirculation of OPs to blood where S1P levels are high. Furthermore, treatment with the S1P1 agonist FTY720 relieved ovariectomy-induced osteoporosis in mice by facilitating recirculation of OP-containing cell populations and reducing the number of mature OCs attached to the bone surface. This study provides evidence that S1P controls the migratory behavior of OPs, dynamically regulating bone mineral homeostasis, and identifies a critical control point in osteoclastogenesis that may be promising as a therapeutic target.  Methods Cell culture RAW264.7, a murine macrophage/monocyte lineage cell line, and mouse bone marrow-derived M-CSF-dependent monocytes (BM-MDM), containing osteoclast precursor cells, were cultured as previously described 28 , 29 . To stimulate osteoclastogenesis, 50 ng/ml RANKL (PeproTech) was added to the medium and the cells were incubated for 3 to 4 days. Conventional and quantitative (real-time) RT-PCR amplification Conventional RT-PCR was performed as described previously 29 . Primers used are listed in Supplementary Table 4 . Relative quantification with real-time RT-PCR was performed using an ABI PRISM 7900 (Applied Biosystems Inc.) with an Assay-on Demand TaqMan probe and relevant primers (S1P1, Assay ID #Mm00514644_m1; CD11b/integrin ?M, Assay ID #Mm01271259_g1; CD18/integrin ?2, Assay ID #Mm00434513_m1; GAPDH, Assay ID #Mm99999915_g1), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Determination of Rac activity Pulldown assay methods to determine the GTP-bound active form of Rac have been described in detail previously 30 . In vitro chemotaxis chamber assay Chemotactic migration of cells was measured in a modified Boyden chamber as described previously 27 . EZ-Taxiscan chemotaxis assay Chemotaxis experiments were also conducted in an EZ-Taxiscan chamber according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Effector Cell Institute). The EZ-Taxiscan is a visually-accessible chemotactic chamber, in which one compartment containing ligand (S1P) and another compartment containing cells are connected by a microchannel. Phase contrast images of migrating cells were acquired at 1 minute interval. Mice C57BL/6 mice, CX3CR1-EGFP knock-in mice 12 , CSF1R (M-CSF receptor)-EGFP transgenic mice 14 , were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. The generation of the loxP-flanked S1P 1 allele ( S1P 1 loxP ) 18 and osteoclast/monocyte lineage-specific CD11b-Cre transgenic mice 19 were described previously. S1P 1 +/+ x CD11b-Cre and S1P 1 loxP/+ x CD11b-Cre littermates were born at expected frequencies and were viable and fertile, but live S1P 1 loxP/loxP x CD11b-Cre littermates were obtained rarely (three viable S1P 1 loxP/loxP x CD11b-Cre out of 59 total mice), suggesting possible embryonic lethality as seen with global S1P1 deficiency. All mice were bred and maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions at animal facilities of NIH. Mutant mice were genotyped by PCR 18 , 19 . All mice were housed and handled according to NIH institutional guidelines under an approved protocol. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistological analyses were performed as described previously 2 . Anti-mouse S1P1 rabbit polyclonal antibody was purchased from Affinity Bioreagents. In some experiments, fluorescence-based staining for TRAP 20 with ELF 97 substrate (Molecular Probes) was used with some modifications. Two-photon intravital bone tissue imaging Intravital microscopy of mouse calvaria bone tissues was performed using a protocol modified from a previous report 10 , 11 . Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (Baxter, 2.5% vaporized in an 80:20 mixture of O2 and air), and the hair in the neck and scalp was removed with hair removal lotion (Nair). The frontoparietal skull was exposed and the mouse head was immobilized in a custom-made stereotactic holder. A catheter was placed into the tail vein with a 30-gauge needle attached to PE-10 tubing (Becton Dickinson). The imaging system was composed of an LSM510 NLO multiphoton microscope (Carl Zeiss) driven by a Chameleon XR Ti:Sapphire laser (Coherent) tuned to 880 nm, and an inverted microscope (Axiovert 200; Carl Zeiss) equipped with a 40X water immersion objective (Achroplan IR, N.A. 0.8; Carl Zeiss). Fluorescent cells were detected through a bandpass emission filter at 525/50 nm (for EGFP). Vessels were visualized by injecting 70 kDa Texas Red conjugated-dextran (detected using a 620/60 nm filter) i.v. immediately prior to imaging. Image stacks were collected at 3 ?m vertical step size at a depth of 100-150 ?m below the skull bone surface. For 3D videos, 4 sequential image stacks were acquired at 3 ?m z spacing to cover a volume of 154 ?m x 154 ?m x 9.0 ?m. The time resolution was 1 minute. Raw imaging data were processed with Imaris (Bitplane) with a Gaussian filter for noise reduction. Ovariectomy and FTY720 treatment Twelve 12-week-old female, ovariectomized or sham-operated, C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. Mice were injected i.p. either with FTY720 (3 mg/kg, Cayman Chemical) dissolved in a vehicle (PBS containing 5% acidified DMSO and 30% fatty acid-free BSA) or with vehicle only, daily for four weeks. The mice were then sacrificed and femurs were excised and fixed. Uteri of all the animals were excised and were weighed to evaluate the effect of ovariectomy. Bone histomorphometry Trabecular bone morphometry within the metaphyseal region of distal femur was quantified using micro-CT (?CT40, Scanco Medical AG). Volumeric regions for trabecular analysis were selected within the endosteal borders to include the central 80% of vertebral height and secondary spongiosa of femoral metaphyses located ~6% of the total length from the growth plate. Trabecular morphometry was characterized by measuring the bone volume fraction (bone volume / total volume, BV/TV), trabecular thickness (Tb. Th) and trabecular number (Tb. N.) To assess the attachment of osteoclasts to the bone surface, osteoclasts and bone trabeculae were fluorescently visualized in sections by two-photon microscopy. In order to identify osteoclasts, fluorescence based TRAP staining 20 was performed. Collagen-enriched bone matrices could be visualized using the 2nd harmonic emission from collagen fibers excited by infrared lasers. Sections were examined using a two-photon laser microscope (laser was tuned to 780 nm). Fluorescence was detected through bandpass emission filters at 370-450 nm (for 2nd harmonic emission from bone matrices) or 525/50 nm (for TRAP staining). Image analysis was performed using a fully automated segmentation approach (no manual tracing of cell/tissue boundaries or other user intervention required) and the “osteoclast attachment ratio” was calculated as the ratio “bone surface attached by osteoclasts / total bone surface” (F.K. submitted). Flow cytometry All reagents were purchased from BD PharMingen. To examine the composition of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PMC), blood was collected from the retro-orbital plexus with a heparinized glass pipette, from mice treated intraperitoneally 4 hours previously with FTY720 (3 mg/kg) or vehicle ( Fig. 4 ), or treated intravenously 1 hour previously with SEW2871 (5 mg/kg) or vehicle ( Supplementary Fig. 4 ). After removing the red blood cells by ACK lysis buffer (Invitrogen), cells were stained with Alexa647-conjugated anti-F4/80 ( Fig. 4 ), or FITC-conjugated anti-CD11b and PE-Cy7-conjugated anti-CD3 ( Supplementary Figs. 4 and 9 ), using conventional methods. Flow cytometric data were collected on a FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson) and analyzed with FlowJo software (TreeStar).  Cell culture RAW264.7, a murine macrophage/monocyte lineage cell line, and mouse bone marrow-derived M-CSF-dependent monocytes (BM-MDM), containing osteoclast precursor cells, were cultured as previously described 28 , 29 . To stimulate osteoclastogenesis, 50 ng/ml RANKL (PeproTech) was added to the medium and the cells were incubated for 3 to 4 days.  Conventional and quantitative (real-time) RT-PCR amplification Conventional RT-PCR was performed as described previously 29 . Primers used are listed in Supplementary Table 4 . Relative quantification with real-time RT-PCR was performed using an ABI PRISM 7900 (Applied Biosystems Inc.) with an Assay-on Demand TaqMan probe and relevant primers (S1P1, Assay ID #Mm00514644_m1; CD11b/integrin ?M, Assay ID #Mm01271259_g1; CD18/integrin ?2, Assay ID #Mm00434513_m1; GAPDH, Assay ID #Mm99999915_g1), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Determination of Rac activity Pulldown assay methods to determine the GTP-bound active form of Rac have been described in detail previously 30 .  In vitro chemotaxis chamber assay Chemotactic migration of cells was measured in a modified Boyden chamber as described previously 27 .  EZ-Taxiscan chemotaxis assay Chemotaxis experiments were also conducted in an EZ-Taxiscan chamber according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Effector Cell Institute). The EZ-Taxiscan is a visually-accessible chemotactic chamber, in which one compartment containing ligand (S1P) and another compartment containing cells are connected by a microchannel. Phase contrast images of migrating cells were acquired at 1 minute interval.  Mice C57BL/6 mice, CX3CR1-EGFP knock-in mice 12 , CSF1R (M-CSF receptor)-EGFP transgenic mice 14 , were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. The generation of the loxP-flanked S1P 1 allele ( S1P 1 loxP ) 18 and osteoclast/monocyte lineage-specific CD11b-Cre transgenic mice 19 were described previously. S1P 1 +/+ x CD11b-Cre and S1P 1 loxP/+ x CD11b-Cre littermates were born at expected frequencies and were viable and fertile, but live S1P 1 loxP/loxP x CD11b-Cre littermates were obtained rarely (three viable S1P 1 loxP/loxP x CD11b-Cre out of 59 total mice), suggesting possible embryonic lethality as seen with global S1P1 deficiency. All mice were bred and maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions at animal facilities of NIH. Mutant mice were genotyped by PCR 18 , 19 . All mice were housed and handled according to NIH institutional guidelines under an approved protocol.  Immunohistochemistry Immunohistological analyses were performed as described previously 2 . Anti-mouse S1P1 rabbit polyclonal antibody was purchased from Affinity Bioreagents. In some experiments, fluorescence-based staining for TRAP 20 with ELF 97 substrate (Molecular Probes) was used with some modifications.  Two-photon intravital bone tissue imaging Intravital microscopy of mouse calvaria bone tissues was performed using a protocol modified from a previous report 10 , 11 . Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (Baxter, 2.5% vaporized in an 80:20 mixture of O2 and air), and the hair in the neck and scalp was removed with hair removal lotion (Nair). The frontoparietal skull was exposed and the mouse head was immobilized in a custom-made stereotactic holder. A catheter was placed into the tail vein with a 30-gauge needle attached to PE-10 tubing (Becton Dickinson). The imaging system was composed of an LSM510 NLO multiphoton microscope (Carl Zeiss) driven by a Chameleon XR Ti:Sapphire laser (Coherent) tuned to 880 nm, and an inverted microscope (Axiovert 200; Carl Zeiss) equipped with a 40X water immersion objective (Achroplan IR, N.A. 0.8; Carl Zeiss). Fluorescent cells were detected through a bandpass emission filter at 525/50 nm (for EGFP). Vessels were visualized by injecting 70 kDa Texas Red conjugated-dextran (detected using a 620/60 nm filter) i.v. immediately prior to imaging. Image stacks were collected at 3 ?m vertical step size at a depth of 100-150 ?m below the skull bone surface. For 3D videos, 4 sequential image stacks were acquired at 3 ?m z spacing to cover a volume of 154 ?m x 154 ?m x 9.0 ?m. The time resolution was 1 minute. Raw imaging data were processed with Imaris (Bitplane) with a Gaussian filter for noise reduction.  Ovariectomy and FTY720 treatment Twelve 12-week-old female, ovariectomized or sham-operated, C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. Mice were injected i.p. either with FTY720 (3 mg/kg, Cayman Chemical) dissolved in a vehicle (PBS containing 5% acidified DMSO and 30% fatty acid-free BSA) or with vehicle only, daily for four weeks. The mice were then sacrificed and femurs were excised and fixed. Uteri of all the animals were excised and were weighed to evaluate the effect of ovariectomy.  Bone histomorphometry Trabecular bone morphometry within the metaphyseal region of distal femur was quantified using micro-CT (?CT40, Scanco Medical AG). Volumeric regions for trabecular analysis were selected within the endosteal borders to include the central 80% of vertebral height and secondary spongiosa of femoral metaphyses located ~6% of the total length from the growth plate. Trabecular morphometry was characterized by measuring the bone volume fraction (bone volume / total volume, BV/TV), trabecular thickness (Tb. Th) and trabecular number (Tb. N.) To assess the attachment of osteoclasts to the bone surface, osteoclasts and bone trabeculae were fluorescently visualized in sections by two-photon microscopy. In order to identify osteoclasts, fluorescence based TRAP staining 20 was performed. Collagen-enriched bone matrices could be visualized using the 2nd harmonic emission from collagen fibers excited by infrared lasers. Sections were examined using a two-photon laser microscope (laser was tuned to 780 nm). Fluorescence was detected through bandpass emission filters at 370-450 nm (for 2nd harmonic emission from bone matrices) or 525/50 nm (for TRAP staining). Image analysis was performed using a fully automated segmentation approach (no manual tracing of cell/tissue boundaries or other user intervention required) and the “osteoclast attachment ratio” was calculated as the ratio “bone surface attached by osteoclasts / total bone surface” (F.K. submitted).  Flow cytometry All reagents were purchased from BD PharMingen. To examine the composition of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PMC), blood was collected from the retro-orbital plexus with a heparinized glass pipette, from mice treated intraperitoneally 4 hours previously with FTY720 (3 mg/kg) or vehicle ( Fig. 4 ), or treated intravenously 1 hour previously with SEW2871 (5 mg/kg) or vehicle ( Supplementary Fig. 4 ). After removing the red blood cells by ACK lysis buffer (Invitrogen), cells were stained with Alexa647-conjugated anti-F4/80 ( Fig. 4 ), or FITC-conjugated anti-CD11b and PE-Cy7-conjugated anti-CD3 ( Supplementary Figs. 4 and 9 ), using conventional methods. Flow cytometric data were collected on a FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson) and analyzed with FlowJo software (TreeStar).  Supplementary Material S movie 1 S movie 2 S movie 3 S movie 4 S movie 5 S movie 6 S movie 7 Supplementary material  Figures Figure 1 Expression and function of S1P receptors in osteoclast precursor monocytes a , Expression of mRNAs encoding 5 mammalian S1P receptors (S1P1 to S1P5) in RAW264.7 monocytes (left panels) and in mouse bone marrow-derived, M-CSF-dependent monocytes (BM-MDM) (middle panels), detected by RT-PCR. mRNAs for integrin ?v and GAPDH were also analyzed as controls. Total cDNA isolated from mouse thymus was used for positive controls (C, right panels). RT, reverse transcription. b , Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of S1P1 mRNA expressed in RAW264.7 cells cultured in the absence (C) or presence (R) of RANKL. Cells were treated with BAY11-7085 (BAY; 10 ?M) or cyclosporine A (CyA; 1 ?M). Error bars represent ± SEM. c , Immunofluorescent detection of S1P1 protein (green) in RAW264.7 cells cultured in the absence (left panel) or presence (right panel) of 50 ng/ml RANKL. Nuclei were visualized with propidium iodide (red). Scale bars represent 20 ?m. d , Immunohistochemical analysis of S1P1 in mouse femoral bone tissues at low ( upper ) and high ( lower ) magnification. Staining for S1P1 (green) (left two panels); merged image with staining for CD9 (red) and transmission (Nomarski image) (right two panels). Arrowheads represent S1P1high mononuclear cells adjacent to bone trabeculae (asterisk). Scale bars represent 20 ?m. e , S1P-induced Rac stimulation. RAW264.7 cells were treated with various concentrations of S1P for 15 min and then analysed for GTP-Rac. f , In vitro chemotactic response of RAW264.7 to S1P gradient. Error bars represent SEM (n = 6). g , In vitro S1P-directed chemotaxis of RAW264.7 dynamically visualized using EZ-Taxiscan™. Cells were loaded onto the upper chamber and the lower chamber was filled either with normal medium (right panel; Supplementary Video 1 ) or with medium containing 10-8 M S1P (middle panel; Supplementary Video 2 ). Mean migration speed is shown in right panel. Error bars represent SEM (n = 8). Scale bar represents 100 ?m. Figure 2 <italic>In vivo</italic> S1P-mediated increase in motility of osteoclast precursor monocytes visualized using intravital two-photon imaging a , Intravital two- photon imaging of mouse skull bone tissues of heterozygous CX3CR1-EGFP knock-in mice, in the absence (upper panels; Supplementary Video 3 ) or presence (lower panels; Supplementary Video 4 ) of the S1P1 agonist SEW2871 (5 mg/kg). CX3CR1-EGFP positive cells appear green. The microvasculature was visualized by intravenous injection of 70kDa dextran-conjugated Texas Red (red) (left panels). The movements of CX3CR1-EGFP positive cells were tracked for 10 minutes (right panels). Gray spheres represent cells and colored lines show the associated trajectories. Scale bars represent 50 ?m. b , Quantification of CX3CR1-EGFP positive cell velocity. Tracking velocity over time after application of SEW2871 (red circle) or vehicle only (black square) are shown. Data points represent mean values (± SEM) of cell velocities in the field at certain time points (n = 15 for vehicle and n = 14 for SEW 2871). c , Summary of mean velocity of CX3CR1-EGFP positive cells treated with SEW2871 (red circle) or vehicle (black circle). Data points (n = 231 for vehicle and n = 210 for SEW2871) represent individual cells compiled from 5 independent experiments. Figure 3 <italic>In vivo</italic> impact of S1P<sub>1</sub> on bone mineral metabolism a , Morphohistometric analyses of control and cS1P1-/- (S1P1loxP/loxP CD11b-Cre) littermates. Femoral bone samples were analyzed by cone-beam ?CT (upper panels) and by histological examination combined with computational quantification for measuring the osteoclast attachment ratio to the bone surface (lower panels) (also see Supplementary Fig. 6 and supplementary material ). Blue areas represent bone trabeculae (2nd harmonic fluorescence signal), red and green areas show TRAP-positive osteoclasts that are attached to or detached from bone trabeculae, respectively, and white shows the area of OC/bone attachment. Scale bar (in upper panel) represents 1 mm. b-d , Summary of the data of bone matrix density (bone volume / total volume = BV / TV) ( b ), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th.) ( c , filled bars) and trabecular density (Tb.N.) ( c , open bars) calculated from ?CT images, and osteoclast attachment ratio calculated by computational segmentation analyses ( d ). Error bars represent SEM. n = 3 ( b, c ) and n = 40 (from 3 mice) ( d ) for each. Figure 4 Preventive effect of FTY720 on ovariectomy-induced osteoporosis a , Effect of FTY720 on bone mineral metabolism. Femurs were collected from mice after four different treatments; sham-operated / vehicle treated, sham-operated / FTY720 treated, ovariectomized / vehicle treated and ovariectomized / FTY720 treated. Bone samples were analyzed by cone-beam ?CT (upper panels) and by histological examination combined with computational quantification for measuring the osteoclast attachment ratio to the bone surface (lower panels) (see Supplementary Fig. 5 ). Scale bar (upper panel) represents 1 mm. b , Summary of the data of cancellous bone mineral density calculated from ?CT images (left panel) and of osteoclast attachment ratio (right panel). Error bars represent SEM. n = 3 (left panel) and n = 20 (from 3 mice) (right panel) for each. c , Effect of FTY720 on the composition of peripheral mononuclear cells (PMC). PMC collected from CX3CR1-EGFP knock-in mice administered vehicle or FTY720 were stained with anti-F4/80 (Alexa647). Absolute numbers of CX3CR1-EGFP+ F4/80+ cells [/10 5 ml of peripheral blood] are described in the panels. d , Effect of FTY720 on the mobility of CX3CR1-EGFP marked cells. Summary of mean tracking velocity of CX3CR1-EGFP positive cells treated with FTY720 (red circle) or vehicle (black circle). Data points (n = 246 for vehicle and n = 339 for FTY720) represent individual cells compiled from 4 independent experiments. Intravital two-photon images of mouse skull bone tissues of heterozygous CX3CR1-EGFP knock-in mice treated with FTY720 are shown in Supplementary Video 7 . 