How (and why) the immune system makes us sleep Good sleep is necessary for physical and mental health. For example, sleep loss impairs immune function, and sleep is altered during infection. Immune signalling molecules are present in the healthy brain, where they interact with neurochemical systems to contribute to the regulation of normal sleep. Animal studies have shown that interactions between immune signalling molecules (such as the cytokine interleukin 1) and brain neurochemical systems (such as the serotonin system) are amplified during infection, indicating that these interactions might underlie the changes in sleep that occur during infection. Why should the immune system cause us to sleep differently when we are sick? We propose that the alterations in sleep architecture during infection are exquisitely tailored to support the generation of fever, which in turn imparts survival value.  Conclusions and future directions Sleep is necessary for health as its loss or restriction is associated with multiple detrimental consequences. Although the interactions with neurotransmitters and neuromodulators through which cytokines enhance NREM sleep have been investigated at length, direct actions of cytokines on neurons in brain regions involved in the regulation of this sleep phase have only recently been determined. At present we know little about the mechanisms by which cytokines inhibit REM sleep. Investigating these mechanisms is important because REM sleep is disrupted in many pathologies that involve altered cytokine concentrations. For example, disturbed REM sleep and cytokine dysregulation are characteristic of major depression 3 . In addition to elucidating the mechanisms by which cytokines contribute to the regulation of the amount, pattern and distribution of sleep, crucial functional questions also wait to be answered. More systematic studies are required before we can understand the nature of cytokine involvement in altered sleep during sickness. Also of importance is the question of the extent to which alterations in sleep during sickness contribute to clinical outcome. Do alterations in sleep during infection contribute to survival as we propose and as is suggested by correlations between sleep quality and survival of infected rabbits 95 ? Would recovery be facilitated if patients in hospitals were able to sleep better? Further investigation is required to better assess the mechanistic and functional relationships between sleep and morbidity and mortality, and to determine whether altered sleep promotes recovery. Box 1 Sleep and immunity in human volunteers There are some differences between laboratory animals and human subjects with respect to sleep–immune interactions. Most studies that use laboratory animals focus on the effects of host-defence activation on sleep and often include as outcome measures changes in immunomodulators in the brain. By contrast, the vast majority of studies that use human volunteers determine the effects of sleep loss on multiple facets of immunity, and immune-related outcome measures are almost always restricted to measures that can be obtained from whole blood, serum or plasma. The negative impact of sleep loss on public health is now recognized for pathologies that involve inflammatory processes, underscoring the importance of sleep to a healthy immune system. It would be unethical to experimentally infect humans, but there are numerous clinical studies that describe the impact of HIV or trypanosome infection on sleep, all of which report that sleep is indeed altered. Healthy human volunteers under careful medical supervision have been subjected to host-defence activation by purified endotoxin 101 , an immune challenge in which there are no replicating pathogens. These studies show that humans are more sensitive to endotoxin than are laboratory animals; in humans, slow-wave sleep (the equivalent of non-rapid eye movement sleep in animals) is increased across the night by very low, subpyrogenic doses of endotoxin (less than one-thousandth of the per-bodyweight dose that elicits sleep responses in rats) 102 . As the endotoxin dose increases there are transient increases in slow-wave sleep, lasting approximately 1 h 103 . With even higher doses of endotoxin a much stronger host-defence response develops and, as in laboratory animals, sleep is severely disrupted 102 . This is probably due, in part, to increased activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, which induces wakefulness and promotes arousal 104 , 105 . As mentioned above, in contrast to the few reports of the effect of host-defence activation by endotoxin in humans, there have been numerous systematic studies in which human volunteers have been deprived of sleep and effects on immunity determined. The first study of the effects of sleep loss on immunity in humans seems to be that of Palmblad et al. 106 . They demonstrated that 48 h of sleep deprivation reduced phytohaemagglutinin-induced DNA synthesis in lymphocytes, an effect that persisted for 5 days. This study was followed by more than 50 other studies that showed effects of sleep deprivation on the human immune system. By way of example, 64 h sleep deprivation is associated with alterations in many aspects of immunity, including leukocytosis, increased natural killer cell activity and increased counts of white blood cells, granulocytes and monocytes 107 . According to recent reports, as little as 4 h of sleep loss in a controlled laboratory setting increases the production of interleukin 6 and tumour necrosis factor by monocytes — an effect that, bioinformatic analyses suggest, is mediated by the nuclear factor-?B inflammatory signalling pathway 108 . The number and scope of studies of human sleep loss and immunity exceed that which can be summarized in this Review, and so for recent comprehensive reviews see REFS 19 , 109 . Box 2 Effects of interleukin 1 on neurotransmitters involved in sleep regulation This Review focuses on interactions between interleukin 1 (IL-1) and the serotonergic system and, where relevant, on interactions between IL-1 and the GABA (?-aminobutyric acid)-ergic system. There are also some published reports of interactions between IL-1 and other neurotransmitter systems that are relevant to sleep regulation, and here we present a brief overview. Acetylcholine (Ach) Pontomesencephalic cholinergic neurons have a key role in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep generation and, together with basal forebrain cholinergic neurons, in cortical desynchronization and activation 64 , 68 . IL-1 inhibits ACh release in the hippocampus in vivo 110 , inhibits ACh synthesis in vitro in cultured pituitary cells 111 and increases acetylcholinesterase activity and mRNA expression in neuron–glia co-cultures and in vivo in the rat cortex 112 . Suppression of REM sleep by IL-1 (REF. 18 ) may be mediated by inhibition of pontomesencephalic cholinergic neurons. Glutamate Glutamate is widely used in the CNS. For instance, it is released by the neurons that project from the brainstem reticular formation, which is part of the ascending arousal system 64 . Many anaesthetics attenuate glutamate-mediated neurotransmission 64 . Interactions between IL-1 and glutamatergic neurotransmission have been investigated at length because of the involvement of glutamate excitotoxicity in neuron loss during stroke or chronic neurodegenerative disease 113 . Evidence suggests that IL-1 can potentiate or inhibit the effects of glutamate 22 , 113 . For instance, IL-1 decreases evoked glutamatergic excitatory responses in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons 81 . Adenosine Adenosine, which is a by-product of energy metabolism, promotes sleep by inhibiting cholinergic and non-cholinergic wake-promoting neurons in the basal forebrain 114 . Because IL-1 stimulates adenosine production 115 , 116 , this effect can further contribute to IL-1-induced increases in non-REM sleep. Moreover, IL-1-induced inhibition of glutamatergic responses (at least in the hippocampus) is mediated by adenosine 81 . Monoamines Brainstem noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus, dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area and histaminergic neurons in the posterior hypothalamus are all wake-promoting 64 . IL-1 activates these aminergic neurons and thereby enhances monoamine release in different brain areas 47 . Owing to their role in promoting wakefulness, IL-1-induced activation of aminergic neurons might counteract the increase in NREM sleep and thus maintain homeostasis.  Acetylcholine (Ach) Pontomesencephalic cholinergic neurons have a key role in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep generation and, together with basal forebrain cholinergic neurons, in cortical desynchronization and activation 64 , 68 . IL-1 inhibits ACh release in the hippocampus in vivo 110 , inhibits ACh synthesis in vitro in cultured pituitary cells 111 and increases acetylcholinesterase activity and mRNA expression in neuron–glia co-cultures and in vivo in the rat cortex 112 . Suppression of REM sleep by IL-1 (REF. 18 ) may be mediated by inhibition of pontomesencephalic cholinergic neurons.  Glutamate Glutamate is widely used in the CNS. For instance, it is released by the neurons that project from the brainstem reticular formation, which is part of the ascending arousal system 64 . Many anaesthetics attenuate glutamate-mediated neurotransmission 64 . Interactions between IL-1 and glutamatergic neurotransmission have been investigated at length because of the involvement of glutamate excitotoxicity in neuron loss during stroke or chronic neurodegenerative disease 113 . Evidence suggests that IL-1 can potentiate or inhibit the effects of glutamate 22 , 113 . For instance, IL-1 decreases evoked glutamatergic excitatory responses in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons 81 .  Adenosine Adenosine, which is a by-product of energy metabolism, promotes sleep by inhibiting cholinergic and non-cholinergic wake-promoting neurons in the basal forebrain 114 . Because IL-1 stimulates adenosine production 115 , 116 , this effect can further contribute to IL-1-induced increases in non-REM sleep. Moreover, IL-1-induced inhibition of glutamatergic responses (at least in the hippocampus) is mediated by adenosine 81 .  Monoamines Brainstem noradrenergic neurons of the locus coeruleus, dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area and histaminergic neurons in the posterior hypothalamus are all wake-promoting 64 . IL-1 activates these aminergic neurons and thereby enhances monoamine release in different brain areas 47 . Owing to their role in promoting wakefulness, IL-1-induced activation of aminergic neurons might counteract the increase in NREM sleep and thus maintain homeostasis.  Figures Figure 1 Serotonin initially increases wakefulness and subsequently increases non-rapid eye movement sleep Serotonergic neurons of the dorsal raphe nucleus, as well as other wake-promoting neurons located in the brainstem and the posterolateral hypothalamus, inhibit sleep-promoting neurons in the anterior hypothalamus, the preoptic area and the adjacent basal forebrain 63 , 64 . In turn, these rostral sleep-promoting neurons inhibit wake-promoting neurons in the brainstem and the posterolateral hypothalamus 63 , 64 . Serotonin (also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)) also induces the synthesis and/or release of sleep-promoting factors, which subsequently inhibit rostral wake-promoting neurons and activate rostral sleep-promoting neurons of the hypothalamus and basal forebrain. Interleukin 1 (IL-1) may be one of the 5-HT-induced sleep factors because serotonergic activation induces IL-1 mRNA expression in the hypothalamus 89 and IL-1 inhibits wake-promoting neurons in the hypothalamic preoptic area/basal forebrain 82 . IL-1 also inhibits wake-promoting serotonergic neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus 74 , 75 . The schema is not intended to depict all interrelationships between the neuroanatomic regions and neurochemical systems involved in sleep regulation; rather, it is intended to illustrate the potential mechanisms by which 5-HT promotes wakefulness per se and at the same time stimulates the synthesis and/or release of sleep-promoting factors that then drive the sleep that naturally follows wakefulness 52 . ACh, acetylcholine; DA, dopamine; GABA, ?-aminobutyric acid; LC, locus coeruleus; LDT–PPT, laterodorsal and pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei; NA, noradrenaline; NREM, non-rapid eye movement; PeF, perifornical region; TMN, tuberomammillary nucleus; VTA, ventral tegmental area; W-REM on, neurons that are active during both wakefulness and rapid eye movement sleep. Figure 2 Interleukin 1 and serotonin interact at multiple sites in the brain to regulate non-rapid eye movement sleep A schematic representation of interactions in the brain among interleukin 1 (IL-1), serotonin (also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)) and ?-aminobutyric acid (GABA) that are relevant for the regulation of non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep. In the dorsal raphe nuclei (DRN), where IL-1 microinjections promote NREM sleep 74 , IL-1 reduces the firing rate of wake-active serotonergic neurons by enhancing the inhibitory effects of GABA 75 ( a ). In the hypothalamic preoptic area/basal forebrain region (POA/BF), IL-1 stimulates 5-HT release from axon terminals 59 ( b ). 5-HT, in turn, inhibits cholinergic neurons involved in cortical activation 86 ( c ) and stimulates the synthesis of IL-1 (REF. 89 ) ( d ), which inhibits wake-promoting neurons ( e ) and activates a subset of sleep-promoting neurons in the POA/BF 82 . IL-1 in the POA/BF is under potent inhibitory homeostatic control by corticosteroids 92 ( f ) released into the blood by the adrenal cortex. Corticosteroid levels depend on the activity of the hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal axis 92 , which is stimulated by activation of the 5-HT system 89 ( g ). ACh, acetylcholine; ACTH, adreno-corticotropic hormone; CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; IPSP, inhibitory postsynaptic potential; PVN, paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. Figure 3 Sleep architecture is altered during fever The relationship between fever and changes in sleep architecture is apparent when interleukin 1 (IL-1) is administered to rats. a | A representative hypnogram depicting sleep–wake cycles of a male Sprague–Dawley rat demonstrates arousal state-dependent changes in brain temperature. Shown is a record of sleep–wake states (green line) and brain temperature (red line) for consecutive 12 s epochs recorded for 12 h after intracerebroventricular injection of vehicle. The injection was given at the beginning of the dark portion of the light–dark cycle. The expanded inset shows the arousal state-dependent changes in brain temperature that occur under normal conditions in a freely behaving rat. Brain temperature declines before entry into and during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, whereas it increases at the onset of and during REM sleep. Increases in brain temperature that are associated with wakefulness (wake) are of greater magnitude than those that occur during REM sleep. b | After intracerebroventricular injection of 5.0 ng IL-1 into the same rat as in part a , NREM sleep is fragmented, REM sleep is abolished (green line) and fever ensues (red line). The expanded inset shows the extent to which NREM sleep is fragmented during fever. This inset depicts the effects of IL-1 on sleep during the third post-injection hour, the same period presented in the expanded inset of part a . In this animal, the effects of IL-1 on NREM sleep and REM sleep are apparent for almost 6 h. Once NREM–REM sleep cycles reappear, arousal state-dependent changes become apparent and brain temperature subsides to control values. Figure 4 Proposed principles by which changes in sleep architecture promote recovery from infection Infection-induced alterations in sleep are such that increases in non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep provide energy savings, and short NREM-sleep bouts reduce heat loss. The reduction in REM sleep allows the animal to shiver. The combined changes in NREM and REM sleep facilitate the production of fever. Fever imparts survival value because it increases the efficiency of many facets of immune function and alters the host environment to make it less favourable for pathogen reproduction 97 . Figure 5 Timeline | A brief history of cytokines and sleep 