Molecular Imaging of Pancreatic Cancer in an Animal Model Using Targeted Multifunctional Nanoparticles Background & Aims Identification of a ligand/receptor system that enables functionalized nanoparticles to efficiently target pancreatic cancer holds great promise for the development of novel approaches for the detection and treatment of pancreatic cancer. Urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), a cellular receptor that is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer and tumor stromal cells, is an excellent surface molecule for receptor-targeted imaging of pancreatic cancer using multifunctional nanoparticles. Methods The uPAR-targeted dual-modality molecular imaging nanoparticle probe is designed and prepared by conjugating a near-infrared dye-labeled amino-terminal fragment of the receptor binding domain of urokinase plasminogen activator to the surface of functionalized magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles. Results We have shown that the systemic delivery of uPAR-targeted nanoparticles leads to their selective accumulation within tumors of orthotopically xenografted human pancreatic cancer in nude mice. The uPAR-targeted nanoparticle probe binds to and is subsequently internalized by uPAR-expressing tumor cells and tumor-associated stromal cells, which facilitates the intratumoral distribution of the nanoparticles and increases the amount and retention of the nanoparticles in a tumor mass. Imaging properties of the nanoparticles enable in vivo optical and magnetic resonance imaging of uPAR-elevated pancreatic cancer lesions. Conclusions Targeting uPAR using biodegradable multifunctional nanoparticles allows for the selective delivery of the nanoparticles into primary and metastatic pancreatic cancer lesions. This novel receptor-targeted nanoparticle is a potential molecular imaging agent for the detection of pancreatic cancer.  Materials and Methods Cell Lines Human pancreatic cancer MIA PaCa-2 and breast cancer T47D cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). MS1 murine endothelial cell line was provided by Dr Jack Arbiser at Emory University. Normal human pancreatic duct epithelial cell line HPDE6 was obtained from Dr Ming-Sound Tsao at University of Toronto, Canada. Immunostaining Frozen sections of pancreatic normal and cancer tissues were obtained from surgically removed pancreatic tissues according to an approved institutional review board protocol at Emory University. Human pancreatic tumor xenografts were obtained from orthotopic pancreatic tumors derived from the MIA PaCa-2 cell line. Frozen tissue sections were incubated with an anti-uPAR polyclonal rabbit antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and followed by Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Human or mouse endothelial cells were identified using a monoclonal anti-human CD31 or a fluorescein isothiocyanate–labeled rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA). Mouse macrophages were identified using Alexa Fluor 488–labeled rat anti-mouse CD68 antibody (AbD Serotec, Raleigh, NC). Immunochemical staining was performed by incubating tissue sections with an anti-uPAR antibody and then with alkaline phosphatase–labeled anti-rabbit antibody followed by Alkaline Phosphatase Substrate Kit I (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Expression of a tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen was determined using a monoclonal anti–carcinoembryonic antigen antibody (Sigma, St Louis, MO) and horseradish peroxidase–labeled anti-mouse antibody, followed by DAB Peroxidase Substrate Kit (Vector Laboratories). Production of Recombinant Mouse ATF Peptidess A complementary DNA fragment encoding amino acids 1 to 135 of mouse uPA was isolated by polymerase chain reaction amplification and then cloned into pET101/D-TOPO expression vector (Invitrogen). Recombinant ATF peptides were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (Invitrogen) and purified from bacterial extracts under native conditions using an Ni2+ NTA-agarose column (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Cy5.5-labeled ATF peptide was produced by conjugating Cy5.5 maleimide to ATF peptides using the manufacturer’s protocol (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ). Free dye molecules were separated using a Nanosep 3k OMEGA column (Pall Corp, Ann Arbor, MI). Preparation of uPAR-Targeted ATF-IO and Cy5.5-ATF-IO or Control Cy5.5-IO Nanoparticles Size-uniformed IO nanoparticles were prepared as described. 18 The IO nanoparticles (10 nm core size) were coated with amphiphilic polymers. 3 ATF peptides or Cy5.5-ATF peptides were then conjugated to the IO nanoparticles via cross-linking of carboxyl groups of the amphiphilic polymers to amino side groups of the peptides ( Figure 2 A ). The final ATF-IO nanoparticle conjugates were purified using Nanosep 100k column. The conjugation of ATF peptides to the IO nanoparticles was determined by fluorescence spectroscopy using Cy5.5-ATF peptides. To prepare the Cy5.5-IO nanoparticles as a control, the Cy5.5-mono NHS ester was directly labeled to the amino group on the amphiphilic polymer after being modified with N-Boc-1,6-hexanediamin. Specificity of ATF-IO Nanoparticles Cells were incubated with nanoparticles for 3 hours at 37°C. To determine target specificity, some cells were transfected with human uPAR small interfering RNA (siRNA) or control siRNA for 24 hours (Applied Biosystems, Austin, TX) or preincubated with 20 µg/mL of recombinant ATF peptides for 1 hour before adding ATF-IO nanoparticles. The cells were examined using Prussian blue staining to determine the presence of IO nanoparticles. 19 For MRI experiments, 1 × 107 cells were incubated with 10 nmol/L per milliliter of nontargeted or ATF-IO nanoparticles at 37°C for 3 hours. Cells were washed and then embedded in 1% agarose in multi-well plates. The plates were then scanned in a 3T MRI scanner (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) using T1-weighted gradient echo and multi-echo T2 weighted fast-spin echo imaging sequences. T2 values of each sample were calculated from obtained multi-echo (TEi, i = 25) T2-weighted MR images by fitting the decay curve on a pixel-by-pixel basis using the nonlinear mono-exponential algorithm of Mi = M0 * exp (?TEi/T2). Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model The pancreatic tumor model was established by injecting 5 × 106 of MIA PaCa-2 cells into the pancreas of the 6- to 8-week-old female nude mice (Taconic, Hudson, NY) using a surgical procedure approved by the Institute of Animal Use Committee of Emory University. Orthotopically xenografted pancreatic tumors reached 5 mm in diameter and were ready for experiments in about 3 to 4 weeks. In Vivo MRI Tumor-bearing mice were scanned using a 3T MRI scanner with a 5-cm volumetric coil. The imaging sequences include T1- and T2-weighted spin echo or gradient echo methods. A multi-echo (TEi, i = 12) T2-weighted fast-spin echo sequence was used to obtain T2 relaxometry of the mouse. After the mice were injected with 200 to 300 pmol of various nanoparticles through the tail vein, they were imaged at different time points to follow the changes of MRI signals. Images from precontrast and postcontrast administration were compared to evaluate the efficacy of contrast enhancement. The region of interest method was used to evaluate and quantify the contrast agent–induced image contrast and T2 value changes in the tumor. Near-Infrared Fluorescence Optical Imaging The mice were placed on an alfalfa-free rodent diet (Harlan Teklad, Madison, WI) to reduce background fluorescence. Optical imaging was performed using the Kodak In Vivo Imaging System FX (Carestream Health, Inc, New Haven, CT). All images were taken using a 625-nm excitation and 700-nm emission filter set with a 40-second exposure time and a ? value of 0.2. For each near-infrared fluorescence (NIR) image, a corresponding x-ray image was taken to provide anatomic location of the tumor. Histologic Analysis The mice were sacrificed after the imaging study was completed. Tumor and normal tissues were collected, and ex vivo optical imaging was performed on the tissues. The frozen tissue sections were examined by Prussian blue staining and immunolabeling.  Cell Lines Human pancreatic cancer MIA PaCa-2 and breast cancer T47D cell lines were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). MS1 murine endothelial cell line was provided by Dr Jack Arbiser at Emory University. Normal human pancreatic duct epithelial cell line HPDE6 was obtained from Dr Ming-Sound Tsao at University of Toronto, Canada.  Immunostaining Frozen sections of pancreatic normal and cancer tissues were obtained from surgically removed pancreatic tissues according to an approved institutional review board protocol at Emory University. Human pancreatic tumor xenografts were obtained from orthotopic pancreatic tumors derived from the MIA PaCa-2 cell line. Frozen tissue sections were incubated with an anti-uPAR polyclonal rabbit antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and followed by Alexa Fluor 555 goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Human or mouse endothelial cells were identified using a monoclonal anti-human CD31 or a fluorescein isothiocyanate–labeled rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA). Mouse macrophages were identified using Alexa Fluor 488–labeled rat anti-mouse CD68 antibody (AbD Serotec, Raleigh, NC). Immunochemical staining was performed by incubating tissue sections with an anti-uPAR antibody and then with alkaline phosphatase–labeled anti-rabbit antibody followed by Alkaline Phosphatase Substrate Kit I (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Expression of a tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen was determined using a monoclonal anti–carcinoembryonic antigen antibody (Sigma, St Louis, MO) and horseradish peroxidase–labeled anti-mouse antibody, followed by DAB Peroxidase Substrate Kit (Vector Laboratories).  Production of Recombinant Mouse ATF Peptidess A complementary DNA fragment encoding amino acids 1 to 135 of mouse uPA was isolated by polymerase chain reaction amplification and then cloned into pET101/D-TOPO expression vector (Invitrogen). Recombinant ATF peptides were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (Invitrogen) and purified from bacterial extracts under native conditions using an Ni2+ NTA-agarose column (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Cy5.5-labeled ATF peptide was produced by conjugating Cy5.5 maleimide to ATF peptides using the manufacturer’s protocol (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ). Free dye molecules were separated using a Nanosep 3k OMEGA column (Pall Corp, Ann Arbor, MI).  Preparation of uPAR-Targeted ATF-IO and Cy5.5-ATF-IO or Control Cy5.5-IO Nanoparticles Size-uniformed IO nanoparticles were prepared as described. 18 The IO nanoparticles (10 nm core size) were coated with amphiphilic polymers. 3 ATF peptides or Cy5.5-ATF peptides were then conjugated to the IO nanoparticles via cross-linking of carboxyl groups of the amphiphilic polymers to amino side groups of the peptides ( Figure 2 A ). The final ATF-IO nanoparticle conjugates were purified using Nanosep 100k column. The conjugation of ATF peptides to the IO nanoparticles was determined by fluorescence spectroscopy using Cy5.5-ATF peptides. To prepare the Cy5.5-IO nanoparticles as a control, the Cy5.5-mono NHS ester was directly labeled to the amino group on the amphiphilic polymer after being modified with N-Boc-1,6-hexanediamin.  Specificity of ATF-IO Nanoparticles Cells were incubated with nanoparticles for 3 hours at 37°C. To determine target specificity, some cells were transfected with human uPAR small interfering RNA (siRNA) or control siRNA for 24 hours (Applied Biosystems, Austin, TX) or preincubated with 20 µg/mL of recombinant ATF peptides for 1 hour before adding ATF-IO nanoparticles. The cells were examined using Prussian blue staining to determine the presence of IO nanoparticles. 19 For MRI experiments, 1 × 107 cells were incubated with 10 nmol/L per milliliter of nontargeted or ATF-IO nanoparticles at 37°C for 3 hours. Cells were washed and then embedded in 1% agarose in multi-well plates. The plates were then scanned in a 3T MRI scanner (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) using T1-weighted gradient echo and multi-echo T2 weighted fast-spin echo imaging sequences. T2 values of each sample were calculated from obtained multi-echo (TEi, i = 25) T2-weighted MR images by fitting the decay curve on a pixel-by-pixel basis using the nonlinear mono-exponential algorithm of Mi = M0 * exp (?TEi/T2).  Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model The pancreatic tumor model was established by injecting 5 × 106 of MIA PaCa-2 cells into the pancreas of the 6- to 8-week-old female nude mice (Taconic, Hudson, NY) using a surgical procedure approved by the Institute of Animal Use Committee of Emory University. Orthotopically xenografted pancreatic tumors reached 5 mm in diameter and were ready for experiments in about 3 to 4 weeks.  In Vivo MRI Tumor-bearing mice were scanned using a 3T MRI scanner with a 5-cm volumetric coil. The imaging sequences include T1- and T2-weighted spin echo or gradient echo methods. A multi-echo (TEi, i = 12) T2-weighted fast-spin echo sequence was used to obtain T2 relaxometry of the mouse. After the mice were injected with 200 to 300 pmol of various nanoparticles through the tail vein, they were imaged at different time points to follow the changes of MRI signals. Images from precontrast and postcontrast administration were compared to evaluate the efficacy of contrast enhancement. The region of interest method was used to evaluate and quantify the contrast agent–induced image contrast and T2 value changes in the tumor.  Near-Infrared Fluorescence Optical Imaging The mice were placed on an alfalfa-free rodent diet (Harlan Teklad, Madison, WI) to reduce background fluorescence. Optical imaging was performed using the Kodak In Vivo Imaging System FX (Carestream Health, Inc, New Haven, CT). All images were taken using a 625-nm excitation and 700-nm emission filter set with a 40-second exposure time and a ? value of 0.2. For each near-infrared fluorescence (NIR) image, a corresponding x-ray image was taken to provide anatomic location of the tumor.  Histologic Analysis The mice were sacrificed after the imaging study was completed. Tumor and normal tissues were collected, and ex vivo optical imaging was performed on the tissues. The frozen tissue sections were examined by Prussian blue staining and immunolabeling.  Results uPAR Is Up-Regulated in Human Pancreatic Cancer Tissues and Tumor Xenografts To validate uPAR as a molecular target, we examined its expression in human pancreatic cancer tissues and found a high level of expression in pancreatic cancer but not in normal pancreatic tissues. Human tumor endothelial cells were also positive for uPAR ( Figure 1 A ). In pancreatic tumor xenografts obtained from nude mice, high levels of uPAR expression were detected in the cancer cells and tumor stromal cells such as endothelial cells and macrophages that originated from mice ( Figure 1 B ). However, uPAR was not detected in the normal pancreatic tissues ( Figure 1 C ). uPAR was also undetectable in the majority of normal tissues and organs, except for a small percentage of cells in the spleen. Lung and kidney have a low level of uPAR ( Figure 1 C ). uPAR-Targeted Nanoparticles Bind to and Are Internalized by Tumor and Endothelial Cells Mouse ATF peptide conjugated-IO nanoparticles were incubated with cancer and endothelial cell lines in vitro. Prussian blue staining revealed iron-positive cells in uPAR-expressing human pancreatic cancer and mouse endothelial cell lines after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles but not with nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 2 B ). Mouse endothelial cells had a higher level of iron staining compared with human pancreatic cancer cells. The T47D cell line does not express a detectable level of uPAR and was also negative ( Figure 2 B ). The binding and internalization of the targeted nanoparticles are further confirmed by significant reduction of Prussian blue–stained MIA PaCa-2 cells after transfecting the cells with uPAR siRNA or blocking with excessive amounts of free ATF peptides ( Figure 2 C ). MRI scan of the cells after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles further demonstrated target specificity, because MRI signal reduction was detected in uPAR expressing cells. IO nanoparticles typically yield MRI contrast with signal reduction due to the T2 relaxation time shortening effect. The T2 relaxometry measurement revealed the largest T2 reduction and signal decrease in MS1 ( Figure 2 D ), indicating that higher amounts of IO nanoparticles are internalized in these cells. Our results also showed that IO nanoparticles conjugated with mouse ATF were able to bind to human cancer cells through cross-reactivity. There was no MRI contrast change following incubation of ATF-IO nanoparticles with a normal human pancreatic ductal cell line HPDE ( Figure 2 D ). In Vivo MRI Shows That ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumors in an Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model When comparing the T2-weighted MR images of the tumor-bearing mice before and after administration of IO nanoparticle, marked signal decreases were detected in the tumor area 5 to 20 hours following injection of the targeted nanoparticles, suggesting selective accumulation of the nanoparticles in the pancreatic cancers ( Figure 3 A ). In contrast, there was no apparent MRI signal change in the tumors of mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 B ). In the other control experiment, we did not see an MRI contrast change in the pancreas of normal mice after administration of ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 C ). Notably, signal decreases were also seen in the liver and spleen ( Figure 3 A – C ). Histologic analysis of tumor and normal tissues revealed significant iron-positive cells in pancreatic tumors but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissues in mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles for 96 hours ( Figure 3 D ). Iron-positive cells were also detected in the liver and spleen of the mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles, but their levels were significantly lower compared with those in the mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 D ). The normal pancreas, stomach, intestines, brain, and heart tissues were consistently negative for iron staining, and only a few scattered iron-positive cells were detected in the kidney and lung in the animals receiving ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 E ). We did not find apparent histologic abnormality in these normal tissue sections. Optical Imaging Demonstrates uPAR-Targeting Specificity, Distribution, and Time-Dependent Clearance of ATF Nanoparticles in Tumor-Bearing Mice Because optical imaging is a simple and sensitive imaging modality that allows for real-time visualization of tissue distribution of nanoprobes in mice, we examined tumor-bearing mice injected with Cy5.5-ATF peptides or Cy5.5-ATF-IO or Cy5.5-IO nanoparticles at different time points. We found that although Cy5.5-ATF peptides alone could emit an NIR signal in the tumor 24 to 72 hours after injection, the signal intensity was 3- and 4-fold weaker at 48 and 72 hours compared with that in the mice receiving Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 4 A, B , and E ). A strong signal was detected in the bladder 2 hours after the peptide injection, suggesting that a large amount of Cy5.5-ATF peptides was secreted through the kidney ( Figure 4 A ). In mice that received Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles, the NIR signal was found in pancreatic cancer 24 hours after injection. The intensity of the signal in the tumor continued to increase 48 to 96 hours after injection ( Figure 4 B and E ). Ex vivo NIR imaging of the tumor and normal tissues confirmed the presence of a strong NIR signal in the tumor but not in most normal tissues except the kidney and bladder ( Figure 4 B ). In a mouse that received a nontargeted Cy5.5-IO nanoparticle injection, a strong NIR signal was detected in the liver 5 hours after injection and lasted for more than 48 hours ( Figure 4 C ). NIR signals from the kidneys were detectable when imaging of the mice was performed from the back ( Figure 4 D ). Taken together, our results suggest that Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles selectively accumulate in pancreatic cancers after systemic delivery and that nanoparticles allow for prolonging the blood and tumor retention time of the imaging probe and thus enhance the tumor targeting effect and signal of NIR imaging. Dual-Modality Imaging Using Cy5.5-ATF-IO Nanoparticles Detects Primary and Metastatic Pancreatic Tumors Given the advantages of sensitivity of optical imaging and high resolution of MRI, we investigated the target specificity of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in mice bearing primary and intraperitoneal metastatic lesions. We found that NIR optical imaging clearly delineated 4 tumor lesions in the peritoneal cavity with volumes ranging from 0.5 to 100 mm3 ( Figure 5 A and C ). MRI and T2 relaxometry measurement performed on the same mouse revealed MR signal decrease in 2 primary tumor nodules ( Figure 5 B ), even though the sensitivity of MRI is lower than NIR. ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumor Cells and Tumor Stromal Cells In Vivo We examined the cell types in the tumor mass that bind to ATF-IO nanoparticles and found that iron-positive cells are colocalized with uPAR-positive tumor cells. Interestingly, iron-positive cells were abundant in both the tumor and stroma immediately adjacent to the tumor cells, but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissue ( Figure 6 A ). Some CD31-positive tumor vessels were also positive for iron staining ( Figure 6 B ). Iron-positive cells were detected in both CD68-positive macrophage and CD68-negative cells, suggesting that MRI contrast in the tumor may be caused by the uptake of ATF-IO nanoparticles in both tumor cells and tumor-associated macrophages ( Figure 6 C ). Although we detected CD68-positive macrophages in the lung tissue sections, these cells did not have positive iron staining ( Figure 6 C ). Additionally, almost all iron-positive cells in the liver were C68-positive macrophages or Kupffer cells. Sensitivity of NIR Optical and MR Imaging in Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Models Our results further showed that pancreatic tumors as small as 1 mm3 can be detected by a 3T MRI scanner at the clinical field strength ( Figure 7 A ), while an intraperitoneal pancreatic cancer lesion with a size of 0.5 mm3 was also detected by NIR optical imaging ( Figure 5 C ) after systemic delivery of ATF-IO or Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles. To precisely determine the number of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticle-labeled cells that produce sufficient signal for NIR optical or detectable contrast for MR imaging, MIA PaCa-2 cells were labeled with Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in culture and different amounts of labeled cells were then injected into the pancreas of nude mice. We found that NIR optical imaging detected tumor cell implants with as little as 1 × 104 tumor cells while MRI detected tumor cell grafts containing 1 × 105 labeled cells ( Figure 7 B and C ).  Results uPAR Is Up-Regulated in Human Pancreatic Cancer Tissues and Tumor Xenografts To validate uPAR as a molecular target, we examined its expression in human pancreatic cancer tissues and found a high level of expression in pancreatic cancer but not in normal pancreatic tissues. Human tumor endothelial cells were also positive for uPAR ( Figure 1 A ). In pancreatic tumor xenografts obtained from nude mice, high levels of uPAR expression were detected in the cancer cells and tumor stromal cells such as endothelial cells and macrophages that originated from mice ( Figure 1 B ). However, uPAR was not detected in the normal pancreatic tissues ( Figure 1 C ). uPAR was also undetectable in the majority of normal tissues and organs, except for a small percentage of cells in the spleen. Lung and kidney have a low level of uPAR ( Figure 1 C ). uPAR-Targeted Nanoparticles Bind to and Are Internalized by Tumor and Endothelial Cells Mouse ATF peptide conjugated-IO nanoparticles were incubated with cancer and endothelial cell lines in vitro. Prussian blue staining revealed iron-positive cells in uPAR-expressing human pancreatic cancer and mouse endothelial cell lines after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles but not with nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 2 B ). Mouse endothelial cells had a higher level of iron staining compared with human pancreatic cancer cells. The T47D cell line does not express a detectable level of uPAR and was also negative ( Figure 2 B ). The binding and internalization of the targeted nanoparticles are further confirmed by significant reduction of Prussian blue–stained MIA PaCa-2 cells after transfecting the cells with uPAR siRNA or blocking with excessive amounts of free ATF peptides ( Figure 2 C ). MRI scan of the cells after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles further demonstrated target specificity, because MRI signal reduction was detected in uPAR expressing cells. IO nanoparticles typically yield MRI contrast with signal reduction due to the T2 relaxation time shortening effect. The T2 relaxometry measurement revealed the largest T2 reduction and signal decrease in MS1 ( Figure 2 D ), indicating that higher amounts of IO nanoparticles are internalized in these cells. Our results also showed that IO nanoparticles conjugated with mouse ATF were able to bind to human cancer cells through cross-reactivity. There was no MRI contrast change following incubation of ATF-IO nanoparticles with a normal human pancreatic ductal cell line HPDE ( Figure 2 D ). In Vivo MRI Shows That ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumors in an Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model When comparing the T2-weighted MR images of the tumor-bearing mice before and after administration of IO nanoparticle, marked signal decreases were detected in the tumor area 5 to 20 hours following injection of the targeted nanoparticles, suggesting selective accumulation of the nanoparticles in the pancreatic cancers ( Figure 3 A ). In contrast, there was no apparent MRI signal change in the tumors of mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 B ). In the other control experiment, we did not see an MRI contrast change in the pancreas of normal mice after administration of ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 C ). Notably, signal decreases were also seen in the liver and spleen ( Figure 3 A – C ). Histologic analysis of tumor and normal tissues revealed significant iron-positive cells in pancreatic tumors but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissues in mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles for 96 hours ( Figure 3 D ). Iron-positive cells were also detected in the liver and spleen of the mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles, but their levels were significantly lower compared with those in the mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 D ). The normal pancreas, stomach, intestines, brain, and heart tissues were consistently negative for iron staining, and only a few scattered iron-positive cells were detected in the kidney and lung in the animals receiving ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 E ). We did not find apparent histologic abnormality in these normal tissue sections. Optical Imaging Demonstrates uPAR-Targeting Specificity, Distribution, and Time-Dependent Clearance of ATF Nanoparticles in Tumor-Bearing Mice Because optical imaging is a simple and sensitive imaging modality that allows for real-time visualization of tissue distribution of nanoprobes in mice, we examined tumor-bearing mice injected with Cy5.5-ATF peptides or Cy5.5-ATF-IO or Cy5.5-IO nanoparticles at different time points. We found that although Cy5.5-ATF peptides alone could emit an NIR signal in the tumor 24 to 72 hours after injection, the signal intensity was 3- and 4-fold weaker at 48 and 72 hours compared with that in the mice receiving Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 4 A, B , and E ). A strong signal was detected in the bladder 2 hours after the peptide injection, suggesting that a large amount of Cy5.5-ATF peptides was secreted through the kidney ( Figure 4 A ). In mice that received Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles, the NIR signal was found in pancreatic cancer 24 hours after injection. The intensity of the signal in the tumor continued to increase 48 to 96 hours after injection ( Figure 4 B and E ). Ex vivo NIR imaging of the tumor and normal tissues confirmed the presence of a strong NIR signal in the tumor but not in most normal tissues except the kidney and bladder ( Figure 4 B ). In a mouse that received a nontargeted Cy5.5-IO nanoparticle injection, a strong NIR signal was detected in the liver 5 hours after injection and lasted for more than 48 hours ( Figure 4 C ). NIR signals from the kidneys were detectable when imaging of the mice was performed from the back ( Figure 4 D ). Taken together, our results suggest that Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles selectively accumulate in pancreatic cancers after systemic delivery and that nanoparticles allow for prolonging the blood and tumor retention time of the imaging probe and thus enhance the tumor targeting effect and signal of NIR imaging. Dual-Modality Imaging Using Cy5.5-ATF-IO Nanoparticles Detects Primary and Metastatic Pancreatic Tumors Given the advantages of sensitivity of optical imaging and high resolution of MRI, we investigated the target specificity of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in mice bearing primary and intraperitoneal metastatic lesions. We found that NIR optical imaging clearly delineated 4 tumor lesions in the peritoneal cavity with volumes ranging from 0.5 to 100 mm3 ( Figure 5 A and C ). MRI and T2 relaxometry measurement performed on the same mouse revealed MR signal decrease in 2 primary tumor nodules ( Figure 5 B ), even though the sensitivity of MRI is lower than NIR. ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumor Cells and Tumor Stromal Cells In Vivo We examined the cell types in the tumor mass that bind to ATF-IO nanoparticles and found that iron-positive cells are colocalized with uPAR-positive tumor cells. Interestingly, iron-positive cells were abundant in both the tumor and stroma immediately adjacent to the tumor cells, but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissue ( Figure 6 A ). Some CD31-positive tumor vessels were also positive for iron staining ( Figure 6 B ). Iron-positive cells were detected in both CD68-positive macrophage and CD68-negative cells, suggesting that MRI contrast in the tumor may be caused by the uptake of ATF-IO nanoparticles in both tumor cells and tumor-associated macrophages ( Figure 6 C ). Although we detected CD68-positive macrophages in the lung tissue sections, these cells did not have positive iron staining ( Figure 6 C ). Additionally, almost all iron-positive cells in the liver were C68-positive macrophages or Kupffer cells. Sensitivity of NIR Optical and MR Imaging in Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Models Our results further showed that pancreatic tumors as small as 1 mm3 can be detected by a 3T MRI scanner at the clinical field strength ( Figure 7 A ), while an intraperitoneal pancreatic cancer lesion with a size of 0.5 mm3 was also detected by NIR optical imaging ( Figure 5 C ) after systemic delivery of ATF-IO or Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles. To precisely determine the number of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticle-labeled cells that produce sufficient signal for NIR optical or detectable contrast for MR imaging, MIA PaCa-2 cells were labeled with Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in culture and different amounts of labeled cells were then injected into the pancreas of nude mice. We found that NIR optical imaging detected tumor cell implants with as little as 1 × 104 tumor cells while MRI detected tumor cell grafts containing 1 × 105 labeled cells ( Figure 7 B and C ).  uPAR Is Up-Regulated in Human Pancreatic Cancer Tissues and Tumor Xenografts To validate uPAR as a molecular target, we examined its expression in human pancreatic cancer tissues and found a high level of expression in pancreatic cancer but not in normal pancreatic tissues. Human tumor endothelial cells were also positive for uPAR ( Figure 1 A ). In pancreatic tumor xenografts obtained from nude mice, high levels of uPAR expression were detected in the cancer cells and tumor stromal cells such as endothelial cells and macrophages that originated from mice ( Figure 1 B ). However, uPAR was not detected in the normal pancreatic tissues ( Figure 1 C ). uPAR was also undetectable in the majority of normal tissues and organs, except for a small percentage of cells in the spleen. Lung and kidney have a low level of uPAR ( Figure 1 C ).  uPAR Is Up-Regulated in Human Pancreatic Cancer Tissues and Tumor Xenografts To validate uPAR as a molecular target, we examined its expression in human pancreatic cancer tissues and found a high level of expression in pancreatic cancer but not in normal pancreatic tissues. Human tumor endothelial cells were also positive for uPAR ( Figure 1 A ). In pancreatic tumor xenografts obtained from nude mice, high levels of uPAR expression were detected in the cancer cells and tumor stromal cells such as endothelial cells and macrophages that originated from mice ( Figure 1 B ). However, uPAR was not detected in the normal pancreatic tissues ( Figure 1 C ). uPAR was also undetectable in the majority of normal tissues and organs, except for a small percentage of cells in the spleen. Lung and kidney have a low level of uPAR ( Figure 1 C ).  uPAR-Targeted Nanoparticles Bind to and Are Internalized by Tumor and Endothelial Cells Mouse ATF peptide conjugated-IO nanoparticles were incubated with cancer and endothelial cell lines in vitro. Prussian blue staining revealed iron-positive cells in uPAR-expressing human pancreatic cancer and mouse endothelial cell lines after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles but not with nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 2 B ). Mouse endothelial cells had a higher level of iron staining compared with human pancreatic cancer cells. The T47D cell line does not express a detectable level of uPAR and was also negative ( Figure 2 B ). The binding and internalization of the targeted nanoparticles are further confirmed by significant reduction of Prussian blue–stained MIA PaCa-2 cells after transfecting the cells with uPAR siRNA or blocking with excessive amounts of free ATF peptides ( Figure 2 C ). MRI scan of the cells after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles further demonstrated target specificity, because MRI signal reduction was detected in uPAR expressing cells. IO nanoparticles typically yield MRI contrast with signal reduction due to the T2 relaxation time shortening effect. The T2 relaxometry measurement revealed the largest T2 reduction and signal decrease in MS1 ( Figure 2 D ), indicating that higher amounts of IO nanoparticles are internalized in these cells. Our results also showed that IO nanoparticles conjugated with mouse ATF were able to bind to human cancer cells through cross-reactivity. There was no MRI contrast change following incubation of ATF-IO nanoparticles with a normal human pancreatic ductal cell line HPDE ( Figure 2 D ).  uPAR-Targeted Nanoparticles Bind to and Are Internalized by Tumor and Endothelial Cells Mouse ATF peptide conjugated-IO nanoparticles were incubated with cancer and endothelial cell lines in vitro. Prussian blue staining revealed iron-positive cells in uPAR-expressing human pancreatic cancer and mouse endothelial cell lines after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles but not with nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 2 B ). Mouse endothelial cells had a higher level of iron staining compared with human pancreatic cancer cells. The T47D cell line does not express a detectable level of uPAR and was also negative ( Figure 2 B ). The binding and internalization of the targeted nanoparticles are further confirmed by significant reduction of Prussian blue–stained MIA PaCa-2 cells after transfecting the cells with uPAR siRNA or blocking with excessive amounts of free ATF peptides ( Figure 2 C ). MRI scan of the cells after incubating with ATF-IO nanoparticles further demonstrated target specificity, because MRI signal reduction was detected in uPAR expressing cells. IO nanoparticles typically yield MRI contrast with signal reduction due to the T2 relaxation time shortening effect. The T2 relaxometry measurement revealed the largest T2 reduction and signal decrease in MS1 ( Figure 2 D ), indicating that higher amounts of IO nanoparticles are internalized in these cells. Our results also showed that IO nanoparticles conjugated with mouse ATF were able to bind to human cancer cells through cross-reactivity. There was no MRI contrast change following incubation of ATF-IO nanoparticles with a normal human pancreatic ductal cell line HPDE ( Figure 2 D ).  In Vivo MRI Shows That ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumors in an Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model When comparing the T2-weighted MR images of the tumor-bearing mice before and after administration of IO nanoparticle, marked signal decreases were detected in the tumor area 5 to 20 hours following injection of the targeted nanoparticles, suggesting selective accumulation of the nanoparticles in the pancreatic cancers ( Figure 3 A ). In contrast, there was no apparent MRI signal change in the tumors of mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 B ). In the other control experiment, we did not see an MRI contrast change in the pancreas of normal mice after administration of ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 C ). Notably, signal decreases were also seen in the liver and spleen ( Figure 3 A – C ). Histologic analysis of tumor and normal tissues revealed significant iron-positive cells in pancreatic tumors but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissues in mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles for 96 hours ( Figure 3 D ). Iron-positive cells were also detected in the liver and spleen of the mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles, but their levels were significantly lower compared with those in the mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 D ). The normal pancreas, stomach, intestines, brain, and heart tissues were consistently negative for iron staining, and only a few scattered iron-positive cells were detected in the kidney and lung in the animals receiving ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 E ). We did not find apparent histologic abnormality in these normal tissue sections.  In Vivo MRI Shows That ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumors in an Orthotopic Human Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Model When comparing the T2-weighted MR images of the tumor-bearing mice before and after administration of IO nanoparticle, marked signal decreases were detected in the tumor area 5 to 20 hours following injection of the targeted nanoparticles, suggesting selective accumulation of the nanoparticles in the pancreatic cancers ( Figure 3 A ). In contrast, there was no apparent MRI signal change in the tumors of mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 B ). In the other control experiment, we did not see an MRI contrast change in the pancreas of normal mice after administration of ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 C ). Notably, signal decreases were also seen in the liver and spleen ( Figure 3 A – C ). Histologic analysis of tumor and normal tissues revealed significant iron-positive cells in pancreatic tumors but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissues in mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles for 96 hours ( Figure 3 D ). Iron-positive cells were also detected in the liver and spleen of the mice that received ATF-IO nanoparticles, but their levels were significantly lower compared with those in the mice receiving nontargeted IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 D ). The normal pancreas, stomach, intestines, brain, and heart tissues were consistently negative for iron staining, and only a few scattered iron-positive cells were detected in the kidney and lung in the animals receiving ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 3 E ). We did not find apparent histologic abnormality in these normal tissue sections.  Optical Imaging Demonstrates uPAR-Targeting Specificity, Distribution, and Time-Dependent Clearance of ATF Nanoparticles in Tumor-Bearing Mice Because optical imaging is a simple and sensitive imaging modality that allows for real-time visualization of tissue distribution of nanoprobes in mice, we examined tumor-bearing mice injected with Cy5.5-ATF peptides or Cy5.5-ATF-IO or Cy5.5-IO nanoparticles at different time points. We found that although Cy5.5-ATF peptides alone could emit an NIR signal in the tumor 24 to 72 hours after injection, the signal intensity was 3- and 4-fold weaker at 48 and 72 hours compared with that in the mice receiving Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 4 A, B , and E ). A strong signal was detected in the bladder 2 hours after the peptide injection, suggesting that a large amount of Cy5.5-ATF peptides was secreted through the kidney ( Figure 4 A ). In mice that received Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles, the NIR signal was found in pancreatic cancer 24 hours after injection. The intensity of the signal in the tumor continued to increase 48 to 96 hours after injection ( Figure 4 B and E ). Ex vivo NIR imaging of the tumor and normal tissues confirmed the presence of a strong NIR signal in the tumor but not in most normal tissues except the kidney and bladder ( Figure 4 B ). In a mouse that received a nontargeted Cy5.5-IO nanoparticle injection, a strong NIR signal was detected in the liver 5 hours after injection and lasted for more than 48 hours ( Figure 4 C ). NIR signals from the kidneys were detectable when imaging of the mice was performed from the back ( Figure 4 D ). Taken together, our results suggest that Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles selectively accumulate in pancreatic cancers after systemic delivery and that nanoparticles allow for prolonging the blood and tumor retention time of the imaging probe and thus enhance the tumor targeting effect and signal of NIR imaging.  Optical Imaging Demonstrates uPAR-Targeting Specificity, Distribution, and Time-Dependent Clearance of ATF Nanoparticles in Tumor-Bearing Mice Because optical imaging is a simple and sensitive imaging modality that allows for real-time visualization of tissue distribution of nanoprobes in mice, we examined tumor-bearing mice injected with Cy5.5-ATF peptides or Cy5.5-ATF-IO or Cy5.5-IO nanoparticles at different time points. We found that although Cy5.5-ATF peptides alone could emit an NIR signal in the tumor 24 to 72 hours after injection, the signal intensity was 3- and 4-fold weaker at 48 and 72 hours compared with that in the mice receiving Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles ( Figure 4 A, B , and E ). A strong signal was detected in the bladder 2 hours after the peptide injection, suggesting that a large amount of Cy5.5-ATF peptides was secreted through the kidney ( Figure 4 A ). In mice that received Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles, the NIR signal was found in pancreatic cancer 24 hours after injection. The intensity of the signal in the tumor continued to increase 48 to 96 hours after injection ( Figure 4 B and E ). Ex vivo NIR imaging of the tumor and normal tissues confirmed the presence of a strong NIR signal in the tumor but not in most normal tissues except the kidney and bladder ( Figure 4 B ). In a mouse that received a nontargeted Cy5.5-IO nanoparticle injection, a strong NIR signal was detected in the liver 5 hours after injection and lasted for more than 48 hours ( Figure 4 C ). NIR signals from the kidneys were detectable when imaging of the mice was performed from the back ( Figure 4 D ). Taken together, our results suggest that Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles selectively accumulate in pancreatic cancers after systemic delivery and that nanoparticles allow for prolonging the blood and tumor retention time of the imaging probe and thus enhance the tumor targeting effect and signal of NIR imaging.  Dual-Modality Imaging Using Cy5.5-ATF-IO Nanoparticles Detects Primary and Metastatic Pancreatic Tumors Given the advantages of sensitivity of optical imaging and high resolution of MRI, we investigated the target specificity of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in mice bearing primary and intraperitoneal metastatic lesions. We found that NIR optical imaging clearly delineated 4 tumor lesions in the peritoneal cavity with volumes ranging from 0.5 to 100 mm3 ( Figure 5 A and C ). MRI and T2 relaxometry measurement performed on the same mouse revealed MR signal decrease in 2 primary tumor nodules ( Figure 5 B ), even though the sensitivity of MRI is lower than NIR.  Dual-Modality Imaging Using Cy5.5-ATF-IO Nanoparticles Detects Primary and Metastatic Pancreatic Tumors Given the advantages of sensitivity of optical imaging and high resolution of MRI, we investigated the target specificity of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in mice bearing primary and intraperitoneal metastatic lesions. We found that NIR optical imaging clearly delineated 4 tumor lesions in the peritoneal cavity with volumes ranging from 0.5 to 100 mm3 ( Figure 5 A and C ). MRI and T2 relaxometry measurement performed on the same mouse revealed MR signal decrease in 2 primary tumor nodules ( Figure 5 B ), even though the sensitivity of MRI is lower than NIR.  ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumor Cells and Tumor Stromal Cells In Vivo We examined the cell types in the tumor mass that bind to ATF-IO nanoparticles and found that iron-positive cells are colocalized with uPAR-positive tumor cells. Interestingly, iron-positive cells were abundant in both the tumor and stroma immediately adjacent to the tumor cells, but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissue ( Figure 6 A ). Some CD31-positive tumor vessels were also positive for iron staining ( Figure 6 B ). Iron-positive cells were detected in both CD68-positive macrophage and CD68-negative cells, suggesting that MRI contrast in the tumor may be caused by the uptake of ATF-IO nanoparticles in both tumor cells and tumor-associated macrophages ( Figure 6 C ). Although we detected CD68-positive macrophages in the lung tissue sections, these cells did not have positive iron staining ( Figure 6 C ). Additionally, almost all iron-positive cells in the liver were C68-positive macrophages or Kupffer cells.  ATF-IO Nanoparticles Target Tumor Cells and Tumor Stromal Cells In Vivo We examined the cell types in the tumor mass that bind to ATF-IO nanoparticles and found that iron-positive cells are colocalized with uPAR-positive tumor cells. Interestingly, iron-positive cells were abundant in both the tumor and stroma immediately adjacent to the tumor cells, but not in surrounding normal pancreatic tissue ( Figure 6 A ). Some CD31-positive tumor vessels were also positive for iron staining ( Figure 6 B ). Iron-positive cells were detected in both CD68-positive macrophage and CD68-negative cells, suggesting that MRI contrast in the tumor may be caused by the uptake of ATF-IO nanoparticles in both tumor cells and tumor-associated macrophages ( Figure 6 C ). Although we detected CD68-positive macrophages in the lung tissue sections, these cells did not have positive iron staining ( Figure 6 C ). Additionally, almost all iron-positive cells in the liver were C68-positive macrophages or Kupffer cells.  Sensitivity of NIR Optical and MR Imaging in Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Models Our results further showed that pancreatic tumors as small as 1 mm3 can be detected by a 3T MRI scanner at the clinical field strength ( Figure 7 A ), while an intraperitoneal pancreatic cancer lesion with a size of 0.5 mm3 was also detected by NIR optical imaging ( Figure 5 C ) after systemic delivery of ATF-IO or Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles. To precisely determine the number of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticle-labeled cells that produce sufficient signal for NIR optical or detectable contrast for MR imaging, MIA PaCa-2 cells were labeled with Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in culture and different amounts of labeled cells were then injected into the pancreas of nude mice. We found that NIR optical imaging detected tumor cell implants with as little as 1 × 104 tumor cells while MRI detected tumor cell grafts containing 1 × 105 labeled cells ( Figure 7 B and C ).  Sensitivity of NIR Optical and MR Imaging in Pancreatic Cancer Xenograft Models Our results further showed that pancreatic tumors as small as 1 mm3 can be detected by a 3T MRI scanner at the clinical field strength ( Figure 7 A ), while an intraperitoneal pancreatic cancer lesion with a size of 0.5 mm3 was also detected by NIR optical imaging ( Figure 5 C ) after systemic delivery of ATF-IO or Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles. To precisely determine the number of Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticle-labeled cells that produce sufficient signal for NIR optical or detectable contrast for MR imaging, MIA PaCa-2 cells were labeled with Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles in culture and different amounts of labeled cells were then injected into the pancreas of nude mice. We found that NIR optical imaging detected tumor cell implants with as little as 1 × 104 tumor cells while MRI detected tumor cell grafts containing 1 × 105 labeled cells ( Figure 7 B and C ).  Discussion Biomarker-targeted imaging and treatment hold great promise for improving the survival of patients with cancer. In the case of pancreatic cancer, there is no reliable imaging approach for diagnosis. Cell surface biomarkers that allow for the development of targeted imaging contrast agents and/or therapeutics for pancreatic cancer have yet to be identified. In this study, we selected the ATF peptide as a targeting ligand with the rationale that the high binding affinity of ATF with uPAR is able to block the interaction of uPAR with its natural ligand uPA and that delivery of ATF peptides inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis in several animal tumor models. 14 , 20 The ability of targeted nanoparticles to be efficiently taken up by cancer cells is important for increasing their tumor-specific accumulation for tumor imaging and for delivering therapeutic agents. The results of our study showed that ATF-conjugated nanoparticles specifically bind to uPAR and are internalized by the cells . In vivo systemic delivery of ATF-IO nanoparticles leads to their selective accumulation in orthotopic pancreatic tumors, as shown by both optical and MR imaging. In this study, we used mouse ATF to generate uPAR-targeted IO nanoparticles, which is appropriate for the investigation of target specificity and tissue distribution of the nanoparticle in mouse. Although we observed that mouse ATF peptides cross-react with human tumor cells, we have produced human ATF peptide for future clinical application because it has a higher binding affinity for human uPAR and is not immunogenic in humans. An important aspect for increasing the sensitivity of in vivo tumor imaging as well as the efficiency of targeted therapy is to deliver large amounts of the nanoparticles into a tumor mass. Currently used target molecules, such as Her-2/neu and MUC-1, are expressed in subpopulations of tumor cells in tumor tissues. 4 , 21 In contrast, uPAR is highly expressed in tumor and stromal cells, which increase the numbers of target cells in a tumor mass and facilitates the active retention of the nanoparticles. 22 , 23 A recent study showed that the level of uPAR expression in both pancreatic cancer and endothelial cells is further up-regulated by tumor hypoxia, which is a common phenomenon in pancreatic cancer tissues. 24 In the majority of normal tissues, uPAR is undetectable except for a low level in macrophages, granulocytes, the uterus, thymus, kidney, and spleen. 25 Nanoparticles with sizes between 10 and 100 nm have a prolonged circulation time and are small enough to pass through leaky vasculatures inside tumors, making the tumor mass accessible for nanoparticles by a passive targeting mechanism 26 ( Figure 8 ). Moreover, the presence of a high level of uPAR in tumor endothelial cells may facilitate their interaction with the targeted nanoparticles, which is the first step toward the retention of the nanoparticles in the tumor. In normal tissues, an intact endothelial layer and a very low level of uPAR in endothelial cells prevent ATF-IO nanoparticles entering into the tissues. The association of uPAR with caveolae, a transcytosis machinery, may further enable nanoparticles to cross the endothelium and rapidly enter the perivascular tumor areas 27 , 28 ( Figure 8 ). Targeting uPAR-expressing tumor stromal cells is important for efficient delivery of the nanoparticles into pancreatic cancers because active tumor stroma make up the majority of pancreatic cancer tissues. Our results of in vivo imaging of tumor-bearing mice after intravenous delivery of ATF-IO nanoparticles and histologic analysis of the tumor and normal tissues provide strong evidence supporting the previously proposed targeting mechanism. The results of this study not only provide mechanistic insights into targeting uPAR for cancer imaging but also demonstrate an important approach for developing receptor-targeted multifunctional nanoparticles. The results of our time-dependent NIR imaging study suggest a clear advantage of a nanoparticle platform in tumor targeting by conjugating Cy5.5-ATF peptides to nanoparticles over Cy5.5-ATF peptides alone. Our in vivo tumor imaging results showed strong NIR signals in the pancreatic tumor areas, but not in the liver, spleen, and many other normal organs of the tumor-bearing mice that received Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles. One of the most challenging tasks in clinical diagnosis of pancreatic cancer is to distinguish between lesions of the tumor and chronic pancreatitis. Our results showed that uPAR is not up-regulated in chronic pancreatitis tissues and systemic delivery of the targeted nanoparticles does not produce optical and MR imaging signals or contrast in the pancreas of the mice with chronic pancreatitis (Supplementary Results; see supplemental material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Additionally, this biodegradable nanoparticle is a sensitive imaging probe that is able to detect tumors as small as 0.5 to 1 mm3 in animal tumor models. Therefore, it has potential for future clinical applications, such as preoperative detection and localization of pancreatic cancer lesions by MRI, intraoperative delineation of tumor margins and peritoneal metastases by optical imaging, and targeted delivery of therapeutic agents while monitoring the response to therapy using MRI in patients with pancreatic cancer.  Discussion Biomarker-targeted imaging and treatment hold great promise for improving the survival of patients with cancer. In the case of pancreatic cancer, there is no reliable imaging approach for diagnosis. Cell surface biomarkers that allow for the development of targeted imaging contrast agents and/or therapeutics for pancreatic cancer have yet to be identified. In this study, we selected the ATF peptide as a targeting ligand with the rationale that the high binding affinity of ATF with uPAR is able to block the interaction of uPAR with its natural ligand uPA and that delivery of ATF peptides inhibits tumor growth and angiogenesis in several animal tumor models. 14 , 20 The ability of targeted nanoparticles to be efficiently taken up by cancer cells is important for increasing their tumor-specific accumulation for tumor imaging and for delivering therapeutic agents. The results of our study showed that ATF-conjugated nanoparticles specifically bind to uPAR and are internalized by the cells . In vivo systemic delivery of ATF-IO nanoparticles leads to their selective accumulation in orthotopic pancreatic tumors, as shown by both optical and MR imaging. In this study, we used mouse ATF to generate uPAR-targeted IO nanoparticles, which is appropriate for the investigation of target specificity and tissue distribution of the nanoparticle in mouse. Although we observed that mouse ATF peptides cross-react with human tumor cells, we have produced human ATF peptide for future clinical application because it has a higher binding affinity for human uPAR and is not immunogenic in humans. An important aspect for increasing the sensitivity of in vivo tumor imaging as well as the efficiency of targeted therapy is to deliver large amounts of the nanoparticles into a tumor mass. Currently used target molecules, such as Her-2/neu and MUC-1, are expressed in subpopulations of tumor cells in tumor tissues. 4 , 21 In contrast, uPAR is highly expressed in tumor and stromal cells, which increase the numbers of target cells in a tumor mass and facilitates the active retention of the nanoparticles. 22 , 23 A recent study showed that the level of uPAR expression in both pancreatic cancer and endothelial cells is further up-regulated by tumor hypoxia, which is a common phenomenon in pancreatic cancer tissues. 24 In the majority of normal tissues, uPAR is undetectable except for a low level in macrophages, granulocytes, the uterus, thymus, kidney, and spleen. 25 Nanoparticles with sizes between 10 and 100 nm have a prolonged circulation time and are small enough to pass through leaky vasculatures inside tumors, making the tumor mass accessible for nanoparticles by a passive targeting mechanism 26 ( Figure 8 ). Moreover, the presence of a high level of uPAR in tumor endothelial cells may facilitate their interaction with the targeted nanoparticles, which is the first step toward the retention of the nanoparticles in the tumor. In normal tissues, an intact endothelial layer and a very low level of uPAR in endothelial cells prevent ATF-IO nanoparticles entering into the tissues. The association of uPAR with caveolae, a transcytosis machinery, may further enable nanoparticles to cross the endothelium and rapidly enter the perivascular tumor areas 27 , 28 ( Figure 8 ). Targeting uPAR-expressing tumor stromal cells is important for efficient delivery of the nanoparticles into pancreatic cancers because active tumor stroma make up the majority of pancreatic cancer tissues. Our results of in vivo imaging of tumor-bearing mice after intravenous delivery of ATF-IO nanoparticles and histologic analysis of the tumor and normal tissues provide strong evidence supporting the previously proposed targeting mechanism. The results of this study not only provide mechanistic insights into targeting uPAR for cancer imaging but also demonstrate an important approach for developing receptor-targeted multifunctional nanoparticles. The results of our time-dependent NIR imaging study suggest a clear advantage of a nanoparticle platform in tumor targeting by conjugating Cy5.5-ATF peptides to nanoparticles over Cy5.5-ATF peptides alone. Our in vivo tumor imaging results showed strong NIR signals in the pancreatic tumor areas, but not in the liver, spleen, and many other normal organs of the tumor-bearing mice that received Cy5.5-ATF-IO nanoparticles. One of the most challenging tasks in clinical diagnosis of pancreatic cancer is to distinguish between lesions of the tumor and chronic pancreatitis. Our results showed that uPAR is not up-regulated in chronic pancreatitis tissues and systemic delivery of the targeted nanoparticles does not produce optical and MR imaging signals or contrast in the pancreas of the mice with chronic pancreatitis (Supplementary Results; see supplemental material online at www.gastrojournal.org ). Additionally, this biodegradable nanoparticle is a sensitive imaging probe that is able to detect tumors as small as 0.5 to 1 mm3 in animal tumor models. Therefore, it has potential for future clinical applications, such as preoperative detection and localization of pancreatic cancer lesions by MRI, intraoperative delineation of tumor margins and peritoneal metastases by optical imaging, and targeted delivery of therapeutic agents while monitoring the response to therapy using MRI in patients with pancreatic cancer.  Supplementary Material 01  Supplementary Material 01 