Decidualized Human Endometrial Stromal Cells Mediate Hemostasis, Angiogenesis, and Abnormal Uterine Bleeding Factor VII binds trans-membrane tissue factor to initiate hemostasis by forming thrombin. Tissue factor expression is enhanced in decidualized human endometrial stromal cells during the luteal phase. Long-term progestin only contraceptives elicit: 1) abnormal uterine bleeding from fragile vessels at focal bleeding sites, 2) paradoxically high tissue factor expression at bleeding sites; 3) reduced endometrial blood flow promoting local hypoxia and enhancing reactive oxygen species levels; and 4) aberrant angiogenesis reflecting increased stromal cell-expressed vascular endothelial growth factor, decreased Angiopoietin-1 and increased endothelial cell-expressed Angiopoietin-2. Aberrantly high local vascular permeability enhances circulating factor VII to decidualized stromal cell-expressed tissue factor to generate excess thrombin. Hypoxia-thrombin interactions augment expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and interleukin-8 by stromal cells. Thrombin, vascular endothelial growth factor and interlerukin-8 synergis-tically augment angiogenesis in a milieu of reactive oxygen species-induced endothelial cell activation. The resulting enhanced vessel fragility promotes abnormal uterine bleeding.  SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The absence of any TF-deficient condition in humans emphasizes the crucial role played by TF, in species survival. Elevated TF expression by decidualized HESCs (decidual cells) protects against hemorrhage during EVT invasion of endometrial vessels and during preterm and term delivery. Thrombin augments VEGF expression in progestin-decidualized HESCs and may mediate luteal phase angiogenesis. In general, LTPOCs reduce endome-trial blood flow to promote local hypoxia and enhance oxidative damage-inducing ROS. Enhanced vascular permeability in such fragile vessels increases circulating factor VII availability to decidualized HESC-expressed TF to generate excess thrombin. Hypoxia–thrombin interactions enhance HESC-expressed VEGF and IL-8. Synergy between thrombin, VEGF, and IL-8 augments angiogenesis in a milieu of ROS-induced endothelial cell activation. Moreover, a neutrophil excess in the LTPOC-derived endometrium expresses proteases that degrade the endometrial perivascular support structure to intensify vessel fragility and promote AUB.  Figures Figure 1 Thrombin effects on VEGF levels in decidualized HESCs and in HEGECs. Confluent HESCs were decidualized for 7 days in 10?8 M E2 (E) + 10?7 M medroxyprogesterone acetate (P), and HEGECs were treated with E + P for 3 days, then incubated in a serum-free defined medium containing E + P with or without thrombin (T) or TRAP (TR). The cultures were incubated for 24 or 48 hours as indicated. Secreted VEGF levels were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and normalized to cell DNA. A, 24 and 48 hours of HESCs with E + P with or without 0.1 U/mL T (average of 2 experiments). B, Dose-response effects of thrombin after 48 hours. Ordinate, fold-increase effects of thrombin versus E + P alone (mean ± SEM, n = 3). C, HESCs with E + P with or without 0.5 U/mL T (mean ± SEM, n = 6 cell preparations, * P < .02). D, Effects of thrombin receptor activating peptide versus T after 48 hours in HESCs with E + P (reprinted with permission from Lockwood et al. 36 ). E2, estradiol; HEGECs, human endometrial glandular epithelial cells; HESCs, human endometrial stromal cells; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. Figure 2 Immunohistochemistry of tissue factor (TF) in endometrium following Mirena insertion. Immunostaining was carried out on paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections. A, First-trimester decidua. Arrows indicate prominent immunostaining for TF at cell membranes of decidualized stromal cells. A blood vessel is indicated by V. B, Endometrial biopsy 3 months after insertion of the Mirena intrauterine system. Note the marked decidualization of and prominent staining for TF at stromal cell membranes (arrows). An atrophic gland, typical of long-term progestin-only contraceptive treatment, is indicated by G. C, Control follicular phase endometrial specimen obtained from the same woman before Mirena contraception. The stromal cells are not decidualized and display a relative absence of TF immunostaining. Magnification, ×200 (reprinted with permission from Lockwood et al 57 ). Figure 3 Immunostaining for nitrotyrosine and 8-Hydroxy-2?-deoxyguanosine in control and long-term progestin-only contraceptive (LTPOC)-treated endometrium. Immunostaining for nitrotyrosine in human control (A) endometrium and that exposed to high-dose LTPOC (B). Similar staining was conducted for 8-Hydroxy-2?-deoxyguanosine in control (C) and LTPOC-treated endometria (D). Brown peroxidase staining identifies antigens (reprinted with permission from Hickey et al 58 ). Figure 4 Central scheme. Long-term progestin-only contraceptives (LTPOCs) result in hypoxia/reperfusion (HX/RP), reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and altered angiogenic factor expression leading to damaged vessels and abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB). Other pathways not yet elucidated may exacerbate this mechanism, denoted by “?” (reprinted with permission from Hickey et al 58 ). Ang, angiopoietin; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. Figure 5 Model of abnormal uterine bleeding induced during long-term progestin-only contraception (LTPOC). In the LTPOC-derived endometrium, excess transudation of factor VII contacts perivascular decidualized human endometrial stromal cell (HESC)-TF to generate thrombin that stimulates decidualized HESCs to release vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and interleukin-8 (IL-8). Acting via separate receptors on the human endometrial endothelial cell (HEEC) surface, thrombin, VEGF, and IL-8 each promote angiogenesis while enhancing endothelial cell permeability. The hypoxic milieu of the LTPOC endometrium also augments VEGF and IL-8 expression to promote a feed forward cycle of increased thrombin generation, leading to increased VEGF and IL-8 production and further angiogenesis (reprinted with permission from Lockwood et al 67 ). 