The history of the “natural history” of hepatitis C(1968–2009) In the late 1960’s, only types A and B hepatitis were believed to exist, distinguished by circumstances of exposure and incubation periods. In the early 1970’s, studies of transfusion recipients were begun with the belief that hepatitis B would be responsible should transfusion-associated hepatitis develop. After discovery of the viruses of hepatitis A and B, neither agent was found responsible, hence non-A, non-B (NANB) hepatitis. Initial follow-up of these cases showed that ~ 50% developed chronic hepatitis based on persistence of serum enzymes for at least 6 months. Approximately 15 years later, after the hepatitis C virus had been identified as the cause for NANB hepatitis, chronic hepatitis was found to develop more frequently as indicated by persistent viral infection in over 80% of infected adults but in only about 50% of infected children or young women. Follow-up over 2 to 4 decades indicated that many infected persons developed progressive hepatic fibrosis, sometimes culminating in cirrhosis and/or liver cancer. Long-term natural history studies have proved to be challenging because disease onset is often silent and progression extremely slow. Differing strategies have been used to determine the natural history, the descriptions and results of which are presented in this review.  Conclusion It is evident that hepatitis C is a progressive disease, and that a variable proportion of chronically infected persons will advance to end-stage liver disease, namely hepatocellular failure and/or HCC. Such persons are highly likely to die as a consequence of the liver disease unless they undergo liver transplantation. A presumably larger group of chronically infected individuals, primarily those who do not develop cirrhosis, are likely to die from other non-liver-related illnesses or traumatic events that represent the more common causes of death. Some will even progress through life without ever knowing that they are HCV infected, while others may suffer from varying degrees of fatigue and a decreased quality of life. In order to accurately establish the frequency of these variable outcomes, it would be necessary to mount a life-long study of a large cohort from the time of the initial infection and follow them until their demise, but for this to be a true natural history study, infected persons would have to forego treatment of the infection, clearly not an acceptable option. Moreover, it would be almost impossible to pursue a study of this duration, both for the infected cohort and for the investigator. The natural history has particular relevance for those infected at birth or in early childhood. Even though evolution to cirrhosis in the first two to three decades after infection among these individuals is relatively infrequent, it is unclear whether disease progression will begin to increase as this population ages. There is increasing evidence that disease progression does not follow a linear path and that it is likely to increase as the infected person ages ( 73 , 105 ). Suffice it to say, because of the advent of effective treatment, the era of natural history studies of chronic hepatitis C has passed, except perhaps under rare circumstances. As treatment improves, the illness will come to be viewed as an infectious disease requiring treatment for all, with less concern about the long-term sequelae. 