The Role of Hepatic Invariant (I)NKT Cells in Systemic/Local Inflammation and Mortality During Polymicrobial Septic Shock 1 Natural killer T (NKT) 4 cells have been described as “innate regulatory cells” because of their rapid response to conserved glycolipids presented on CD1d via their invariant TCR. However, little is known about the contribution of the hepatic NKT cell to the development of a local and/or systemic immune response to acute septic challenge (cecal ligation & puncture; CLP). We found not only that mice deficient in invariant [i] NKT cells (J?18 -/-) had a marked attenuation in CLP induced mortality, but also exhibited an oblation of the systemic inflammatory response (with little effect on splenic/ peritoneal immune responsiveness). Flow cytometric data indicated that following CLP, there was a marked decline in the % of CD3+?GalCer-CD1d-tetramer+ cells in the mouse C57BL/6J and Balb/c liver non-parenchymal cell population. This was associated with the marked activation of these cells (increased expression of CD69 and CD25) as well as a rise in the frequency of NKT cells positive for both Th1 and Th2 intracellular cytokines. In this respect, when mice were pre-treated in vivo with anti-CD1d blocking antibody we observed not only that this inhibited the systemic rise of IL-6 and IL-10 levels in septic mice and improved overall septic survival, but that the CLP induced changes in liver macrophage IL-6 and IL-10 expressions were inversely effected by this treatment. Together, these findings suggest that the activation of hepatic iNKT cells plays a critical role in regulating the innate immune/ systemic inflammatory response and survival in a model of acute septic shock.  INTRODUCTION Sepsis and septic shock affirm their clinical significance as one of the leading causes of death in intensive care units as well as the 10th overall cause of death of men and women in the United States ( 1 ). Previous research has indicated a complex interplay within the immune system resulting in the strong initial proinflammatory/ innate response and the subsequent development of an immunosuppressed state observed clinically, which appears to be associated with septic morbidity ( 2 ). In this respect, while historically, T lymphocytes/ T cells have been thought of primarily as contributors to the development and control of the adaptive immune response, it is becoming increasingly clear that sub-population of these cells, known as regulatory T cell populations, i.e., T regulatory cells, ?? T cells, etc., may play critical roles in mediating both innate as well as adaptive immune response ( 3 ). Here we will examine one such population, the natural killer T (NKT) cell, using the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) murine model of polymicrobial septic shock. NKT cells have been previously shown to regulate the immune response in other infectious and autoimmune disease models ( 4 - 7 ). Historically, they have been defined by their concomitant expression of NK markers, such as NK1.1, DX5 (CD49b) and Ly49A along with the components of the T cell receptor (TCR). With respect to the expression of the TCR, the most well-studied subpopulation of NKT cells express an invariant V?14j18 TCR ? chain (these cells are also referred to as ‘invariant’ [i] NKT cells)( 8 ). They are in part activationally restricted by antigen presented in the context of CD1d, a glycolipid presenting class I-like molecule, present on most traditional and some non-traditional antigen presenting cells ( 8 ). In addition, iNKT cells are also distinct in their ability to produce large amounts of IFN? and/or IL-4 upon activation via ligation of the TCR by antigen presented in the context of CD1d. This rapid early release is speculated to contribute to expanding the innate immune response in certain situations ( 9 - 11 ), possibly such as the systemic inflammatory response seen early in experimental sepsis. However, upon repeated exposure to antigen, cytokine production shifts towards Th2 type response, as may occur during chronic sepsis ( 12 ) or other forms of traumatic injury ( 13 ). The iNKT Th2 cytokine repertoire has been found to also include IL-10, IL-5 and TGF-? ( 14 ). The overall NKT population includes small percentages of other variant TCR NKT cells, but it is only the invariant V?14 NKT cells that we examine and refer to as iNKT cells here ( 15 ). With respect to sepsis, prior research in our lab indicated that iNKT cells appeared to be able to contribute to the septic immune response ( 16 ). Administration of anti-CD1d antibody, reported to block iNKT cell activation but not deplete these cells, prior to CLP was shown to have a prophylactic effects by raising septic survival ?35%, while reducing the expansion of the septic mouse splenic NKT cell sub-population. With respect to the development of immune suppression, concentrating on the alterations in splenic lymphocyte and macrophage Th1/Th2 cytokine productive capacity, we found that antibody treated septic mouse splenocytes produce less of the Th2/anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 and more of the Th1/pro-inflammatory cytokines IFN? and IL-2 than non-specific antibody treated septic mice ( 17 ). Intriguingly, from an innate regulatory perspective, we also observed that anti-CD1d antibody blockade markedly reduced the release of IL-6 and IL-10 in the blood of these same septic animals. However, while NKT cells represent about 1-3 % of the normal splenic population, they comprise at least 10-20% more of the total T cell population in the liver ( 17 - 19 ). Since the liver has been reported to play a significant role in contributing to both the innate pro-inflammatory cytokine and acute phase mediator response to infectious challenge or shock and is an organ that is often injured in the septic process ( 20 - 24 ), we set out to test the hypotheses that not only are hepatic iNKT affected by experimental polymicrobial septic shock, but they contribute to the pathology of this condition.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals Male Balb/c, C57BL/6J (from Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) and C57BL/6- J?18 -/- (J?18 -/-; deficient in iNKT cells) (a gift from Dr. H. Taniguchi, Kanagawa, Japan)( 25 ) mice, 8-10 weeks of age were used in all experiment procedures. In a subset of experiments mice were treated with either 500 ?g of rat anti-mouse CD1d (clone 1B1; BD Biosciences) or isotype control antibody, i.p., 18 h prior to subjecting them to CLP as described previously ( 16 ). Research objectives and all animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Rhode Island Hospital and carried out in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act and National Institute of Health guidelines. Septic Model The CLP surgery established by Baker et al ( 26 ) and modified by us ( 16 ) was used to induce polymicrobial septic shock in mice. In brief, the cecum was exposed by a midline incision and then tied off with a 3-0 silk ligature 1 cm from the distal end. The ligated portion was then subjected to 2 punctures with a 22-gauge needle: one at the distal end of the cecum and one close to the site of ligation. CLP animals were in a state of septic shock by 24 hours. To control for the effects of the anesthesia and laparotomy on the septic group, Sham surgery mice were subject to all of the procedures above saving ligation and puncture of the cecum. Isolation of Liver Non-Parenchymal Cells (NPC), Splenocytes, Bone Marrow Cells and Peritoneal Leukocytes Livers were first ground and suspended in PBS with 2% fetal bovine serum. After 3 washes with the same media, NPCs were isolated from the remaining cell pellet using a density gradient of 40% and 70% Percoll according to the methods of Pien et al. ( 11 , 27 ) Hepatic macrophages, peritoneal macrophages, splenocytes and/or bone marrow cells were isolated as previously described by our laboratory ( 28 - 30 ). The capacity of splenic T cells or adherent cell cultures to produce cytokines in response to the T cell stimulus anti-CD3 antibody or lipopolysaccharide (as a well defined phagocyte stimulant), respectively, was also assessed as described previously ( 28 , 29 ). Cytokine Levels Blood was collected by cardiac puncture, plasma separated and frozen/stored until needed for assay. BD-Cytometric Bead Assay using a BD-FACSArray (BD-Biosciences Inc) ( 31 ) was applied to determine the pro-inflammatory or Th1/Th2 cytokine levels in blood or cell supernatants. Flow Cytometry NPC were stained with PE-conjugated anti-CD3, anti-CD4, anti-CD69, anti-CD25, anti-CD1d antibodies (BD-Biosciences Inc) and APC-conjugated anti-F4/80, anti-CD11c, anti-NK1.1 antibodies (BD-Biosciences Inc), ?-galactosylceramide-loaded (?-GalCer) as well as unloaded CD1d tetramer (provided by the tetramer facility at the National Institute of Health, Germantown, MD) and with the appropriate antibody isotypic-chromaphore conjugated controls (BD-Biosciences Inc). Stain incubation was performed at room temperature for 20 minutes in 100?l of staining buffer (1% bovine serum albumin and 0.01% sodium azide in PBS). Samples were then read and analyzed (to delineate specific from non-specific staining) using a BD FACSArray and software as previously described ( 32 ). Intracellular Cytokine Staining The detection of intracellular cytokine expression was carried out as previously described in our laboratory ( 33 ). For these studies freshly purified NPCs harvested 24 hours post-CLP were first incubated 2 hours with Brefeldin-A (3?g/ml - eBioscience, San Diego, CA) at 37°C in RPMI medium. Cell surface staining was then performed by incubation with APC-Cy7-labeled anti-CD3 antibodies and APC-labeled anti-NK1.1 antibodies (for C57BL/6J mice) or anti-DX5 antibodies (for Balb/c mice) for 45 min at 4°C in the dark. Note, we utilized anti-NK1.1 or anti-DX5 antibody as opposed to ?-GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer, on C57BL/6J or Balb/c mice respectively, as the tetramer staining was lost during the latter steps of the intracellular cytokine staining protocol. Cells were then permeabilized using freshly prepared Fix’Perm reagent (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and incubated with PE-labeled anti-IL-2, anti-IL-6, anti-IL-10, anti-IL-4, anti-TNF-?, anti-MCP-1, anti-IFN-? antibodies or the appropriate isotype controls (eBioscience, San Diego, CA). After washing twice, cells were analyzed by flow cytometry( 32 ). Survival Study Age matched groups of C57BL/6J and iNKT deficient (J?18 -/-) mice or anti-mouse IgG and anti-mouse CD1d treated Balb/c mice were subject to CLP and their survival monitored and recorded for 14 days. Statistical Analysis The data are presented as a mean ± SEM for each group. Differences in the experimental means for flow cytometric and cytokine values were considered significant if p<0.05 as determined using the Kruskal-Wallis One Way Analysis of Variance on Ranks with SigmaStat® Ver. 3.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Differences in survival curves were considered significant by the Log-rank survival analysis at p<0.05 (SigmaStat® Ver. 3.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).  Animals Male Balb/c, C57BL/6J (from Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) and C57BL/6- J?18 -/- (J?18 -/-; deficient in iNKT cells) (a gift from Dr. H. Taniguchi, Kanagawa, Japan)( 25 ) mice, 8-10 weeks of age were used in all experiment procedures. In a subset of experiments mice were treated with either 500 ?g of rat anti-mouse CD1d (clone 1B1; BD Biosciences) or isotype control antibody, i.p., 18 h prior to subjecting them to CLP as described previously ( 16 ). Research objectives and all animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Rhode Island Hospital and carried out in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act and National Institute of Health guidelines.  Septic Model The CLP surgery established by Baker et al ( 26 ) and modified by us ( 16 ) was used to induce polymicrobial septic shock in mice. In brief, the cecum was exposed by a midline incision and then tied off with a 3-0 silk ligature 1 cm from the distal end. The ligated portion was then subjected to 2 punctures with a 22-gauge needle: one at the distal end of the cecum and one close to the site of ligation. CLP animals were in a state of septic shock by 24 hours. To control for the effects of the anesthesia and laparotomy on the septic group, Sham surgery mice were subject to all of the procedures above saving ligation and puncture of the cecum.  Isolation of Liver Non-Parenchymal Cells (NPC), Splenocytes, Bone Marrow Cells and Peritoneal Leukocytes Livers were first ground and suspended in PBS with 2% fetal bovine serum. After 3 washes with the same media, NPCs were isolated from the remaining cell pellet using a density gradient of 40% and 70% Percoll according to the methods of Pien et al. ( 11 , 27 ) Hepatic macrophages, peritoneal macrophages, splenocytes and/or bone marrow cells were isolated as previously described by our laboratory ( 28 - 30 ). The capacity of splenic T cells or adherent cell cultures to produce cytokines in response to the T cell stimulus anti-CD3 antibody or lipopolysaccharide (as a well defined phagocyte stimulant), respectively, was also assessed as described previously ( 28 , 29 ).  Cytokine Levels Blood was collected by cardiac puncture, plasma separated and frozen/stored until needed for assay. BD-Cytometric Bead Assay using a BD-FACSArray (BD-Biosciences Inc) ( 31 ) was applied to determine the pro-inflammatory or Th1/Th2 cytokine levels in blood or cell supernatants.  Flow Cytometry NPC were stained with PE-conjugated anti-CD3, anti-CD4, anti-CD69, anti-CD25, anti-CD1d antibodies (BD-Biosciences Inc) and APC-conjugated anti-F4/80, anti-CD11c, anti-NK1.1 antibodies (BD-Biosciences Inc), ?-galactosylceramide-loaded (?-GalCer) as well as unloaded CD1d tetramer (provided by the tetramer facility at the National Institute of Health, Germantown, MD) and with the appropriate antibody isotypic-chromaphore conjugated controls (BD-Biosciences Inc). Stain incubation was performed at room temperature for 20 minutes in 100?l of staining buffer (1% bovine serum albumin and 0.01% sodium azide in PBS). Samples were then read and analyzed (to delineate specific from non-specific staining) using a BD FACSArray and software as previously described ( 32 ).  Intracellular Cytokine Staining The detection of intracellular cytokine expression was carried out as previously described in our laboratory ( 33 ). For these studies freshly purified NPCs harvested 24 hours post-CLP were first incubated 2 hours with Brefeldin-A (3?g/ml - eBioscience, San Diego, CA) at 37°C in RPMI medium. Cell surface staining was then performed by incubation with APC-Cy7-labeled anti-CD3 antibodies and APC-labeled anti-NK1.1 antibodies (for C57BL/6J mice) or anti-DX5 antibodies (for Balb/c mice) for 45 min at 4°C in the dark. Note, we utilized anti-NK1.1 or anti-DX5 antibody as opposed to ?-GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer, on C57BL/6J or Balb/c mice respectively, as the tetramer staining was lost during the latter steps of the intracellular cytokine staining protocol. Cells were then permeabilized using freshly prepared Fix’Perm reagent (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and incubated with PE-labeled anti-IL-2, anti-IL-6, anti-IL-10, anti-IL-4, anti-TNF-?, anti-MCP-1, anti-IFN-? antibodies or the appropriate isotype controls (eBioscience, San Diego, CA). After washing twice, cells were analyzed by flow cytometry( 32 ).  Survival Study Age matched groups of C57BL/6J and iNKT deficient (J?18 -/-) mice or anti-mouse IgG and anti-mouse CD1d treated Balb/c mice were subject to CLP and their survival monitored and recorded for 14 days.  Statistical Analysis The data are presented as a mean ± SEM for each group. Differences in the experimental means for flow cytometric and cytokine values were considered significant if p<0.05 as determined using the Kruskal-Wallis One Way Analysis of Variance on Ranks with SigmaStat® Ver. 3.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Differences in survival curves were considered significant by the Log-rank survival analysis at p<0.05 (SigmaStat® Ver. 3.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).  RESULTS Septic Shock-Induced Mortality, the Systemic Inflammatory Response but not Splenic or Peritoneal Cytokine Release Capacity Are Substantially Reduced by the Genetic Deficiency of iNKT Cells When we conducted a survival study on age matched male C57BL/6J and iNKT (J?18 -/-) deficient mice, we found that a significant survival advantage could be detected as early as 48 h following CLP in the J?18 -/- mice and remained evident even at 14 days post-CLP ( Fig. 1A ). In line with this we observed that in J?18 -/- mouse, CLP-induced blood systemic cytokine response was essentially ablated ( Fig. 1B ). To the extent that iNKT cells might be playing a role in acute septic immune cell dysfunction, we assessed the degree to which local tissue immune responsiveness was altered (as an index of immune morbidity) following CLP in iNKT cell deficient J?18 -/- mice ( 25 ) vs. background control animals. Surprisingly, while we documented/ re-affirmed the functional decline in the capacity of splenocytes to produce Th1 cytokines as well as peritoneal macrophages’ abilities to produce pro-inflammatory mediators after sepsis ( Figs. 1C-D ) that has been previously reported ( 28 , 32 , 34 - 37 ), genetic deficiency of iNKT cells only partially restored Th1 cytokine (IFN-? and TNF-?) release in splenocytes ( Fig. 1C ) and had no effect on peritoneal macrophage cytokine release ( Fig. 1D ); suggesting that iNKT cells play only a minimal role in these dysfunctions. The Frequency of Liver iNKT Cells Declines over the 1st 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since the liver is one the largest sites of resident NKT cells in the mouse ( 18 , 19 ) and as we and others have previously shown that substantially aspects/ amounts of the cytokines seen during the systemic pro-inflammatory response to experimental sepsis and/ or shock ( 20 , 38 ) are initially derived from the liver, we attempted to determine what effect CLP had on the this resident iNKT cell sub-population. Looking initially at a typical flow dot-plot ( Fig. 2A ) and associated histogram ( Fig. 2B ) of NPCs derived 24 h following either Sham protocol or CLP, it can be seen that there is a ?70% decline in the number of liver CD3+tetramer+ cells/ iNKT cells after sepsis ( 18 ). When these data are collated for several repeat experiments we observed that while the percentage of liver iNKT cells for septic mouse samples remained the same as the Sham animals’ cells at 4 h, it was significantly decreased at 12 and 24 h post CLP by ?45% ( Fig. 2C .). Further, we observed that the frequency of CD3+NK1.1+ closely correlated with the percentages seen on the CD3+tetramer+ cells detected here in the liver ( Fig. 2D ). To the degree that the loss in liver iNKT cells was not an actual decline, we observed not only that there was no decline in the mean fluorescence intensity of the CD1d+tetramer/CD3+ staining within the iNKT cell population ( Fig. 2A-B ; e.g., the sum of 8-9 animal’s samples/group for the MFI for CD1d-tetramer+ expressions was 2554±97 for Sham and 2383±80 for CLP [24 h post]) and no significant differences in the total NPC yield from Sham or CLP livers ( Fig. 2E ), but also that these cells did not appear to have migrated elsewhere. This latter conclusion was based on the observation that when the same staining was performed in the spleen and bone marrow cells, no increase in tetramer positive iNKT cells were found (data not shown). To the extent that the decline NKT cells was associated with a marked change in the expression of CD1d antigen presenting cells present in the liver, we noted no significant change in the extent CD1d+ expression in either the whole NPC population (Sham 60.3±5.7% vs CLP 62.5±1.5% CD1d+; n= 6-8 mice per group) or the F4/80+CD1d+ or CD11c+CD1d+ sub-populations following CLP on these cells by flow cytometric assessment (data not shown). The Frequency of Activated Liver iNKT Cells and Liver Macrophages that Express Pro-/ Anti-Inflammatory Cytokines Is Elevated at 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since studies have suggested that iNKT cells can be readily activated ( 18 ) ( 39 ), we subsequently attempted to determine the extent to which the tetramer+ cells were expressing the activation markers CD69 and CD25. What we found was while there was a marked overall decline in the frequency of septic mouse CD1d tetramer+ cells ( Fig 2D-E ), these residual cells exhibited a marked increase in CD69 and CD25 expressions, as determined by the rise in mean fluorescent intensity ( Fig. 3A-D ). Moreover, since iNKT cells have been reported to rapidly upregulate the release of IL-4, IFN-? ( 9 ), as well as several other Th1/Th2 cytokines ( 12 - 14 ), we attempted to determine whether the frequency of NKT cells expressing the cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-?, TNF-? and MCP-1, by intracellular cytokine staining/ flow cytometric assessment, was altered. What we observed in liver NKT cells derived from septic C57BL/6J mice was that there was a marked increase in the frequency of TNF-?+, IL-6+, IL-10+ cells with a trend though non-significant rise in IL-4+ and IFN-?+ cells ( Fig 4 A-E ). No change was seen in IL-2+ or MCP-1+ cell percentages (data not shown). Since previous studies have indicated not only that liver NKT cells may interact with local tissue macrophages to activate them ( 11 ), but that liver macrophages contribute to aspects of the developing systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response encountered in the septic animal ( 20 ), we concomitantly examined the extent of change in frequency of liver macrophages (F4/80+ cells) that were positive for the inflammatory cytokines, TNF-?, IL-6 and IL-10. Not surprisingly, what we observed was a marked rise in the septic mouse percentage of liver macrophages that was positive for all 3 of these cytokines ( Fig. 4F-H ). Inhibition of Antigen Presentation/Activation via CD1d Blocks Pro-inflammatory Cytokine Release, Septic Mortality and the CLP-Induced Potentiation of Hepatic Macrophage/ Kupffer Cell Cytokine Production Since we had observed that the residual liver iNKT cell population, while in decline, was apparently activated and producing cytokines, we attempted to ascertain whether inability to activate iNKT cells (by blocking their ability to see antigen presented in the context of CD1d) altered the capacity to not only induce a systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response, CLP mortality, but also potentiate septic hepatic macrophage cytokine expression. What we found was that, as seen in J?18-/-mice, Balb/c mice pre-treated with the CD1d-blocking antibody 18 h prior to being subjected to CLP not only exhibited lower levels of circulating TNF-?, IL-6, MCP-1 (commonly assessed markers of the pro-inflammatory response ( 40 , 41 )) and IL-10 (a typical index of the anti-inflammatory response ( 42 , 43 )) ( Fig 5A ), but showed a decrease in NKT cell’s capacity to produce TNF-? / IL-6 / IL-10 and IL-4 ( Fig 6A-D ). Most importantly, this was associated with a marked improvement in septic survival when compared to rat-IgG treated mice ( Fig 5B ). Interestingly, when we assessed the extent to which the frequency of septic liver macrophage intracellular inflammatory cytokine expression was altered by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment, we found that while the percentage of IL-6+ macrophages markedly declined (when compared to IgG treated mouse samples), the rise in TNF+ cells was not attenuated ( Fig. 6F-G ). Further, the frequency of IL-10+ septic mouse F4/80+ cells were significantly increased by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment ( Fig. 6H ). Of note while we initially chose to use C57BL/6J mice, because they served as the genetic background mouse for the J?18 -/- deficient mouse; we decided to utilize the Balb/c mouse for the last part of this study as: 1) we wanted to determine the extent to which the contribution of the NKT cells to septic morbidity was mouse strain specific ( 44 , 45 ); 2) we had previously looked at changes in septic mouse splenic responses using this strain ( 16 ); and 3) our initial observations that relative to the C57BL/6J that the CLP induced changes in frequency (a decline in the % of NKT cells) and activation status (concomitant increases in both CD69 & CD25) of the Balb/c’s hepatic NKT cell sub-population were comparable ( Fig. 7A-C ). That said; while the aspects of NKT cell percentage decline in the face of residual NKT cell CD69/ CD25 activation exhibited similar response to the onset of sepsis, the intracellular cytokine expression of the septic Balb/c liver NKT cells was distinct. Although presenting with a similar trend toward an increase, unlike the C57BL/6J mouse NKT cells, CLP did not induced a statistically significant increase in IL-6+, IL-10+, IFN-?+ or TNF-?+. However, the percentage of IL-4+ NKT cells was markedly increased ( Fig. 6A-E ).  RESULTS Septic Shock-Induced Mortality, the Systemic Inflammatory Response but not Splenic or Peritoneal Cytokine Release Capacity Are Substantially Reduced by the Genetic Deficiency of iNKT Cells When we conducted a survival study on age matched male C57BL/6J and iNKT (J?18 -/-) deficient mice, we found that a significant survival advantage could be detected as early as 48 h following CLP in the J?18 -/- mice and remained evident even at 14 days post-CLP ( Fig. 1A ). In line with this we observed that in J?18 -/- mouse, CLP-induced blood systemic cytokine response was essentially ablated ( Fig. 1B ). To the extent that iNKT cells might be playing a role in acute septic immune cell dysfunction, we assessed the degree to which local tissue immune responsiveness was altered (as an index of immune morbidity) following CLP in iNKT cell deficient J?18 -/- mice ( 25 ) vs. background control animals. Surprisingly, while we documented/ re-affirmed the functional decline in the capacity of splenocytes to produce Th1 cytokines as well as peritoneal macrophages’ abilities to produce pro-inflammatory mediators after sepsis ( Figs. 1C-D ) that has been previously reported ( 28 , 32 , 34 - 37 ), genetic deficiency of iNKT cells only partially restored Th1 cytokine (IFN-? and TNF-?) release in splenocytes ( Fig. 1C ) and had no effect on peritoneal macrophage cytokine release ( Fig. 1D ); suggesting that iNKT cells play only a minimal role in these dysfunctions. The Frequency of Liver iNKT Cells Declines over the 1st 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since the liver is one the largest sites of resident NKT cells in the mouse ( 18 , 19 ) and as we and others have previously shown that substantially aspects/ amounts of the cytokines seen during the systemic pro-inflammatory response to experimental sepsis and/ or shock ( 20 , 38 ) are initially derived from the liver, we attempted to determine what effect CLP had on the this resident iNKT cell sub-population. Looking initially at a typical flow dot-plot ( Fig. 2A ) and associated histogram ( Fig. 2B ) of NPCs derived 24 h following either Sham protocol or CLP, it can be seen that there is a ?70% decline in the number of liver CD3+tetramer+ cells/ iNKT cells after sepsis ( 18 ). When these data are collated for several repeat experiments we observed that while the percentage of liver iNKT cells for septic mouse samples remained the same as the Sham animals’ cells at 4 h, it was significantly decreased at 12 and 24 h post CLP by ?45% ( Fig. 2C .). Further, we observed that the frequency of CD3+NK1.1+ closely correlated with the percentages seen on the CD3+tetramer+ cells detected here in the liver ( Fig. 2D ). To the degree that the loss in liver iNKT cells was not an actual decline, we observed not only that there was no decline in the mean fluorescence intensity of the CD1d+tetramer/CD3+ staining within the iNKT cell population ( Fig. 2A-B ; e.g., the sum of 8-9 animal’s samples/group for the MFI for CD1d-tetramer+ expressions was 2554±97 for Sham and 2383±80 for CLP [24 h post]) and no significant differences in the total NPC yield from Sham or CLP livers ( Fig. 2E ), but also that these cells did not appear to have migrated elsewhere. This latter conclusion was based on the observation that when the same staining was performed in the spleen and bone marrow cells, no increase in tetramer positive iNKT cells were found (data not shown). To the extent that the decline NKT cells was associated with a marked change in the expression of CD1d antigen presenting cells present in the liver, we noted no significant change in the extent CD1d+ expression in either the whole NPC population (Sham 60.3±5.7% vs CLP 62.5±1.5% CD1d+; n= 6-8 mice per group) or the F4/80+CD1d+ or CD11c+CD1d+ sub-populations following CLP on these cells by flow cytometric assessment (data not shown). The Frequency of Activated Liver iNKT Cells and Liver Macrophages that Express Pro-/ Anti-Inflammatory Cytokines Is Elevated at 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since studies have suggested that iNKT cells can be readily activated ( 18 ) ( 39 ), we subsequently attempted to determine the extent to which the tetramer+ cells were expressing the activation markers CD69 and CD25. What we found was while there was a marked overall decline in the frequency of septic mouse CD1d tetramer+ cells ( Fig 2D-E ), these residual cells exhibited a marked increase in CD69 and CD25 expressions, as determined by the rise in mean fluorescent intensity ( Fig. 3A-D ). Moreover, since iNKT cells have been reported to rapidly upregulate the release of IL-4, IFN-? ( 9 ), as well as several other Th1/Th2 cytokines ( 12 - 14 ), we attempted to determine whether the frequency of NKT cells expressing the cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-?, TNF-? and MCP-1, by intracellular cytokine staining/ flow cytometric assessment, was altered. What we observed in liver NKT cells derived from septic C57BL/6J mice was that there was a marked increase in the frequency of TNF-?+, IL-6+, IL-10+ cells with a trend though non-significant rise in IL-4+ and IFN-?+ cells ( Fig 4 A-E ). No change was seen in IL-2+ or MCP-1+ cell percentages (data not shown). Since previous studies have indicated not only that liver NKT cells may interact with local tissue macrophages to activate them ( 11 ), but that liver macrophages contribute to aspects of the developing systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response encountered in the septic animal ( 20 ), we concomitantly examined the extent of change in frequency of liver macrophages (F4/80+ cells) that were positive for the inflammatory cytokines, TNF-?, IL-6 and IL-10. Not surprisingly, what we observed was a marked rise in the septic mouse percentage of liver macrophages that was positive for all 3 of these cytokines ( Fig. 4F-H ). Inhibition of Antigen Presentation/Activation via CD1d Blocks Pro-inflammatory Cytokine Release, Septic Mortality and the CLP-Induced Potentiation of Hepatic Macrophage/ Kupffer Cell Cytokine Production Since we had observed that the residual liver iNKT cell population, while in decline, was apparently activated and producing cytokines, we attempted to ascertain whether inability to activate iNKT cells (by blocking their ability to see antigen presented in the context of CD1d) altered the capacity to not only induce a systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response, CLP mortality, but also potentiate septic hepatic macrophage cytokine expression. What we found was that, as seen in J?18-/-mice, Balb/c mice pre-treated with the CD1d-blocking antibody 18 h prior to being subjected to CLP not only exhibited lower levels of circulating TNF-?, IL-6, MCP-1 (commonly assessed markers of the pro-inflammatory response ( 40 , 41 )) and IL-10 (a typical index of the anti-inflammatory response ( 42 , 43 )) ( Fig 5A ), but showed a decrease in NKT cell’s capacity to produce TNF-? / IL-6 / IL-10 and IL-4 ( Fig 6A-D ). Most importantly, this was associated with a marked improvement in septic survival when compared to rat-IgG treated mice ( Fig 5B ). Interestingly, when we assessed the extent to which the frequency of septic liver macrophage intracellular inflammatory cytokine expression was altered by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment, we found that while the percentage of IL-6+ macrophages markedly declined (when compared to IgG treated mouse samples), the rise in TNF+ cells was not attenuated ( Fig. 6F-G ). Further, the frequency of IL-10+ septic mouse F4/80+ cells were significantly increased by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment ( Fig. 6H ). Of note while we initially chose to use C57BL/6J mice, because they served as the genetic background mouse for the J?18 -/- deficient mouse; we decided to utilize the Balb/c mouse for the last part of this study as: 1) we wanted to determine the extent to which the contribution of the NKT cells to septic morbidity was mouse strain specific ( 44 , 45 ); 2) we had previously looked at changes in septic mouse splenic responses using this strain ( 16 ); and 3) our initial observations that relative to the C57BL/6J that the CLP induced changes in frequency (a decline in the % of NKT cells) and activation status (concomitant increases in both CD69 & CD25) of the Balb/c’s hepatic NKT cell sub-population were comparable ( Fig. 7A-C ). That said; while the aspects of NKT cell percentage decline in the face of residual NKT cell CD69/ CD25 activation exhibited similar response to the onset of sepsis, the intracellular cytokine expression of the septic Balb/c liver NKT cells was distinct. Although presenting with a similar trend toward an increase, unlike the C57BL/6J mouse NKT cells, CLP did not induced a statistically significant increase in IL-6+, IL-10+, IFN-?+ or TNF-?+. However, the percentage of IL-4+ NKT cells was markedly increased ( Fig. 6A-E ).  Septic Shock-Induced Mortality, the Systemic Inflammatory Response but not Splenic or Peritoneal Cytokine Release Capacity Are Substantially Reduced by the Genetic Deficiency of iNKT Cells When we conducted a survival study on age matched male C57BL/6J and iNKT (J?18 -/-) deficient mice, we found that a significant survival advantage could be detected as early as 48 h following CLP in the J?18 -/- mice and remained evident even at 14 days post-CLP ( Fig. 1A ). In line with this we observed that in J?18 -/- mouse, CLP-induced blood systemic cytokine response was essentially ablated ( Fig. 1B ). To the extent that iNKT cells might be playing a role in acute septic immune cell dysfunction, we assessed the degree to which local tissue immune responsiveness was altered (as an index of immune morbidity) following CLP in iNKT cell deficient J?18 -/- mice ( 25 ) vs. background control animals. Surprisingly, while we documented/ re-affirmed the functional decline in the capacity of splenocytes to produce Th1 cytokines as well as peritoneal macrophages’ abilities to produce pro-inflammatory mediators after sepsis ( Figs. 1C-D ) that has been previously reported ( 28 , 32 , 34 - 37 ), genetic deficiency of iNKT cells only partially restored Th1 cytokine (IFN-? and TNF-?) release in splenocytes ( Fig. 1C ) and had no effect on peritoneal macrophage cytokine release ( Fig. 1D ); suggesting that iNKT cells play only a minimal role in these dysfunctions.  Septic Shock-Induced Mortality, the Systemic Inflammatory Response but not Splenic or Peritoneal Cytokine Release Capacity Are Substantially Reduced by the Genetic Deficiency of iNKT Cells When we conducted a survival study on age matched male C57BL/6J and iNKT (J?18 -/-) deficient mice, we found that a significant survival advantage could be detected as early as 48 h following CLP in the J?18 -/- mice and remained evident even at 14 days post-CLP ( Fig. 1A ). In line with this we observed that in J?18 -/- mouse, CLP-induced blood systemic cytokine response was essentially ablated ( Fig. 1B ). To the extent that iNKT cells might be playing a role in acute septic immune cell dysfunction, we assessed the degree to which local tissue immune responsiveness was altered (as an index of immune morbidity) following CLP in iNKT cell deficient J?18 -/- mice ( 25 ) vs. background control animals. Surprisingly, while we documented/ re-affirmed the functional decline in the capacity of splenocytes to produce Th1 cytokines as well as peritoneal macrophages’ abilities to produce pro-inflammatory mediators after sepsis ( Figs. 1C-D ) that has been previously reported ( 28 , 32 , 34 - 37 ), genetic deficiency of iNKT cells only partially restored Th1 cytokine (IFN-? and TNF-?) release in splenocytes ( Fig. 1C ) and had no effect on peritoneal macrophage cytokine release ( Fig. 1D ); suggesting that iNKT cells play only a minimal role in these dysfunctions.  The Frequency of Liver iNKT Cells Declines over the 1st 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since the liver is one the largest sites of resident NKT cells in the mouse ( 18 , 19 ) and as we and others have previously shown that substantially aspects/ amounts of the cytokines seen during the systemic pro-inflammatory response to experimental sepsis and/ or shock ( 20 , 38 ) are initially derived from the liver, we attempted to determine what effect CLP had on the this resident iNKT cell sub-population. Looking initially at a typical flow dot-plot ( Fig. 2A ) and associated histogram ( Fig. 2B ) of NPCs derived 24 h following either Sham protocol or CLP, it can be seen that there is a ?70% decline in the number of liver CD3+tetramer+ cells/ iNKT cells after sepsis ( 18 ). When these data are collated for several repeat experiments we observed that while the percentage of liver iNKT cells for septic mouse samples remained the same as the Sham animals’ cells at 4 h, it was significantly decreased at 12 and 24 h post CLP by ?45% ( Fig. 2C .). Further, we observed that the frequency of CD3+NK1.1+ closely correlated with the percentages seen on the CD3+tetramer+ cells detected here in the liver ( Fig. 2D ). To the degree that the loss in liver iNKT cells was not an actual decline, we observed not only that there was no decline in the mean fluorescence intensity of the CD1d+tetramer/CD3+ staining within the iNKT cell population ( Fig. 2A-B ; e.g., the sum of 8-9 animal’s samples/group for the MFI for CD1d-tetramer+ expressions was 2554±97 for Sham and 2383±80 for CLP [24 h post]) and no significant differences in the total NPC yield from Sham or CLP livers ( Fig. 2E ), but also that these cells did not appear to have migrated elsewhere. This latter conclusion was based on the observation that when the same staining was performed in the spleen and bone marrow cells, no increase in tetramer positive iNKT cells were found (data not shown). To the extent that the decline NKT cells was associated with a marked change in the expression of CD1d antigen presenting cells present in the liver, we noted no significant change in the extent CD1d+ expression in either the whole NPC population (Sham 60.3±5.7% vs CLP 62.5±1.5% CD1d+; n= 6-8 mice per group) or the F4/80+CD1d+ or CD11c+CD1d+ sub-populations following CLP on these cells by flow cytometric assessment (data not shown).  The Frequency of Liver iNKT Cells Declines over the 1st 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since the liver is one the largest sites of resident NKT cells in the mouse ( 18 , 19 ) and as we and others have previously shown that substantially aspects/ amounts of the cytokines seen during the systemic pro-inflammatory response to experimental sepsis and/ or shock ( 20 , 38 ) are initially derived from the liver, we attempted to determine what effect CLP had on the this resident iNKT cell sub-population. Looking initially at a typical flow dot-plot ( Fig. 2A ) and associated histogram ( Fig. 2B ) of NPCs derived 24 h following either Sham protocol or CLP, it can be seen that there is a ?70% decline in the number of liver CD3+tetramer+ cells/ iNKT cells after sepsis ( 18 ). When these data are collated for several repeat experiments we observed that while the percentage of liver iNKT cells for septic mouse samples remained the same as the Sham animals’ cells at 4 h, it was significantly decreased at 12 and 24 h post CLP by ?45% ( Fig. 2C .). Further, we observed that the frequency of CD3+NK1.1+ closely correlated with the percentages seen on the CD3+tetramer+ cells detected here in the liver ( Fig. 2D ). To the degree that the loss in liver iNKT cells was not an actual decline, we observed not only that there was no decline in the mean fluorescence intensity of the CD1d+tetramer/CD3+ staining within the iNKT cell population ( Fig. 2A-B ; e.g., the sum of 8-9 animal’s samples/group for the MFI for CD1d-tetramer+ expressions was 2554±97 for Sham and 2383±80 for CLP [24 h post]) and no significant differences in the total NPC yield from Sham or CLP livers ( Fig. 2E ), but also that these cells did not appear to have migrated elsewhere. This latter conclusion was based on the observation that when the same staining was performed in the spleen and bone marrow cells, no increase in tetramer positive iNKT cells were found (data not shown). To the extent that the decline NKT cells was associated with a marked change in the expression of CD1d antigen presenting cells present in the liver, we noted no significant change in the extent CD1d+ expression in either the whole NPC population (Sham 60.3±5.7% vs CLP 62.5±1.5% CD1d+; n= 6-8 mice per group) or the F4/80+CD1d+ or CD11c+CD1d+ sub-populations following CLP on these cells by flow cytometric assessment (data not shown).  The Frequency of Activated Liver iNKT Cells and Liver Macrophages that Express Pro-/ Anti-Inflammatory Cytokines Is Elevated at 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since studies have suggested that iNKT cells can be readily activated ( 18 ) ( 39 ), we subsequently attempted to determine the extent to which the tetramer+ cells were expressing the activation markers CD69 and CD25. What we found was while there was a marked overall decline in the frequency of septic mouse CD1d tetramer+ cells ( Fig 2D-E ), these residual cells exhibited a marked increase in CD69 and CD25 expressions, as determined by the rise in mean fluorescent intensity ( Fig. 3A-D ). Moreover, since iNKT cells have been reported to rapidly upregulate the release of IL-4, IFN-? ( 9 ), as well as several other Th1/Th2 cytokines ( 12 - 14 ), we attempted to determine whether the frequency of NKT cells expressing the cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-?, TNF-? and MCP-1, by intracellular cytokine staining/ flow cytometric assessment, was altered. What we observed in liver NKT cells derived from septic C57BL/6J mice was that there was a marked increase in the frequency of TNF-?+, IL-6+, IL-10+ cells with a trend though non-significant rise in IL-4+ and IFN-?+ cells ( Fig 4 A-E ). No change was seen in IL-2+ or MCP-1+ cell percentages (data not shown). Since previous studies have indicated not only that liver NKT cells may interact with local tissue macrophages to activate them ( 11 ), but that liver macrophages contribute to aspects of the developing systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response encountered in the septic animal ( 20 ), we concomitantly examined the extent of change in frequency of liver macrophages (F4/80+ cells) that were positive for the inflammatory cytokines, TNF-?, IL-6 and IL-10. Not surprisingly, what we observed was a marked rise in the septic mouse percentage of liver macrophages that was positive for all 3 of these cytokines ( Fig. 4F-H ).  The Frequency of Activated Liver iNKT Cells and Liver Macrophages that Express Pro-/ Anti-Inflammatory Cytokines Is Elevated at 24 Hours following Septic Insult Since studies have suggested that iNKT cells can be readily activated ( 18 ) ( 39 ), we subsequently attempted to determine the extent to which the tetramer+ cells were expressing the activation markers CD69 and CD25. What we found was while there was a marked overall decline in the frequency of septic mouse CD1d tetramer+ cells ( Fig 2D-E ), these residual cells exhibited a marked increase in CD69 and CD25 expressions, as determined by the rise in mean fluorescent intensity ( Fig. 3A-D ). Moreover, since iNKT cells have been reported to rapidly upregulate the release of IL-4, IFN-? ( 9 ), as well as several other Th1/Th2 cytokines ( 12 - 14 ), we attempted to determine whether the frequency of NKT cells expressing the cytokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IFN-?, TNF-? and MCP-1, by intracellular cytokine staining/ flow cytometric assessment, was altered. What we observed in liver NKT cells derived from septic C57BL/6J mice was that there was a marked increase in the frequency of TNF-?+, IL-6+, IL-10+ cells with a trend though non-significant rise in IL-4+ and IFN-?+ cells ( Fig 4 A-E ). No change was seen in IL-2+ or MCP-1+ cell percentages (data not shown). Since previous studies have indicated not only that liver NKT cells may interact with local tissue macrophages to activate them ( 11 ), but that liver macrophages contribute to aspects of the developing systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response encountered in the septic animal ( 20 ), we concomitantly examined the extent of change in frequency of liver macrophages (F4/80+ cells) that were positive for the inflammatory cytokines, TNF-?, IL-6 and IL-10. Not surprisingly, what we observed was a marked rise in the septic mouse percentage of liver macrophages that was positive for all 3 of these cytokines ( Fig. 4F-H ).  Inhibition of Antigen Presentation/Activation via CD1d Blocks Pro-inflammatory Cytokine Release, Septic Mortality and the CLP-Induced Potentiation of Hepatic Macrophage/ Kupffer Cell Cytokine Production Since we had observed that the residual liver iNKT cell population, while in decline, was apparently activated and producing cytokines, we attempted to ascertain whether inability to activate iNKT cells (by blocking their ability to see antigen presented in the context of CD1d) altered the capacity to not only induce a systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response, CLP mortality, but also potentiate septic hepatic macrophage cytokine expression. What we found was that, as seen in J?18-/-mice, Balb/c mice pre-treated with the CD1d-blocking antibody 18 h prior to being subjected to CLP not only exhibited lower levels of circulating TNF-?, IL-6, MCP-1 (commonly assessed markers of the pro-inflammatory response ( 40 , 41 )) and IL-10 (a typical index of the anti-inflammatory response ( 42 , 43 )) ( Fig 5A ), but showed a decrease in NKT cell’s capacity to produce TNF-? / IL-6 / IL-10 and IL-4 ( Fig 6A-D ). Most importantly, this was associated with a marked improvement in septic survival when compared to rat-IgG treated mice ( Fig 5B ). Interestingly, when we assessed the extent to which the frequency of septic liver macrophage intracellular inflammatory cytokine expression was altered by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment, we found that while the percentage of IL-6+ macrophages markedly declined (when compared to IgG treated mouse samples), the rise in TNF+ cells was not attenuated ( Fig. 6F-G ). Further, the frequency of IL-10+ septic mouse F4/80+ cells were significantly increased by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment ( Fig. 6H ). Of note while we initially chose to use C57BL/6J mice, because they served as the genetic background mouse for the J?18 -/- deficient mouse; we decided to utilize the Balb/c mouse for the last part of this study as: 1) we wanted to determine the extent to which the contribution of the NKT cells to septic morbidity was mouse strain specific ( 44 , 45 ); 2) we had previously looked at changes in septic mouse splenic responses using this strain ( 16 ); and 3) our initial observations that relative to the C57BL/6J that the CLP induced changes in frequency (a decline in the % of NKT cells) and activation status (concomitant increases in both CD69 & CD25) of the Balb/c’s hepatic NKT cell sub-population were comparable ( Fig. 7A-C ). That said; while the aspects of NKT cell percentage decline in the face of residual NKT cell CD69/ CD25 activation exhibited similar response to the onset of sepsis, the intracellular cytokine expression of the septic Balb/c liver NKT cells was distinct. Although presenting with a similar trend toward an increase, unlike the C57BL/6J mouse NKT cells, CLP did not induced a statistically significant increase in IL-6+, IL-10+, IFN-?+ or TNF-?+. However, the percentage of IL-4+ NKT cells was markedly increased ( Fig. 6A-E ).  Inhibition of Antigen Presentation/Activation via CD1d Blocks Pro-inflammatory Cytokine Release, Septic Mortality and the CLP-Induced Potentiation of Hepatic Macrophage/ Kupffer Cell Cytokine Production Since we had observed that the residual liver iNKT cell population, while in decline, was apparently activated and producing cytokines, we attempted to ascertain whether inability to activate iNKT cells (by blocking their ability to see antigen presented in the context of CD1d) altered the capacity to not only induce a systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine response, CLP mortality, but also potentiate septic hepatic macrophage cytokine expression. What we found was that, as seen in J?18-/-mice, Balb/c mice pre-treated with the CD1d-blocking antibody 18 h prior to being subjected to CLP not only exhibited lower levels of circulating TNF-?, IL-6, MCP-1 (commonly assessed markers of the pro-inflammatory response ( 40 , 41 )) and IL-10 (a typical index of the anti-inflammatory response ( 42 , 43 )) ( Fig 5A ), but showed a decrease in NKT cell’s capacity to produce TNF-? / IL-6 / IL-10 and IL-4 ( Fig 6A-D ). Most importantly, this was associated with a marked improvement in septic survival when compared to rat-IgG treated mice ( Fig 5B ). Interestingly, when we assessed the extent to which the frequency of septic liver macrophage intracellular inflammatory cytokine expression was altered by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment, we found that while the percentage of IL-6+ macrophages markedly declined (when compared to IgG treated mouse samples), the rise in TNF+ cells was not attenuated ( Fig. 6F-G ). Further, the frequency of IL-10+ septic mouse F4/80+ cells were significantly increased by anti-CD1d blocking antibody pre-treatment ( Fig. 6H ). Of note while we initially chose to use C57BL/6J mice, because they served as the genetic background mouse for the J?18 -/- deficient mouse; we decided to utilize the Balb/c mouse for the last part of this study as: 1) we wanted to determine the extent to which the contribution of the NKT cells to septic morbidity was mouse strain specific ( 44 , 45 ); 2) we had previously looked at changes in septic mouse splenic responses using this strain ( 16 ); and 3) our initial observations that relative to the C57BL/6J that the CLP induced changes in frequency (a decline in the % of NKT cells) and activation status (concomitant increases in both CD69 & CD25) of the Balb/c’s hepatic NKT cell sub-population were comparable ( Fig. 7A-C ). That said; while the aspects of NKT cell percentage decline in the face of residual NKT cell CD69/ CD25 activation exhibited similar response to the onset of sepsis, the intracellular cytokine expression of the septic Balb/c liver NKT cells was distinct. Although presenting with a similar trend toward an increase, unlike the C57BL/6J mouse NKT cells, CLP did not induced a statistically significant increase in IL-6+, IL-10+, IFN-?+ or TNF-?+. However, the percentage of IL-4+ NKT cells was markedly increased ( Fig. 6A-E ).  DISCUSSION Initial triggers of the sepsis may be gram positive and negative bacteria, tissue injury (when extensive) or ischemia, and less often fungi, or viruses ( 2 , 46 ). The polymicrobial septic shock model we used here introduced both necrotic and infectious material into circulation, which in turn is thought to serve as the stimulus for the biphasic immune response seen clinically ( 47 ). While the search for endogenous/ exogenous NKT ligands continues, our model shows that septic injury/ insult is capable of activating these cells in the liver and this occurs both in mice from a C57BL/6J or Balb/c strain background. Further, at least in a model of acute onset mortality, we show that NKT cells not only contribute to the development of pro-inflammation in this setting, but that this is at least in part through a CD1d antigen mediated event that appears to involve the activation of endogenous liver adherent cell populations. This is an important point as several recent studies have illustrated that iNKT cells not only express pattern recognition receptors, i.e., TLR-4 ( 48 ), TLR-2 ( 49 ) and TLR-9 ( 50 ), which should allow them to sense these microbial components present in the septic animal, but also respond to defined gram negative infectious challenge by potentiating the pro-inflammatory response. These data differ with reports by Faunce et al ( 13 , 51 ),( 52 ) which indicate that following an injury, such as burn, the iNKT cell, via its release of IL-4, plays a role in suppressing the developing cell-mediated adaptive immune response. This is not to say that we have not previously seen some aspects of an immune suppressive phenotype developing in these mice ( 3 ). However, here we have reported that both the lack of iNKT cells or functional blockade of iNKT cell signaling with anti-CD1d blocking antibody treatment, led to the decline of pro-inflammatory (TNF-?, MCP-1, and IL-6) as well as anti-inflammatory IL-10 release into circulation. Four possible reasons for differences in our findings may relate to: 1) the background of the animals used in the studies by Faunce et al was solely Balb/c, which we ( Fig. 6D ) and others ( 44 , 45 ) have shown exhibit a more Th2 shifted character/ higher IL-4 than seen in C57BL/6J; 2) the nature of the insult, our model being infectious as well as tissue injury vs. non-lethal burn alone; 3) that all our approaches here are pre-treatment by the nature (in the case of the J?18 -/- mice) and in the timing of anti-CD1d blockade treatment; and 4) the high/ rapid (1st 48-72 h) mortality (vs. non-lethal burn injury ( 13 )). Thus, we cannot preclude the possibility that in a model of chronic-low mortality sepsis we might not be able to see the subsequent development of an immune suppressive iNKT cell phenotype. However, this does not mitigate the primary observations that in the face of an acute septic shock/ challenge, which activate the liver iNKT cells that these cells appear to play a critical stimulatory role in the developing pro-inflammatory status of the animal, which is associated with its mortality. Our findings also diverge from data recently reported by Etogo et al ( 53 ) that indicated that neither a change in cytokine production nor overall mortality was observed in response to acute septic shock in CD1d deficient mice. Several possible explanations come to mind. 1st, genetic deficiency of CD1d on the antigen presenting cell, while producing an animal that is low in iNKT cells, may not be equivalent in all fashions to the iNKT cell deficient, J?18 -/-, mouse, and, 2nd, the application of the anti-CD1d blocking antibody may have a more restricted and/or transient effect than the lack of the CD1d gene produces. Our study also supports recent observations that iNKT cells have the capacity to mediate the development of a pro-inflammatory response by their interaction with other local cell type(s), such as tissue macrophages and/or local dendritic cells in the liver ( 11 ). Along with our previous observation that Kupffer cell depletion substantially reduces the systemic inflammatory response encountered following septic shock ( 21 , 54 ), we found here that pre-treatment with antibodies, which block iNKT cell activation ( 55 ), significantly inhibited CLP priming for liver macrophage IL-6 but not TNF-? release. This is in keeping with findings we have made looking with ex vivo liver macrophage preparations derived from hypotensive shock ( 56 ) or CLP ( 57 ) mice. At present we know little concerning the level of action of the iNKT cell’s effect on macrophages. Studies by Wesley et al ( 11 ), in a divergent model of viral infection, suggest that soluble mediators such as interferons and other cytokines may be important here. That said; our observation that liver NKT cell sub-population differs in the nature of the intracellular cytokine pattern across strains (C57BL/6J vs. Balb/c) implies that the production of soluble mediators, such as these cytokines, may not be as critical as cell-cell interactions the NKT cell has with local liver leukocytes. However, until we can screen the septic liver NKT cells to determine what possible cell surface candidates might be involved here (studies presently outside the scope of this work), we can only speculate as to what those interactions might be. As to what stimulates/ activates the liver iNKT cells during the early response to septic shock, we believe, based on our prior studies ( 16 ) and the data presented here using pre-treatment with blocking antibodies against CD1d mediated antigen presentation, that CD1d and its associated antigen are involved. This is important as the antigen presented by as well as the structure of CD1d is highly conserved. In fact, while it was known that the antigens presented by CD1d were glycosylceramides, which could be replaced by the marine sponge product ?-Gal-Ser ( 18 , 58 ), it was not until the last few years that glycosylceramides in the bacterial pathogen family (in mammals) as well as a mammalian intracellular source of glycosylceramides, the glycosphingolipids/iGb3, were identified ( 10 ). This means that the antigen for presentation via CD1d could be derived from either a microbial agent and/or the host tissue via tissue injury. Another aspect of indirect support for this concept comes from a recent study by Kattan et al, which indicated that supplement/ treatment of CLP rats with a component of plasma lipoproteins, Apolipoprotein E, an agent that is thought to bind and traffic antigen through CD1d to NKT cells, markedly increased septic morbidity/ mortality ( 59 ). As mentioned before, recent studies also indicate that in response to septic shock, iNKT cells express receptors for the bacterial products, such as endotoxin ( 48 ), bacterial lipoproteins ( 49 ) and CpG DNA ( 50 ). However, there is controversy concerning whether or not iNKT cells can directly respond to these stimulants through these classic TLRs. In fact, a recent study by Nagarajan ( 60 ) indicates that at least the response to in vivo endotoxin is mediated not through iNKT cell TLRs or V?14i TCR/CD1d interaction but via the stimulation by IL-12 and IL-18 produced by LPS stimulated antigen-presenting cells. Nonetheless, the host response to CLP is often more complicated than the response to endotoxin or mono-specific gram negative bacterial challenge. In this respect, it has been shown that mice, which lack the capacity to respond to endotoxin due to a defect in TLR4, while being resistant to lethality and marked pro-inflammation seen in TLR4 competent animals in response to endotoxemia ( 61 , 62 ) are at least as susceptible if not more so to infectious bacterial challenge or polymicrobial septic in the form of CLP ( 63 - 69 ). Thus, while our initial data suggest that CD1d may be important to the early innate response to CLP, as used here, further studies are needed to determine the exact nature of the stimuli that contribute to iNKT cell response seen in CLP. As to what happens to these iNKT cells following activation in the septic animal, it is difficult to say, since, as others have reported with diverse iNKT cell TCR stimuli ( 18 , 19 , 70 ), the frequency of CD3+tetramer+ cells markedly declined in the septic mice despite expressing increased levels of the activation marker CD69 and CD25. While not an exhaustive assessment of various other lymphoid compartments, the observation that the frequency of these cells declines in the liver but did not change in the spleen or bone marrow suggests that this is potentially an organ specific effect ( 59 ). To the extent that they are apoptosising, we can only speculate (as this was not directly assessed in this work). While they are known to express Fas, like other T-cells, our preliminary data indicates there is little change in the expression of this death receptor on these cells when compared to samples from shams (preliminary data). That said; we have recently reported that hepatic CD8+ T cell expression of FasL is increased following the onset of experimental sepsis and this is associated with an increase in Fas mediated apoptosis in the liver as well as an increase in local inflammation ( 24 ). In this respect, a recent study by Chiba et al ( 71 ) indicates that in response to i.v. challenge with Mycobacterium bovis both splenic and liver NKT cells not only expressed increases in caspase and death receptor but underwent cell death/ apoptotic cell subpopulation contraction. While together the data above suggests the possibility that the activated iNKT cells in the septic mouse might be a target for the FasL expressing T cell (thus, accounting for their disappearance), this remains to be formally documented. Finally, while we believe these are interesting findings, which may point to a potentially important clinical target for therapy, our initial objectives here were to determine the extent to which liver NKT cells were affected by septic shock and their possible contribution to its development from a pathological perspective. Thus, we did not initially utilize a therapeutic (post-treatment) approach here. Nonetheless, we believe these findings suggest that hepatic iNKT cells play a critical role in regulating the innate immune/ systemic inflammatory response and survival in a model of acute septic shock.  DISCUSSION Initial triggers of the sepsis may be gram positive and negative bacteria, tissue injury (when extensive) or ischemia, and less often fungi, or viruses ( 2 , 46 ). The polymicrobial septic shock model we used here introduced both necrotic and infectious material into circulation, which in turn is thought to serve as the stimulus for the biphasic immune response seen clinically ( 47 ). While the search for endogenous/ exogenous NKT ligands continues, our model shows that septic injury/ insult is capable of activating these cells in the liver and this occurs both in mice from a C57BL/6J or Balb/c strain background. Further, at least in a model of acute onset mortality, we show that NKT cells not only contribute to the development of pro-inflammation in this setting, but that this is at least in part through a CD1d antigen mediated event that appears to involve the activation of endogenous liver adherent cell populations. This is an important point as several recent studies have illustrated that iNKT cells not only express pattern recognition receptors, i.e., TLR-4 ( 48 ), TLR-2 ( 49 ) and TLR-9 ( 50 ), which should allow them to sense these microbial components present in the septic animal, but also respond to defined gram negative infectious challenge by potentiating the pro-inflammatory response. These data differ with reports by Faunce et al ( 13 , 51 ),( 52 ) which indicate that following an injury, such as burn, the iNKT cell, via its release of IL-4, plays a role in suppressing the developing cell-mediated adaptive immune response. This is not to say that we have not previously seen some aspects of an immune suppressive phenotype developing in these mice ( 3 ). However, here we have reported that both the lack of iNKT cells or functional blockade of iNKT cell signaling with anti-CD1d blocking antibody treatment, led to the decline of pro-inflammatory (TNF-?, MCP-1, and IL-6) as well as anti-inflammatory IL-10 release into circulation. Four possible reasons for differences in our findings may relate to: 1) the background of the animals used in the studies by Faunce et al was solely Balb/c, which we ( Fig. 6D ) and others ( 44 , 45 ) have shown exhibit a more Th2 shifted character/ higher IL-4 than seen in C57BL/6J; 2) the nature of the insult, our model being infectious as well as tissue injury vs. non-lethal burn alone; 3) that all our approaches here are pre-treatment by the nature (in the case of the J?18 -/- mice) and in the timing of anti-CD1d blockade treatment; and 4) the high/ rapid (1st 48-72 h) mortality (vs. non-lethal burn injury ( 13 )). Thus, we cannot preclude the possibility that in a model of chronic-low mortality sepsis we might not be able to see the subsequent development of an immune suppressive iNKT cell phenotype. However, this does not mitigate the primary observations that in the face of an acute septic shock/ challenge, which activate the liver iNKT cells that these cells appear to play a critical stimulatory role in the developing pro-inflammatory status of the animal, which is associated with its mortality. Our findings also diverge from data recently reported by Etogo et al ( 53 ) that indicated that neither a change in cytokine production nor overall mortality was observed in response to acute septic shock in CD1d deficient mice. Several possible explanations come to mind. 1st, genetic deficiency of CD1d on the antigen presenting cell, while producing an animal that is low in iNKT cells, may not be equivalent in all fashions to the iNKT cell deficient, J?18 -/-, mouse, and, 2nd, the application of the anti-CD1d blocking antibody may have a more restricted and/or transient effect than the lack of the CD1d gene produces. Our study also supports recent observations that iNKT cells have the capacity to mediate the development of a pro-inflammatory response by their interaction with other local cell type(s), such as tissue macrophages and/or local dendritic cells in the liver ( 11 ). Along with our previous observation that Kupffer cell depletion substantially reduces the systemic inflammatory response encountered following septic shock ( 21 , 54 ), we found here that pre-treatment with antibodies, which block iNKT cell activation ( 55 ), significantly inhibited CLP priming for liver macrophage IL-6 but not TNF-? release. This is in keeping with findings we have made looking with ex vivo liver macrophage preparations derived from hypotensive shock ( 56 ) or CLP ( 57 ) mice. At present we know little concerning the level of action of the iNKT cell’s effect on macrophages. Studies by Wesley et al ( 11 ), in a divergent model of viral infection, suggest that soluble mediators such as interferons and other cytokines may be important here. That said; our observation that liver NKT cell sub-population differs in the nature of the intracellular cytokine pattern across strains (C57BL/6J vs. Balb/c) implies that the production of soluble mediators, such as these cytokines, may not be as critical as cell-cell interactions the NKT cell has with local liver leukocytes. However, until we can screen the septic liver NKT cells to determine what possible cell surface candidates might be involved here (studies presently outside the scope of this work), we can only speculate as to what those interactions might be. As to what stimulates/ activates the liver iNKT cells during the early response to septic shock, we believe, based on our prior studies ( 16 ) and the data presented here using pre-treatment with blocking antibodies against CD1d mediated antigen presentation, that CD1d and its associated antigen are involved. This is important as the antigen presented by as well as the structure of CD1d is highly conserved. In fact, while it was known that the antigens presented by CD1d were glycosylceramides, which could be replaced by the marine sponge product ?-Gal-Ser ( 18 , 58 ), it was not until the last few years that glycosylceramides in the bacterial pathogen family (in mammals) as well as a mammalian intracellular source of glycosylceramides, the glycosphingolipids/iGb3, were identified ( 10 ). This means that the antigen for presentation via CD1d could be derived from either a microbial agent and/or the host tissue via tissue injury. Another aspect of indirect support for this concept comes from a recent study by Kattan et al, which indicated that supplement/ treatment of CLP rats with a component of plasma lipoproteins, Apolipoprotein E, an agent that is thought to bind and traffic antigen through CD1d to NKT cells, markedly increased septic morbidity/ mortality ( 59 ). As mentioned before, recent studies also indicate that in response to septic shock, iNKT cells express receptors for the bacterial products, such as endotoxin ( 48 ), bacterial lipoproteins ( 49 ) and CpG DNA ( 50 ). However, there is controversy concerning whether or not iNKT cells can directly respond to these stimulants through these classic TLRs. In fact, a recent study by Nagarajan ( 60 ) indicates that at least the response to in vivo endotoxin is mediated not through iNKT cell TLRs or V?14i TCR/CD1d interaction but via the stimulation by IL-12 and IL-18 produced by LPS stimulated antigen-presenting cells. Nonetheless, the host response to CLP is often more complicated than the response to endotoxin or mono-specific gram negative bacterial challenge. In this respect, it has been shown that mice, which lack the capacity to respond to endotoxin due to a defect in TLR4, while being resistant to lethality and marked pro-inflammation seen in TLR4 competent animals in response to endotoxemia ( 61 , 62 ) are at least as susceptible if not more so to infectious bacterial challenge or polymicrobial septic in the form of CLP ( 63 - 69 ). Thus, while our initial data suggest that CD1d may be important to the early innate response to CLP, as used here, further studies are needed to determine the exact nature of the stimuli that contribute to iNKT cell response seen in CLP. As to what happens to these iNKT cells following activation in the septic animal, it is difficult to say, since, as others have reported with diverse iNKT cell TCR stimuli ( 18 , 19 , 70 ), the frequency of CD3+tetramer+ cells markedly declined in the septic mice despite expressing increased levels of the activation marker CD69 and CD25. While not an exhaustive assessment of various other lymphoid compartments, the observation that the frequency of these cells declines in the liver but did not change in the spleen or bone marrow suggests that this is potentially an organ specific effect ( 59 ). To the extent that they are apoptosising, we can only speculate (as this was not directly assessed in this work). While they are known to express Fas, like other T-cells, our preliminary data indicates there is little change in the expression of this death receptor on these cells when compared to samples from shams (preliminary data). That said; we have recently reported that hepatic CD8+ T cell expression of FasL is increased following the onset of experimental sepsis and this is associated with an increase in Fas mediated apoptosis in the liver as well as an increase in local inflammation ( 24 ). In this respect, a recent study by Chiba et al ( 71 ) indicates that in response to i.v. challenge with Mycobacterium bovis both splenic and liver NKT cells not only expressed increases in caspase and death receptor but underwent cell death/ apoptotic cell subpopulation contraction. While together the data above suggests the possibility that the activated iNKT cells in the septic mouse might be a target for the FasL expressing T cell (thus, accounting for their disappearance), this remains to be formally documented. Finally, while we believe these are interesting findings, which may point to a potentially important clinical target for therapy, our initial objectives here were to determine the extent to which liver NKT cells were affected by septic shock and their possible contribution to its development from a pathological perspective. Thus, we did not initially utilize a therapeutic (post-treatment) approach here. Nonetheless, we believe these findings suggest that hepatic iNKT cells play a critical role in regulating the innate immune/ systemic inflammatory response and survival in a model of acute septic shock.  Figures Fig. 1 iNKT cell deficiency is associated with reduced mortality and systemic inflammatory response after CLP (A.) iNKT cell deficient J?18 -/- mice exhibit a distinct survival advantage when compared to C57BL/6J background controls in response to CLP. *, indicates a significant difference at p<0.05 as determine by Log-Rank survival analysis vs. C57BL/6J (+/+) group; n=16-20 animals per group. (B.) Genetic deficiency of the iNKT cell in the J?18 -/- (-/-) mice markedly attenuates the systemic blood (plasma) pro-inflammatory response encountered in the C57BL/6J background (+/+) control mouse seen 24 h following CLP. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the paired Sham group; #, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the CLP (+/+) group; n=4-5 animals per group. While CLP induced changes are evident in C57BL/6J background controls, genetic deficiency of iNKT cells (J?18-/-) had a partial effect on cytokine release on stimulated splenocytes (anti-CD3) (C.) and no effect on stimulated peritoneal leukocytes (LPS) (D.) derived from these animals. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the paired Sham group; @, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham (+/+) or CLP (+/+) group; #, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the CLP (+/+) group; n=4-5 animals per group. Fig. 2 The percentage of iNKT cells is decreased in the liver after CLP Flow cytometric analysis indicates that the frequency of liver non-parenchymal cells (NPC) staining with antibodies to CD3 and ?GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer declines in the cells derived from the livers of C57BL/6J mice subjected to CLP as opposed to Sham protocol. (A.) Representative dot-plots are presented for 24 h post-Sham or CLP preparations. The regions delineating positive staining CD3 alone, CD1d-tetramer alone or dual positive were determined using the appropriate antibody isotype and unloaded tetramer controls. (B.) Histogram derived from these typical dot-plots for total CD3+ cells and ?GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer+CD3+ cells illustrate that while there was minimal change in the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) for the CD1d tetramer staining on these cells, there was a decline in the overall frequency in the CLP sample. (C.) Histograms of the cumulative changes in frequency of no less than 6-9 independent animals sampled per group for CD3+CD1d-tetramer+ at 4, 12 and 24 h, indicate that, while not at 4 h, by 12 h post- CLP there was a marked decline in this cell subpopulation in the liver. (D.) Using an alternative flow cytometric marker (CD3+NK1.1+) for mouse NKT cells supports the observation that these cells are declining in the CLP mouse liver. (E.) Assessment of the total NPC yield indicates these were not different 24 h post-CLP. Results for D. , E. and F. are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group; n=4-6 mice/group. Fig. 3 Liver iNKT cells present with increased expression of activation makers after CLP Flow cytometric analysis indicates that on ?GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer+ cells derived from the livers of C57BL/6J mice subjected to CLP (as compared to Sham); there is an increase in the expression of the activation markers CD69 and CD25. (A.) Representative dot-plots are presented for 24 h post-Sham and CLP liver NPC preparations. The regions delineating positive staining CD1d-tetramer alone, CD69 alone, dual positive as well as dual negative cells were set using the appropriate unloaded tetramer and antibody isotype controls. (B.) From these dot-plots a histogram was derived for CD1d-tetramer+ cells that illustrate the typical increase in the mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) seen for these cells obtained from the CLP sample. (C.) Histograms of the cumulative changes in MFI for CD69+CD1d-tetramer+ indicate that at 12 and 24 h post- CLP there was a marked increase in the fluorescent intensity of CD69 on this cell subpopulation in the liver. (D.) Histograms of the cumulative changes in MFI of no less than 9 independent animals sampled per group for CD25+CD1d-tetramer+ indicate that at 24 h post- CLP there was also a significant increase in the fluorescent intensity of CD25 on this same cell subpopulation. Results of no less than 6-9 independent animals sampled per group are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group. Fig. 4 Cytokine production by liver iNKT cells and liver macrophages is increased after CLP Ex vivo intracellular cytokine staining of isolated liver NKT cells (as delineated by CD3+NK1.1+) (A-E) or liver macrophages / Kupffer cells (as delineated by F4/80+) (F-H) , derived from sham or CLP C57BL/6J mice, exhibited a marked increase in the frequency of cells expressing the TNF-?, IL-6 as well as IL-10 at 24 h post-CLP. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group; n=5-7 mice/group. Fig. 5 Anti-CD1d treatment leads to decreased systemic cytokine production and mortality after CLP (A.) Pre-treatment of CLP Balb/c mice with blocking antibody to CD1d (anti-CD1d) suppresses the systemic plasma cytokine (TNF-?, IL-6, MCP-1 and IL-10) response typically encountered in mice 24 h post-CLP . Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham or CLP/anti-CD1d group; n=4-5 animals per group. (B.) CLP Mice pre-treated with blocking antibody to CD1d (anti-CD1d; n=16 mice) exhibit a distinct survival advantage when compared to animals treated with control rat IgG (IgG; n=16 mice). *, indicates a significant difference at p<0.05 vs. IgG group, as determined by Log-Rank survival analysis. Fig. 6 Anti-CD1d treatment leads to reduced iNKT cell cytokine production after CLP Assessment of the effect of in vivo anti-CD1d antibody pre-treatment (as opposed to non-specific mouse IgG treatment) of CLP mice on the ex vivo intracellular cytokine staining of isolated liver NKT cells (as delineated by CD3+DX5+) (A-E) or liver macrophage/ Kupffer cells (as delineated by F4/80+) (F-H) , derived from Balb/c mice. Liver NKT cells exhibited a marked increase only in the frequency of cells expressing the IL-4 and IL-10 but not IFN-?, TNF-?, IL-6 or at 24 h post-CLP that was partially blocked by anti-CD1d treatment. (A-E) . Alternatively, CLP/IgG treated mouse liver macrophages show an increase in the percentage of TNF-?+ and IL-6+ cells at 24 h post-CLP. Only the increased IL-6 production was decreased by pre-treatment with anti-CD1d antibodies. (F-H) . Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group; #, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the CLP-Sham group; n=3-5 mice/group. Fig. 7 Balb/c mice present with a decreased frequency and an increased activation of liver iNKT after CLP (A.) Using flow cytometric markers CD3+CD1d-tetramer+ for mouse NKT cells we observed that the frequency of these cells was also declining in the liver of CLP Balb/c mice (a similar observation was also made with CD3+DX5+; data not shown). Cumulative alterations in MFI for both CD69 (B.) and CD25 (C.) for CD1d-tetramer+ indicate that at 24 h post- CLP they were also elevated on Balb/c mouse liver NPCs. No less than 5 independent Balb/c mice sampled per group. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group.  Figures Fig. 1 iNKT cell deficiency is associated with reduced mortality and systemic inflammatory response after CLP (A.) iNKT cell deficient J?18 -/- mice exhibit a distinct survival advantage when compared to C57BL/6J background controls in response to CLP. *, indicates a significant difference at p<0.05 as determine by Log-Rank survival analysis vs. C57BL/6J (+/+) group; n=16-20 animals per group. (B.) Genetic deficiency of the iNKT cell in the J?18 -/- (-/-) mice markedly attenuates the systemic blood (plasma) pro-inflammatory response encountered in the C57BL/6J background (+/+) control mouse seen 24 h following CLP. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the paired Sham group; #, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the CLP (+/+) group; n=4-5 animals per group. While CLP induced changes are evident in C57BL/6J background controls, genetic deficiency of iNKT cells (J?18-/-) had a partial effect on cytokine release on stimulated splenocytes (anti-CD3) (C.) and no effect on stimulated peritoneal leukocytes (LPS) (D.) derived from these animals. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the paired Sham group; @, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham (+/+) or CLP (+/+) group; #, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the CLP (+/+) group; n=4-5 animals per group. Fig. 2 The percentage of iNKT cells is decreased in the liver after CLP Flow cytometric analysis indicates that the frequency of liver non-parenchymal cells (NPC) staining with antibodies to CD3 and ?GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer declines in the cells derived from the livers of C57BL/6J mice subjected to CLP as opposed to Sham protocol. (A.) Representative dot-plots are presented for 24 h post-Sham or CLP preparations. The regions delineating positive staining CD3 alone, CD1d-tetramer alone or dual positive were determined using the appropriate antibody isotype and unloaded tetramer controls. (B.) Histogram derived from these typical dot-plots for total CD3+ cells and ?GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer+CD3+ cells illustrate that while there was minimal change in the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) for the CD1d tetramer staining on these cells, there was a decline in the overall frequency in the CLP sample. (C.) Histograms of the cumulative changes in frequency of no less than 6-9 independent animals sampled per group for CD3+CD1d-tetramer+ at 4, 12 and 24 h, indicate that, while not at 4 h, by 12 h post- CLP there was a marked decline in this cell subpopulation in the liver. (D.) Using an alternative flow cytometric marker (CD3+NK1.1+) for mouse NKT cells supports the observation that these cells are declining in the CLP mouse liver. (E.) Assessment of the total NPC yield indicates these were not different 24 h post-CLP. Results for D. , E. and F. are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group; n=4-6 mice/group. Fig. 3 Liver iNKT cells present with increased expression of activation makers after CLP Flow cytometric analysis indicates that on ?GalCer loaded-CD1d tetramer+ cells derived from the livers of C57BL/6J mice subjected to CLP (as compared to Sham); there is an increase in the expression of the activation markers CD69 and CD25. (A.) Representative dot-plots are presented for 24 h post-Sham and CLP liver NPC preparations. The regions delineating positive staining CD1d-tetramer alone, CD69 alone, dual positive as well as dual negative cells were set using the appropriate unloaded tetramer and antibody isotype controls. (B.) From these dot-plots a histogram was derived for CD1d-tetramer+ cells that illustrate the typical increase in the mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) seen for these cells obtained from the CLP sample. (C.) Histograms of the cumulative changes in MFI for CD69+CD1d-tetramer+ indicate that at 12 and 24 h post- CLP there was a marked increase in the fluorescent intensity of CD69 on this cell subpopulation in the liver. (D.) Histograms of the cumulative changes in MFI of no less than 9 independent animals sampled per group for CD25+CD1d-tetramer+ indicate that at 24 h post- CLP there was also a significant increase in the fluorescent intensity of CD25 on this same cell subpopulation. Results of no less than 6-9 independent animals sampled per group are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group. Fig. 4 Cytokine production by liver iNKT cells and liver macrophages is increased after CLP Ex vivo intracellular cytokine staining of isolated liver NKT cells (as delineated by CD3+NK1.1+) (A-E) or liver macrophages / Kupffer cells (as delineated by F4/80+) (F-H) , derived from sham or CLP C57BL/6J mice, exhibited a marked increase in the frequency of cells expressing the TNF-?, IL-6 as well as IL-10 at 24 h post-CLP. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group; n=5-7 mice/group. Fig. 5 Anti-CD1d treatment leads to decreased systemic cytokine production and mortality after CLP (A.) Pre-treatment of CLP Balb/c mice with blocking antibody to CD1d (anti-CD1d) suppresses the systemic plasma cytokine (TNF-?, IL-6, MCP-1 and IL-10) response typically encountered in mice 24 h post-CLP . Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham or CLP/anti-CD1d group; n=4-5 animals per group. (B.) CLP Mice pre-treated with blocking antibody to CD1d (anti-CD1d; n=16 mice) exhibit a distinct survival advantage when compared to animals treated with control rat IgG (IgG; n=16 mice). *, indicates a significant difference at p<0.05 vs. IgG group, as determined by Log-Rank survival analysis. Fig. 6 Anti-CD1d treatment leads to reduced iNKT cell cytokine production after CLP Assessment of the effect of in vivo anti-CD1d antibody pre-treatment (as opposed to non-specific mouse IgG treatment) of CLP mice on the ex vivo intracellular cytokine staining of isolated liver NKT cells (as delineated by CD3+DX5+) (A-E) or liver macrophage/ Kupffer cells (as delineated by F4/80+) (F-H) , derived from Balb/c mice. Liver NKT cells exhibited a marked increase only in the frequency of cells expressing the IL-4 and IL-10 but not IFN-?, TNF-?, IL-6 or at 24 h post-CLP that was partially blocked by anti-CD1d treatment. (A-E) . Alternatively, CLP/IgG treated mouse liver macrophages show an increase in the percentage of TNF-?+ and IL-6+ cells at 24 h post-CLP. Only the increased IL-6 production was decreased by pre-treatment with anti-CD1d antibodies. (F-H) . Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group; #, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the CLP-Sham group; n=3-5 mice/group. Fig. 7 Balb/c mice present with a decreased frequency and an increased activation of liver iNKT after CLP (A.) Using flow cytometric markers CD3+CD1d-tetramer+ for mouse NKT cells we observed that the frequency of these cells was also declining in the liver of CLP Balb/c mice (a similar observation was also made with CD3+DX5+; data not shown). Cumulative alterations in MFI for both CD69 (B.) and CD25 (C.) for CD1d-tetramer+ indicate that at 24 h post- CLP they were also elevated on Balb/c mouse liver NPCs. No less than 5 independent Balb/c mice sampled per group. Results are given as mean ± SEM. *, indicates significance at p<0.05 vs. the Sham group. 