Candidate Endophenotypes for Genetic Studies of Suicidal Behavior Twin, adoption, and family studies have established the heritability of suicide attempts and suicide. Identifying specific suicide diathesis-related genes has proven more difficult. As with psychiatric disorders in general, methodological difficulties include complexity of the phenotype for suicidal behavior and distinguishing suicide diathesis-related genes from genes associated with mood disorders and other suicide-associated psychiatric illness. Adopting an endophenotype approach involving identification of genes associated with heritable intermediate phenotypes, including biological and/or behavioral markers more proximal to genes, is an approach being used for other psychiatric disorders. Therefore, a workshop convened by the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, the Department of Psychiatry at Columbia University, and the National Institute of Mental Health sought to identify potential target endophenotypes for genetic studies of suicidal behavior. The most promising endophenotypes were trait aggression/impulsivity, early-onset major depression, neurocognitive function, and cortisol social stress response. Other candidate endophenotypes requiring further investigation include serotonergic neurotransmission, second messenger systems, and borderline personality disorder traits.  Genetic Studies–Other Considerations Epigenetics Genetic impact on suicidality may not just be a matter of a direct generation-to-generation transmission of vulnerability genes. Familial transmission may also occur in the context of early-life environment effects on epigenetic mechanisms resulting in altered neurobiological function. Evidence that epigenetic factors play a role in psychiatric disorders includes discordance in monozygotic (MZ) twins and discordance for psychiatric illness in twins being associated with differential DNA methylation ( 97 ). Epigenetic events alter expression for different copies of the same gene in a given cell nucleus. Methylation of parts of DNA mostly blocks transcriptional factors from gaining access to the gene and thus effectively silences expression of the gene. This is a stable epigenetic modification that is maintained after cell division and is the means by which cellular differentiation occurs during development. Microarray SNP chips allow for whole-genome DNA methylation profiling in human tissues, including brain, and can provide data on total and allele-specific methylation that can then be examined for disease-related aberrations. Animal studies can examine environmental, genetic, and behavioral circuitry, and in rodents there is clear evidence for the effects of early environment on gene expression ( 98 ). For example, differences in maternal behavior (licking and grooming) result in alterations in HPA axis response to stress, one of the candidate endophenotypes, in offspring ( 99 ) and in differential methylation of the noncoding glucocorticoid receptor promotor region 17 in hippocampal tissues in adult offspring ( 100 ). Methodological Issues Identifying endophenotypes for suicidal behavior may address some difficulties related to heterogeneity and complexity of the phenotype; however, there remain substantial methodological challenges in identifying relevant genes and elucidating their causal pathways. Gene expression array data sets are enormous. False discovery rate corrections are often too stringent, and real findings can be missed (type 2 error). Verifying positive findings by a second assay method such as in situ hybridization histochemistry is one safeguard, and better statistical methods offer another approach. Type 2 error is also an issue in SNP association studies, even where polymorphisms have established functional effects, i.e., val/met in COMT, where the small difference in frequencies between affected and nonaffected groups means large sample sizes are required to detect any effect. Even in relatively large homogenous samples, it can be difficult to detect an effect; for example, a Finnish study of 2000 families with schizophrenia found heritability of 54%, but despite examining 317,000 SNPs and characterizing the genome so precisely that individuals could be identified by village of origin, no locus was significant for schizophrenia ( 101 ).  Epigenetics Genetic impact on suicidality may not just be a matter of a direct generation-to-generation transmission of vulnerability genes. Familial transmission may also occur in the context of early-life environment effects on epigenetic mechanisms resulting in altered neurobiological function. Evidence that epigenetic factors play a role in psychiatric disorders includes discordance in monozygotic (MZ) twins and discordance for psychiatric illness in twins being associated with differential DNA methylation ( 97 ). Epigenetic events alter expression for different copies of the same gene in a given cell nucleus. Methylation of parts of DNA mostly blocks transcriptional factors from gaining access to the gene and thus effectively silences expression of the gene. This is a stable epigenetic modification that is maintained after cell division and is the means by which cellular differentiation occurs during development. Microarray SNP chips allow for whole-genome DNA methylation profiling in human tissues, including brain, and can provide data on total and allele-specific methylation that can then be examined for disease-related aberrations. Animal studies can examine environmental, genetic, and behavioral circuitry, and in rodents there is clear evidence for the effects of early environment on gene expression ( 98 ). For example, differences in maternal behavior (licking and grooming) result in alterations in HPA axis response to stress, one of the candidate endophenotypes, in offspring ( 99 ) and in differential methylation of the noncoding glucocorticoid receptor promotor region 17 in hippocampal tissues in adult offspring ( 100 ).  Methodological Issues Identifying endophenotypes for suicidal behavior may address some difficulties related to heterogeneity and complexity of the phenotype; however, there remain substantial methodological challenges in identifying relevant genes and elucidating their causal pathways. Gene expression array data sets are enormous. False discovery rate corrections are often too stringent, and real findings can be missed (type 2 error). Verifying positive findings by a second assay method such as in situ hybridization histochemistry is one safeguard, and better statistical methods offer another approach. Type 2 error is also an issue in SNP association studies, even where polymorphisms have established functional effects, i.e., val/met in COMT, where the small difference in frequencies between affected and nonaffected groups means large sample sizes are required to detect any effect. Even in relatively large homogenous samples, it can be difficult to detect an effect; for example, a Finnish study of 2000 families with schizophrenia found heritability of 54%, but despite examining 317,000 SNPs and characterizing the genome so precisely that individuals could be identified by village of origin, no locus was significant for schizophrenia ( 101 ).  Conclusions Given the heritability of suicidal behavior, more knowledge of the risk and/or protective genes would be valuable in the identification of high-risk individuals and the development of treatment interventions. Discovering the relevant genes and their biological role in complex and multidetermined phenotypes such as suicide and attempted suicide is a challenge. However, advances in clinical and biological understanding of suicide and attempted suicide and methodological and technical developments in genetic studies assist in this task. Moving from broad end point phenotypes to more specific narrower endophenotypes is one approach. Several promising endophenotypes that largely meet the criteria of Gottesman and Gould ( 14 ) include impulsive-aggressive traits, early-onset major depression, neurocognitive function, and increased cortisol response to social stress. Systematic genetic studies of these endophenotypes are proposed using genome-wide structural and expression arrays and superimposed mapping of methylation sites. Other potential candidate biological and clinical endophenotypes have been identified, based largely on association with the phenotype. For these, studies are needed to establish that they can fulfill the criteria for endophenotype. The heritability of suicidal behavior is comparable with major psychiatric disorders and warrants a comparable effort to identify the responsible genes. Such studies will require large sample sizes, and the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Center for Collaborative Genetic Studies is an important resource ( http://nimhgenetics.org/ ). 