Cross-sectional association of dietary patterns with insulin resistance phenotypes among adults without diabetes in the Framingham Offspring Study Cluster analysis is a valuable tool for exploring the health consequences of consuming different dietary patterns. We used this approach to examine the cross-sectional relationship between dietary patterns and insulin resistance phenotypes, including waist circumference, body mass index (BMI), fasting insulin, 2-h post-challenge insulin, insulin sensitivity index (ISI0,120), HDL cholesterol, triacylglycerol and blood pressure, using data from the fifth examination cycle of the Framingham Offspring Study. Among 2,875 participants without diabetes, we identified four dietary patterns based on the predominant sources of energy: “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains”, “Refined Grains and Sweets”, “Beer”, and “Soda”. After adjusting for multiple comparisons and potential confounders, compared with the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, the “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern had significantly higher mean waist circumference (92.4 versus 90.5 cm, P=0.008) and BMI (27.3 versus 26.6 kg/m2, P=0.02); the “Soda” pattern had significantly higher mean fasting insulin concentration (31.3 versus 28.0 ?U/ml, P?0.001); the “Beer” pattern had significantly higher mean HDL cholesterol concentration (1.46 versus 1.31 mmol/l, P<0.001). No associations were observed between dietary patterns and ISI0,120, triacylglycerol, and systolic or diastolic blood pressure. Our findings suggest that consumption of a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains and reduced fat dairy protects against insulin resistance phenotypes and displacing these healthy choices with refined grains, high fat dairy, sweet baked foods, candy and sugar sweetened soda promotes insulin resistant phenotypes.  Results The mean age of study participants was 54 years for both men and women. Men had significantly higher waist circumference (98.5 vs. 85.6 cm, P<0.01), BMI (27.9 vs. 26.3 kg/m2, P<0.01), physical activity score (36.1 vs. 33.7 Met-hours/d, P<0.01), energy intake (8407 vs. 7306 KJ/d, P<0.01), alcohol intake (15.5 vs. 7.2 g/d, P<0.01), and prevalence of hypertension (19.8% vs.16.1%, P=0.01) than women. There was no difference between men and women with respect to the proportion of smokers (19.4% for men and 19.7% for women). Four clusters were characterized based on the food or foods that were distinct contributors to total energy intake in each cluster. We named the four clusters as follows; “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern (n=577), “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern (n=1846), “Beer” pattern (n=242), and “Soda” pattern (n=210). The “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern was characterized by relatively higher energy contribution from reduced fat dairy, whole grains, fruits, vegetables, fish and seafood, and lower energy contribution from high fat dairy, meat, chocolate, and sweet baked foods ( Table 2 ). The “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern was characterized by a relatively high percentage of energy from sweet baked foods (9%) and also contained relatively greater energy contributions from high fat dairy, refined grains, candy. Energy contributions from beer and soda were greatest in the “Beer” and the “Soda” patterns, respectively, and they were the only foods to contribute more than 15% of energy in any of the four patterns. In addition, the “Beer” and “Soda” pattern both had relative lower energy contribution from many healthier food choices, such as reduced fat dairy, fruits, vegetables, fish, whole grains; the “Soda” pattern also had higher contributions from meat, chocolate and miscellaneous sweets. With respect to diet soda consumption, individuals in the “Soda” pattern consumed significantly less diet soda compared to those in the other dietary patterns. The four dietary patterns differed significantly with respect to sex, nutrient intakes, dietary glycemic index, and diet quality ( Table 3 ). Participants in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern were more likely to be female (67.2%), and participants in the “Beer” pattern were more likely to be male (87.2%). Participants in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern had the lowest total energy intake, lowest energy contribution from total fat and saturated fat, lowest cholesterol intake, highest energy contribution from protein intake, highest intake of dietary fiber, highest intake of potassium, magnesium and calcium, and highest overall diet quality. Individuals in the “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern had highest energy contribution from total fat, including saturated fat, monounsaturated fat, and polyunsaturated fat, and highest cholesterol intake. Individuals in the “Beer” pattern had the highest alcohol intake, and the lowest energy contribution from carbohydrate and sucrose intakes and glycemic index. Individuals in the “Soda” pattern had the highest energy intake, highest energy contribution from carbohydrate and sucrose, and glycemic index. In addition, this dietary pattern had the lowest energy contribution from protein; the lowest intakes of fiber, potassium, magnesium and calcium; and the lowest overall diet quality. Multivariate-adjusted means of insulin resistance phenotype markers were compared across the four dietary patterns (Table 4). Compared to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, those in the “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern had significant higher waist circumference and BMI after adjusting for multiple comparisons and potential confounders, including age, sex, smoking, physical activity, treatment of hypertension and total energy intake. In comparison to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, fasting insulin concentrations were significantly higher in those individuals in the “Soda” pattern; In comparison to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, HDL cholesterol concentrations were significantly higher among those in the “Beer” pattern. No significant associations were found between dietary pattern and ISI 0,120, triacylglycerol, or systolic and diastolic blood pressure.  Results The mean age of study participants was 54 years for both men and women. Men had significantly higher waist circumference (98.5 vs. 85.6 cm, P<0.01), BMI (27.9 vs. 26.3 kg/m2, P<0.01), physical activity score (36.1 vs. 33.7 Met-hours/d, P<0.01), energy intake (8407 vs. 7306 KJ/d, P<0.01), alcohol intake (15.5 vs. 7.2 g/d, P<0.01), and prevalence of hypertension (19.8% vs.16.1%, P=0.01) than women. There was no difference between men and women with respect to the proportion of smokers (19.4% for men and 19.7% for women). Four clusters were characterized based on the food or foods that were distinct contributors to total energy intake in each cluster. We named the four clusters as follows; “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern (n=577), “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern (n=1846), “Beer” pattern (n=242), and “Soda” pattern (n=210). The “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern was characterized by relatively higher energy contribution from reduced fat dairy, whole grains, fruits, vegetables, fish and seafood, and lower energy contribution from high fat dairy, meat, chocolate, and sweet baked foods ( Table 2 ). The “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern was characterized by a relatively high percentage of energy from sweet baked foods (9%) and also contained relatively greater energy contributions from high fat dairy, refined grains, candy. Energy contributions from beer and soda were greatest in the “Beer” and the “Soda” patterns, respectively, and they were the only foods to contribute more than 15% of energy in any of the four patterns. In addition, the “Beer” and “Soda” pattern both had relative lower energy contribution from many healthier food choices, such as reduced fat dairy, fruits, vegetables, fish, whole grains; the “Soda” pattern also had higher contributions from meat, chocolate and miscellaneous sweets. With respect to diet soda consumption, individuals in the “Soda” pattern consumed significantly less diet soda compared to those in the other dietary patterns. The four dietary patterns differed significantly with respect to sex, nutrient intakes, dietary glycemic index, and diet quality ( Table 3 ). Participants in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern were more likely to be female (67.2%), and participants in the “Beer” pattern were more likely to be male (87.2%). Participants in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern had the lowest total energy intake, lowest energy contribution from total fat and saturated fat, lowest cholesterol intake, highest energy contribution from protein intake, highest intake of dietary fiber, highest intake of potassium, magnesium and calcium, and highest overall diet quality. Individuals in the “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern had highest energy contribution from total fat, including saturated fat, monounsaturated fat, and polyunsaturated fat, and highest cholesterol intake. Individuals in the “Beer” pattern had the highest alcohol intake, and the lowest energy contribution from carbohydrate and sucrose intakes and glycemic index. Individuals in the “Soda” pattern had the highest energy intake, highest energy contribution from carbohydrate and sucrose, and glycemic index. In addition, this dietary pattern had the lowest energy contribution from protein; the lowest intakes of fiber, potassium, magnesium and calcium; and the lowest overall diet quality. Multivariate-adjusted means of insulin resistance phenotype markers were compared across the four dietary patterns (Table 4). Compared to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, those in the “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern had significant higher waist circumference and BMI after adjusting for multiple comparisons and potential confounders, including age, sex, smoking, physical activity, treatment of hypertension and total energy intake. In comparison to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, fasting insulin concentrations were significantly higher in those individuals in the “Soda” pattern; In comparison to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, HDL cholesterol concentrations were significantly higher among those in the “Beer” pattern. No significant associations were found between dietary pattern and ISI 0,120, triacylglycerol, or systolic and diastolic blood pressure.  Discussion In this cross-sectional study of healthy adults in the Framingham Offspring Study, four dietary patterns were derived using cluster analysis (“Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains”, “Refined Grains and Sweets”, “Beer”, and “Soda”). The “Refined Grains and Sweets” dietary pattern comprised the largest number of individuals, while the “Soda” pattern comprised the smallest number. The four patterns derived in this study are similar to those identified using cluster analysis in other American populations ( 31 - 34 ). For example, a Heart Healthy pattern and an Empty Calorie pattern, which resemble our “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” and “Soda” patterns, were identified as 2 of 6 patterns in women participating at the third examination cycle of the Framingham Offspring Study ( 33 ). Consistent with our study, a Healthy and Alcohol pattern were identified among 5 patterns using cluster analysis in 459 men and women in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging ( 32 ). Often, an Alcohol pattern is captured in dietary pattern analysis, particularly when men are included in the analysis ( 32 , 35 , 36 ). In this study, beer was the predominant contributor to alcohol intake and thus the rational for naming it the beer dietary pattern. Although dietary patterns derived in different studies are assigned different names, they often reflect similar food behaviors and nutrient profiles. For instance, our “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern is comparable in nutrient content to the ‘dark bread, rice and pasta, vegetables’ pattern identified in the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study ( 34 ) and a ‘milk, cereals, and fruits’ pattern identified among elderly Boston area residents ( 31 ). In this study, compared to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” dietary pattern, those in the “Refined Grains and Sweets” dietary pattern had significantly higher waist circumference and BMI. The “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern also had relatively higher energy contribution from high fat dairy, meat, refined grains, sweet baked foods, candy, and had lower energy contribution from reduced fat dairy, fruits, vegetables and whole grains compared to the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern. This result is consistent with previous findings that a diet high in refined grains, high fat dairy, meat, sweets, low in whole grains, fruits, vegetables was associated with high risk of obesity ( 37 , 38 ). Prospective studies also found that consuming a diet high in fruits, vegetables, reduced fat dairy, and whole grains was associated with lower increase in BMI and waist circumference ( 32 , 39 - 42 ). In the present study, none of the dietary patterns were associated with improved blood pressure after the exclusion of those on hypertensive medication. We found individuals in the “Soda” pattern had significantly higher fasting insulin concentrations than those in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, consistent with our previous finding that consumption of sugar-sweetened drinks is positively associated with fasting insulin ( 43 ). Individuals in the “Soda” pattern also had lower dietary fiber intake, higher dietary glycemic index. The protective effect of dietary fiber on insulin resistance ( 4 , 6 , 44 ), metabolic syndrome ( 5 ) and type 2 diabetes mellitus ( 34 , 45 ) has been well-documented. McKeown et al ( 46 ) observed that a higher dietary glycemic index was unfavorably associated with surrogate measures of insulin resistance. In contrast, no association was found between dietary glycemic index and measures of insulin resistance in either the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study ( 6 ) or Zutphen Elderly Study ( 47 ). Inconsistencies between studies may in part be attributed to the different methods used to determine insulin sensitivity, the different populations studied, and methods of dietary assessment. Some, but not all, observational studies have found a significant association between sugar-sweetened soft drinks and obesity ( 48 - 50 ). Using cluster analysis, Wirfalt et al ( 28 ) observed that individuals in the Soft Drinks pattern had a significantly higher mean BMI compared to individuals in the Skim Milk and Meat-Cheese patterns. The “Soda” pattern had highest energy contribution from carbohydrate and highest glycemic index. Previous studies have demonstrated that high carbohydrate diets contribute to decreasing HDL cholesterol and increasing triacylglycerol concentrations ( 51 , 52 ). Findings from several observational studies have consistently found that glycemic index is inversely related to HDL cholesterol concentration ( 53 , 54 ). Using data from an earlier examination in the Framingham Offspring Cohort, Sonnenberg and colleagues observed that obese and non-obese women in the ‘empty calories’ cluster had a higher prevalence of the metabolic syndrome ( 14 ). Despite differences in the type of FFQ administered and the defining of the clusters, this dietary pattern characterized by higher of sugar sweetened beverages and lower intakes of dietary fiber and vegetables, is similar to the “Soda” dietary pattern derived in this cluster analysis. Individuals in the “Soda” pattern displayed several metabolic syndrome abnormalities i.e higher waist circumference and triacylglycerol and lower HDL cholesterol. However, these differences were not statistically significant compared to the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern in part due to the small number of subjects in this pattern (n=210). Two prospective studies have observed that diet soda consumption is positively associated with the metabolic syndrome ( 16 , 50 ). It is possible that diet soda consumption may be associated with a particular dietary pattern, or alternatively a reflection of a dietary change due to some underlying metabolic disease. In the present study, only those individuals in the “Soda” cluster differed with respect to diet soda consumption i.e. they consumed significantly less diet soda compared to the other clusters. We previously found that diet soda consumption was not associated with any surrogate measures of insulin resistance after adjustment for potential confounders ( 43 ). In this study, individuals in the “Beer” pattern had significant higher HDL cholesterol concentration compared to those in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern. The inverse association between alcohol consumption and coronary heart disease has been observed in many observational studies around the world ( 55 ). It is estimated that approximately 50% of the benefit of moderate alcohol consumption could be explained by the direct effect of alcohol on HDL cholesterol ( 56 , 57 ). A meta-analysis of experimental studies found that a dose of 30 g of alcohol a day increased the concentration of HDL cholesterol by 3.99 mg/dl (95% CI, 3.25-4.73) ( 58 ). Although higher beer intake was associated with a better HDL cholesterol level, individuals in the beer pattern had a poorer overall diet, for instance, fewer fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and less reduced fat dairy. In addition, individuals in the “Beer” pattern had a significantly lower overall diet quality score compared with individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern. Strength of this study includes its large sample size and inclusion of multiple insulin resistance phenotypes measured in a clinical setting. The main limitation is the cross-sectional study design. Since the diet and insulin resistance phenotypes data were collected at the same time, the causal relationship can not be assessed due to uncertainty regarding the timing of exposure and outcome, so further prospective studies are needed to examine the effect of diet on insulin resistance using dietary patterns to characterize exposures. Although we adjusted for physical activity, residual confounding caused by lifestyle behaviors and social economic status factors may arise in this study. The characterization of the food groups used in this study is limited by the dietary data obtained by self-reported FFQ. Although the FFQ has limitations in estimating absolute intake for individuals, it is a feasible and valid method to rank (or differentiate) people according to their usual diet. Differences in food and nutrient intake profile across clusters, as depicted in Table 2 and 3 , demonstrate the utility of the cluster analysis for discriminating dietary exposure within the cohort. In addition, dietary patterns derived by cluster analysis using FFQ data have been validated against 3-day food records specifically in the Framingham Offspring Study ( 33 , 59 ). Because the participants of Framingham Offspring Study are predominantly white Americans, the results from this study may not be readily generalized to other populations who have different dietary behaviors. In conclusion, our findings suggest that consumption of a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains and reduced fat dairy protects against insulin resistance phenotypes; displacing these healthy choices with meat, refined grains, high fat dairy, sweet baked foods, candy and sugar sweetened soda promotes insulin resistant phenotypes.  Discussion In this cross-sectional study of healthy adults in the Framingham Offspring Study, four dietary patterns were derived using cluster analysis (“Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains”, “Refined Grains and Sweets”, “Beer”, and “Soda”). The “Refined Grains and Sweets” dietary pattern comprised the largest number of individuals, while the “Soda” pattern comprised the smallest number. The four patterns derived in this study are similar to those identified using cluster analysis in other American populations ( 31 - 34 ). For example, a Heart Healthy pattern and an Empty Calorie pattern, which resemble our “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” and “Soda” patterns, were identified as 2 of 6 patterns in women participating at the third examination cycle of the Framingham Offspring Study ( 33 ). Consistent with our study, a Healthy and Alcohol pattern were identified among 5 patterns using cluster analysis in 459 men and women in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging ( 32 ). Often, an Alcohol pattern is captured in dietary pattern analysis, particularly when men are included in the analysis ( 32 , 35 , 36 ). In this study, beer was the predominant contributor to alcohol intake and thus the rational for naming it the beer dietary pattern. Although dietary patterns derived in different studies are assigned different names, they often reflect similar food behaviors and nutrient profiles. For instance, our “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern is comparable in nutrient content to the ‘dark bread, rice and pasta, vegetables’ pattern identified in the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study ( 34 ) and a ‘milk, cereals, and fruits’ pattern identified among elderly Boston area residents ( 31 ). In this study, compared to individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” dietary pattern, those in the “Refined Grains and Sweets” dietary pattern had significantly higher waist circumference and BMI. The “Refined Grains and Sweets” pattern also had relatively higher energy contribution from high fat dairy, meat, refined grains, sweet baked foods, candy, and had lower energy contribution from reduced fat dairy, fruits, vegetables and whole grains compared to the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern. This result is consistent with previous findings that a diet high in refined grains, high fat dairy, meat, sweets, low in whole grains, fruits, vegetables was associated with high risk of obesity ( 37 , 38 ). Prospective studies also found that consuming a diet high in fruits, vegetables, reduced fat dairy, and whole grains was associated with lower increase in BMI and waist circumference ( 32 , 39 - 42 ). In the present study, none of the dietary patterns were associated with improved blood pressure after the exclusion of those on hypertensive medication. We found individuals in the “Soda” pattern had significantly higher fasting insulin concentrations than those in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern, consistent with our previous finding that consumption of sugar-sweetened drinks is positively associated with fasting insulin ( 43 ). Individuals in the “Soda” pattern also had lower dietary fiber intake, higher dietary glycemic index. The protective effect of dietary fiber on insulin resistance ( 4 , 6 , 44 ), metabolic syndrome ( 5 ) and type 2 diabetes mellitus ( 34 , 45 ) has been well-documented. McKeown et al ( 46 ) observed that a higher dietary glycemic index was unfavorably associated with surrogate measures of insulin resistance. In contrast, no association was found between dietary glycemic index and measures of insulin resistance in either the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study ( 6 ) or Zutphen Elderly Study ( 47 ). Inconsistencies between studies may in part be attributed to the different methods used to determine insulin sensitivity, the different populations studied, and methods of dietary assessment. Some, but not all, observational studies have found a significant association between sugar-sweetened soft drinks and obesity ( 48 - 50 ). Using cluster analysis, Wirfalt et al ( 28 ) observed that individuals in the Soft Drinks pattern had a significantly higher mean BMI compared to individuals in the Skim Milk and Meat-Cheese patterns. The “Soda” pattern had highest energy contribution from carbohydrate and highest glycemic index. Previous studies have demonstrated that high carbohydrate diets contribute to decreasing HDL cholesterol and increasing triacylglycerol concentrations ( 51 , 52 ). Findings from several observational studies have consistently found that glycemic index is inversely related to HDL cholesterol concentration ( 53 , 54 ). Using data from an earlier examination in the Framingham Offspring Cohort, Sonnenberg and colleagues observed that obese and non-obese women in the ‘empty calories’ cluster had a higher prevalence of the metabolic syndrome ( 14 ). Despite differences in the type of FFQ administered and the defining of the clusters, this dietary pattern characterized by higher of sugar sweetened beverages and lower intakes of dietary fiber and vegetables, is similar to the “Soda” dietary pattern derived in this cluster analysis. Individuals in the “Soda” pattern displayed several metabolic syndrome abnormalities i.e higher waist circumference and triacylglycerol and lower HDL cholesterol. However, these differences were not statistically significant compared to the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern in part due to the small number of subjects in this pattern (n=210). Two prospective studies have observed that diet soda consumption is positively associated with the metabolic syndrome ( 16 , 50 ). It is possible that diet soda consumption may be associated with a particular dietary pattern, or alternatively a reflection of a dietary change due to some underlying metabolic disease. In the present study, only those individuals in the “Soda” cluster differed with respect to diet soda consumption i.e. they consumed significantly less diet soda compared to the other clusters. We previously found that diet soda consumption was not associated with any surrogate measures of insulin resistance after adjustment for potential confounders ( 43 ). In this study, individuals in the “Beer” pattern had significant higher HDL cholesterol concentration compared to those in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern. The inverse association between alcohol consumption and coronary heart disease has been observed in many observational studies around the world ( 55 ). It is estimated that approximately 50% of the benefit of moderate alcohol consumption could be explained by the direct effect of alcohol on HDL cholesterol ( 56 , 57 ). A meta-analysis of experimental studies found that a dose of 30 g of alcohol a day increased the concentration of HDL cholesterol by 3.99 mg/dl (95% CI, 3.25-4.73) ( 58 ). Although higher beer intake was associated with a better HDL cholesterol level, individuals in the beer pattern had a poorer overall diet, for instance, fewer fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and less reduced fat dairy. In addition, individuals in the “Beer” pattern had a significantly lower overall diet quality score compared with individuals in the “Fruits, Reduced Fat Dairy and Whole Grains” pattern. Strength of this study includes its large sample size and inclusion of multiple insulin resistance phenotypes measured in a clinical setting. The main limitation is the cross-sectional study design. Since the diet and insulin resistance phenotypes data were collected at the same time, the causal relationship can not be assessed due to uncertainty regarding the timing of exposure and outcome, so further prospective studies are needed to examine the effect of diet on insulin resistance using dietary patterns to characterize exposures. Although we adjusted for physical activity, residual confounding caused by lifestyle behaviors and social economic status factors may arise in this study. The characterization of the food groups used in this study is limited by the dietary data obtained by self-reported FFQ. Although the FFQ has limitations in estimating absolute intake for individuals, it is a feasible and valid method to rank (or differentiate) people according to their usual diet. Differences in food and nutrient intake profile across clusters, as depicted in Table 2 and 3 , demonstrate the utility of the cluster analysis for discriminating dietary exposure within the cohort. In addition, dietary patterns derived by cluster analysis using FFQ data have been validated against 3-day food records specifically in the Framingham Offspring Study ( 33 , 59 ). Because the participants of Framingham Offspring Study are predominantly white Americans, the results from this study may not be readily generalized to other populations who have different dietary behaviors. In conclusion, our findings suggest that consumption of a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains and reduced fat dairy protects against insulin resistance phenotypes; displacing these healthy choices with meat, refined grains, high fat dairy, sweet baked foods, candy and sugar sweetened soda promotes insulin resistant phenotypes. 