AMPed Up immunity: how antimicrobial peptides have multiple roles in immune defense Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are widely expressed and rapidly induced at epithelial surfaces to repel assault from diverse infectious agents including bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites. Much information suggests that AMPs act by mechanisms that extend beyond their capacity to serve as gene-encoded antibiotics. For example, some AMPs alter the properties of the mammalian membrane or interact with its receptors to influence diverse cellular processes including cytokine release, chemotaxis, antigen presentation, angiogenesis and wound healing. These functions complement their antimicrobial action and favor resolution of infection and repair of damaged epithelia. Opposing this, some microbes have evolved mechanisms to inactivate or avoid AMPs and subsequently become pathogens. Thus, AMPs are multifunctional molecules that have a central role in infection and Inflammation.  Conclusions and perspectives Great progress has been achieved in the last decade with respect to the mechanisms of AMP action and their complex role in our immune system. Along with the capacity of AMPs to directly kill microbes, AMPs also boost specific innate immune responses and exert selective immunomodulatory effects on the host. Upon exposure to danger, AMPs create an overall balance by inhibiting microbial growth, attenuating exacerbated inflammatory responses and stimulating certain beneficial aspects of inflammation. This combined functional profile highlights the unique tempora1 niche that AMPs occupy in microbial defense (i.e. they are ideally suited for rapid but transient responses). These characteristics also make AMPs promising agents as beneficial therapeutics. Therefore, understanding the function of antimicrobial peptides as ‘natural antibiotics’ and their mechanism of action as ‘immune regulators’ has great promise for yielding new strategies in the control of human disease. Box 1. Membrane action of AMPs There are several mechanisms by which different classes of AMPs could act on the microbial target membrane [ 47 ]. In the ‘carpet model’. peptides accumulate on and orient parallel to the membrane surface. At a certain high concentration of peptides, AMPs disrupt the bilayer membrane in a detergent-like manner, resulting in the formation of micelles and leakage of cellular contents. In the ‘toroidal-hole model’, the polar heads of the peptides face the polar head groups of the lipids, inducing the lipids to form a continuous bend from the top to the bottom in the fashion of a toroid which is lined by both the peptides and the lipid head groups. Some cationic AMPs adopt an ?-helical configuration, attach to, aggregate and insert into oriented bilayers that are hydrated with water vapor, leading to the formation of ‘barrel-stave’ holes in the membrane. For this model, the hydrophobic peptide regions align with the lipid core region of the bilayer and the hydrophilic peptide regions form the interior region of the pore. Notably, the differences between the toroidal model from the barrel-stave model is that peptides in the former are always associated with the lipid head groups even when they are perpendicularly inserted in the lipid bilayer. Finally, although most AMPs have been shown to disrupt cell membranes and induce microbial killing, a few AMPs kill bacteria without any detectable lysis. These AMPs can penetrate the cell membrane and bind to different targets, such as DNA, to inhibit bacterial growth. Box 2. AMPs conquer microbial resistance Microbes have evolved several mechanisms to degrade AMPs, yet the expression of AMPs continues to provide protection against infection. Why? Several theories can be advanced to explain their effectiveness in mammalian immunity. First, even though most pathogens have developed some countermeasures against AMPs, strict regulation of the expression of AMPs at the infection site leads to extremely high concentrations of AMPs in vivo that cannot be completely overcome by the microbe [ 115 , 116 ]. This combined with simultaneous production of a variety of different AMPs, impedes microbial colonization and growth [ 25 ]. In addition, the high costs for microbes to develop and express resistance genes preclude modifications that allow total resistance. In particular, it is difficult to evade the membrane-disturbing activity of AMPs while preserving the functional and structural integrity of the microbial cell wall and membrane. Furthermore, a strategy of destruction of the AMPs also poses several problems for the microbe. Most peptides are created from sequences of amino acids lacking unique epitopes that could serve as the recognition site of a specifically evolved protease that would be required for selective destruction of the AMP. Thus, it is difficult to design a degradation mechanism that would not also degrade necessary host proteins for attachment or microbial proteins necessary for survival. Finally, we have seen that all multicellular organisms attack microbes with multiple peptides of different structural classes, hence destruction of one peptide might not suffice to avoid the lethal assault of a diverse group of AMPs [ 49 ].  Figures and Table Figure 1 Structure of selected antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). AMPs are present in a wide variety of structural conformation, such as peptides with ?-helix structures, peptides with ?-sheet structures stabilized by disulfide bridges or peptides with extended or loop structures. (a) ?-helix. NMR-structure of the LL-37 core peptide of cathelicidin bound to detergent micelles [PDB ID: 2FBS). (b) ?-sheet Solution structure of the defensin hBD2 by two-dimensional proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (PDB ID: 1FQQ). (c) extended structure, NMR structure of the bovine antimicrobial peptide indolicidin bound to dedecytphosphocholine (OPC) micelles (PDB ID: 1G89). (d) loop structure. 3D structure of a cyclic defensin from the leukocytes of rhesus macaques (PDB ID: 1HVZ). PDB ID: ID of peptide structure in Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB) protein data bank ( http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do ). The style of LL37 in (a) is shown as secondary coloring shortcuts, whereas the styles of peptides in (b-d) are shown in rainbow coloring shortcuts. Figure 2 Multiple functions of antimicrobial peptides in host defense. AMPs induce a variety of responses in host Innate immune cells such as monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils and epithelial cells. They alter gene expression of host cells, induce production of chemokines and cytokins, promote leukocyte recruitment to the site of infection, influence cell differentiation and activation and block or activate TLR signaling. The outcome of the selective Immunomodulation by AMPs results in innate Immune responses, leading to protection against infection, selective control of inflammation, promotion of wound healing and initiation of adaptive immune responses. Abbrevations: AMP, anti-microbial peptide; DC, dendritic cell; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; pDC, plasmacytold dendritic cell; PMN, polymorphonucleocyte; TLR, Toll-like receptor. Figure 3 Alternative models for host activation by antimicrobial peptides. Three mechanisms have been proposed to explain how AMPs activate mammalian cells. Alternate ligand model ; some AMPs, such as defensins and cathelicidin, might directly bind to a specific receptor, resulting in initiation of receptor signaling. This has been proposed for CCR6 and FPRL-1. Membrane disruption model in this model AMPs associate with and modify the membrane containing the receptor. This membrane activity indirectly results in a change in receptor function such that it can signal without a ligand or becomes insensitive to binding by its specific ligand. This has been proposed for inactivation of TLR4. Trans-activation model: AMPs stimulate the release of a membrane-bound growth factor, which then binds to its high affinity receptor and activates it. This has been proposed for HB-EGF (heparin binding epidermal growth factor) and the EGF receptor. Figure 4 Model of the initiation and maintenance of autoimmune skin inflammation by LL37 in psoriasis. Skin injury and infections induce a rapid expression of the cathelicidin hCAPl8 in keratinocytes or infiltrated neutrophils. The mature peptide LL37 is cleaved from the precursor hCAP18 by Kalllikreins or proteinese 3. Subsequently LL37 combines with self-DNA released by damagad cells to form a complex. which triggers TLR9 in pDC to produce type 1 Interferons (IFN? and ?). Type 1 IFNs trigger local maturation of myeloid dendritic cell to activate autoreactive Th1 or Th17 cells, resulting in the production of INF-?,.IL-22 and IL-17. The sustained production of IL-22 and IL-17 leads to the expression of LL37 that forms a feedback loop to maintain inflammation in psoriasis. Table 1 Diseases associated with AMPs. Diseases Peptides Expression levels Refs Inflammatory skin diseases Atopic dermatitis LL37, defensins Downregulatad [ 93 ] Psoriasis LL37, defensins Overexpressed [ 93 ] Rosacea cathelicidins Increased [ 96 ] Acne vulgaris Defensins, granulysin Induced [ 78 , 110 ] Lupus and contact dermatitis LL37 Increased [ 111 ] Inflammatory bowel diseases Ulcarative colitis HD5.6; hBD2–4; lysozyme upregulated [ 112 ] Crohn’s disease ?-defensins hBD2 Reduced in Paneth cells; low gene copy number of hBD2(?3) [ 94 , 113 ] Gastrointestinal infections LL37, hBD1 Downregulated [ 113 ] Respiratory diseases Cystic fibrosis LL37, ?-defensins Reduced antimicrobial activity because of salt accumulation [ 114 ] 