Prevention of ER-Negative Breast Cancer The successful demonstration that the selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) tamoxifen and raloxifene reduce the risk of breast cancer has stimulated great interest in using drugs to prevent breast cancer in high-risk women. In addition, recent results from breast cancer treatment trials suggest that aromatase inhibitors may be even more effective at preventing breast cancer than are SERMs. However, while SERMs and aromatase inhibitors do prevent the development of many estrogen-receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers, these drugs do not prevent the development of ER-negative breast cancer. Thus, there is an urgent need to identify agents that can prevent ER-negative breast cancer. We have studied the cancer preventative activity of several classes of drugs for their ability to prevent ER-negative breast cancer in preclinical models. Results from these studies demonstrate that rexinoids (analogs of retinoids that bind and activate RXR receptors), tyrosine kinase inhibitors (such as EGFR inhibitors and dual kinase inhibitors that block EGFR and HER2/neu signaling), and cyclo-oxygenase 2 (COX-2) inhibitors all prevent ER-negative breast cancer in transgenic mice that develop ER-negative breast cancer. Other promising agents now under investigation include vitamin D and vitamin D analogs, drugs that activate PPAR-gamma nuclear receptors, and statins. Many of these agents are now being tested in early phase cancer prevention clinical trials to determine whether they will show activity in breast tissue and whether they are safe for use in high-risk women without breast cancer. The current status of these studies will be reviewed. It is anticipated that in the future, drugs that effectively prevent ER-negative breast cancer will be used in combination with hormonal agents such SERMs or aromatase inhibitors to prevent all forms of breast cancer.  13.9 Conclusion Clinical cancer prevention studies have demonstrated that SERMs reduce the incidence of breast cancer and that chemoprevention is clinically feasible. Current chemoprevention studies are now testing the ability of AIs to prevent breast cancer. However, while SERMs are, and AIs may be, effective agents to prevent ER-positive breast cancer, they have no effect in reducing the incidence of ER-negative breast cancers. Through a better understanding of the estrogen-independent pathways that lead to mammary tumorigenesis, a growing number of chemopreventative agents have emerged that prevent ER-negative breast cancers in preclinical models. Rexinoids, COX-2 inhibitors, and EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors are the most promising agents that have been shown to prevent ER-negative tumorigenesis. Despite the promising effect of these novel agents, issues of safety and toxicity still hamper progress in the field. Clinically observed toxicity has adversely affected several ongoing chemoprevention trials including those of celecoxib and gefitinib. While many of these drugs are tolerated by cancer patients, the severity and frequency of side effects becomes a major concern when considering chronic preventative therapy in healthy women. Thus, future clinical studies of chemoprevention will depend heavily on the balance between efficacy and tolerability. With breast cancer risk assessment, it becomes critical to select the high-risk women who will be benefit most from chemoprevention. More recently, preclinical studies have shown that combination chemoprevention is a promising strategy that will greatly enhance the efficacy of cancer preventative effect. Thus, to ultimately prevent all forms of breast cancers, it will be necessary to combine safe and effective drugs targeting the ER as well as drugs inhibiting critical estrogen-independent pathways. 