A TARBP2 mutation in human cancer impairs microRNA processing and DICER1 function microRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression by targeting messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts. Recently, a miRNA expression profile of human tumors has been characterized by an overall miRNA downregulation 1 – 3 . Explanations for this observation include a failure of miRNA post-transcriptional regulation 4 , transcriptional silencing associated with hypermethylation of CpG island promoters 5 – 7 and miRNA transcriptional repression by oncogenic factors 8 . Another possibility is that the enzymes and cofactors involved in miRNA processing pathways may themselves be targets of genetic disruption, further enhancing cellular transformation 9 . However, no loss-of-function genetic alterations in the genes encoding these proteins have been reported. Here we have identified truncating mutations in TARBP2 (TAR RNA-binding protein 2), encoding an integral component of a DICER1-containing complex 10 , 11 , in sporadic and hereditary carcinomas with microsatellite instability 12 – 14 . The presence of TARBP2 frameshift mutations causes diminished TRBP protein expression and a defect in the processing of miRNAs. The reintroduction of TRBP in the deficient cells restores the efficient production of miRNAs and inhibits tumor growth. Most important, the TRBP impairment is associated with a destabilization of the DICER1 protein. These results provide, for a subset of human tumors, an explanation for the observed defects in the expression of mature miRNAs.  METHODS Cell lines and primary tumor samples Human colorectal and endometrial cancer cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Human gastric cancer cell lines and Co115 were provided by M. Toyota (First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University) and R. Hamelin (Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale), respectively. The cancer cell lines were grown and maintained in 10% FBS in RPMI medium 1640 at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. We obtained DNA samples from primary tumors ( n = 282) at the time of the clinically indicated surgical procedures. Mutation analysis Genomic DNA from cell lines and primary tumors and cDNA from the cell lines were amplified by PCR. PCR products and recombinant plasmids from single clones of every sample were sequenced in an automated ABI Prism 3700 sequencer. The genes studied, their genomic locations and the primers used are described in Supplementary Table 1 . FISH analysis FISH was done by standard methods. We used the UCSC genome browser to select for the TARBP2 gene the two BAC clones spanning the 12q13 region: RP11-793H13 and RP11-101H10, and for DICER1 gene the BAC clone covering the 14q32 region: RP11-1143O10. The BACs were obtained from the Children’s Hospital Oakland Research Institute in Oakland, USA. We used commercial centromeric probes for chromosomes 12 and 14 (Vysis) as control. Analysis of <italic>TARBP2</italic> and <italic>DICER1</italic> CpG island promoter methylation DNA samples were treated with sodium bisulfite and primers spanning the CpG island of the TARBP2 and DICER1 promoters were used for bisulfite genomic sequencing. Primer sequences and PCR conditions are available upon request. We analyzed ten clones per sample. Protein blotting For protein blotting of TRBP and DICER1 expression, total protein extracts were immunoprobed with antibodies to TRBP (monoclonal ABNOVA 1:1,000) and DICER1 (1:500, Santa Cruz H212). We used an antibody against ?-actin (1:5000; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) or nucleolin (1:1000; Santa Cruz) as a loading control. RNA isolation Total RNA was isolated by Trizol (Invitrogen). Extraction was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Quantification of miRNAs with real-time PCR We used TaqMan MiRNA assays to quantify mature miRNAs as described previously 24 . Each reverse transcriptase (RT) reaction contained 10 ng of purified and DNase-treated (Turbo DNA-free, Ambion) total RNA, 50 nM stem-loop RT primer, 1 × RT buffer, dNTPs (each at 1 mM), 16.5 units of MultiScribe Reverse Transcriptase and 1.36 units of RNase inhibitor (Applied Biosystems). The reactions were incubated at 16 °C for 30 min, 42 °C for 30 min and 85 °C for 5 min. Real-time PCR reactions for each miRNA (10 µl volume) were done in triplicate, and each 10 µl reaction mixture included 2 µl of diluted RT product (1:15 dilution), 5 µl of TaqMan 2× Universal PCR Master Mix, 1× TaqMan MiRNA Assay (Applied Biosystems). Reactions were incubated in an Applied Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR system in 384-well plates at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. We used the 2?(??Ct) method 17 to determine relative quantitative levels of individual miRNAs, using GADPH for normalization, and expressed values as the relative difference compared to the relevant controls. The primers used are described online in Supplementary Table 1 . Precursor miRNA qPCR SuperScript III Platinum One-Step RT-qPCR kit (Invitrogen) was used to quantify precursor miRNAs by RT-qPCR 25 . The precursor miRNAs to be tested were selected according to the colorectal miRNAome identified by Cummins et al. 26 . The primers used are described online in Supplementary Table 1 . miRNA processing efficiency The changes in miRNA processing efficiency were plotted as ‘relative processing’ and ‘processing fold’. Relative processing was defined as the ratio of mature to precursor miRNA. Processing fold was defined as the ratio of mature to precursor miRNA in transfected cells divided by the ratio of mature to precursor miRNA in empty vector transfected cells 4 . Processing fold = 2 ? ( ? Ct . miR / ? Ct . Pre ? miR ) Transfected 2 ? ( ? Ct . miR / ? Ct . Pre ? miR ) EmptyVector Total RNA was extracted from three independent experiments and the results presented are the means of these. Northern blot Forty micrograms of total RNA together with Decade Marker (Ambion) were resolved in 15% denaturating polyacrylamide gel containing 7 M urea in 0.5XTBE buffer system and transferred onto Hybond-N+ membrane (Amersham) in 0.5XTBE. Probes were radioactively labeled with 25 µCie [?-32P] ATP (PerkinElmer) and T4 kinase (Invitrogen), and purified with Nucaway Spin columns (Ambion). Membranes were UV-cross linked (1200 jules), prehybridized in hybridization buffer and hybridized overnight in the same solution at 37 °C containing the radioactively labeled probed previously heated at 95 °C for 2 min. Membranes were washed at low stringency followed by film exposure. Probes used are described online in Supplementary Table 1 . RNA interference TARBP2 - and DICER1 -specific small interfering RNAs (siRNA) were designed and synthesized by Qiagen. Two siRNA duplexes that recognized two different sequences were used against the TARBP2 gene, and likewise for the DICER1 gene. TARBP2 and DICER1 expression was analyzed by qRT-PCR and protein blotting; pre-miRNA and miRNAs were assessed by qRT-PCR, as described above. Transfections of <italic>TARBP2</italic> and <italic>DICER1</italic> The wild-type TARBP2 expression vector (pLPC- TARBP2 wt) was constructed by cloning the cDNA corresponding to the wild-type gene TARBP2 into a pLPC vector. The truncated form of TRBP was constructed by cloning the cDNA corresponding to TARBP2 truncated from Co115 into a pCMV-Tag4B vector, pCMV-Tag4B- TARBP2 -Mut. The DICER1 expression vector pCMV-Tag4B- DICER1 was constructed by cloning the cDNA corresponding to the gene DICER1 into a pCMV-Tag4B vector. Transfection of Co115 cells was done by electroporating 107 cells in 0.8 ml PBS with 40 µg of the vector at 250 V and 975 µF. After electroporation, cells were washed with PBS and seeded in fresh medium. Clones expressing wild-type TRBP were selected in complete medium supplemented with 0.5 µg ml?1 puromycin; clones expressing the truncated form of TRBP were selected in complete medium supplemented with 1 mg ml?1 G418; clones expressing DICER1 were selected in complete medium supplemented with 1 mg ml?1 G418 and clones coexpressing TRBP wild-type and DICER1 were selected in complete medium supplemented with 0.5 µg ml?1 puromycin and 1 mg ml?1 G418. Transfection of miRs precursor molecules miR-19a, miR-138, miR-30a, miR-148a, miR-12b1, miR-125b2 and miR let7a precursor molecules and negative control miRNAs were purchased from Ambion. We carried out experiments involving transient transfections of pre-miRNAs with oligofectamine (Invitrogen) using 100 nmol/l RNA duplexes. The cells were collected 48 h and 72 h after transfection, and the expression of precursor and mature miRNAs was assessed by qRT-PCR, as described above. miRNA expression study by microarray Briefly, 5 µg of RNA from each tissue sample was labeled with biotin by reverse transcription using random octomers. Hybridization was carried out on the second version of a miRNA-chip 18 , which contained 238 probes for mature miRNAs. Each oligo was printed in duplicate in two different slide locations. Hybridization signals were detected by biotin binding of a Streptavidin-Alexa647 conjugate (one-color signal) using a GenePix 4000B scanner (Axon Instruments). We quantified images using the GenePix Pro 6.0 (Axon Instruments). Raw data were analyzed in BRB-ArrayTools developed by R. Simon and A.P. Lam (version: 3.6.1, May 2008; National Cancer Institute). Expression data were normalized by quantiles method of the Bioconductor package. Statistical comparisons were done using class comparison t -test. Cell viability and colony formation assay We determined cell viability by the 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. For colony formation experiments, stable G418, puromycin and G418+ puromycin-resistant colonies were fixed and stained with MTT reagent. Mouse xenograft model Athymic nu/nu mice, aged 4–5 weeks, were used for tumor xenografts. The animals were maintained in a sterile environment; their cages, food and bedding were sterilized by autoclaving. The experimental design was approved by the IDIBELL animal facility committee. Mice were anesthetized and tumor cells were subcutaneously injected. We subcutaneously injected 3 × 106 of empty vector cells (control) or cells stably transfected with TARBP2 wild-type, TARBP2 truncated form, DICER1 and TARBP2 wild-type + DICER1 diluted in 200 µl of PBS in both flanks of each animal ( n = 10). Mice were weighed, and tumor width (W) and length (L) were measured every 5 d. Tumor volume was estimated according to the formula V = ?/6 × L × W2. Mice were killed 30 d postinjection, and tumors from both groups were excised and weighed. The mean volume or tumor mass ± s.e.m. were calculated for each mouse group, and significance was assessed by means of a two-tailed independent samples t -test.  Cell lines and primary tumor samples Human colorectal and endometrial cancer cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Human gastric cancer cell lines and Co115 were provided by M. Toyota (First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University) and R. Hamelin (Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale), respectively. The cancer cell lines were grown and maintained in 10% FBS in RPMI medium 1640 at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. We obtained DNA samples from primary tumors ( n = 282) at the time of the clinically indicated surgical procedures.  Mutation analysis Genomic DNA from cell lines and primary tumors and cDNA from the cell lines were amplified by PCR. PCR products and recombinant plasmids from single clones of every sample were sequenced in an automated ABI Prism 3700 sequencer. The genes studied, their genomic locations and the primers used are described in Supplementary Table 1 .  FISH analysis FISH was done by standard methods. We used the UCSC genome browser to select for the TARBP2 gene the two BAC clones spanning the 12q13 region: RP11-793H13 and RP11-101H10, and for DICER1 gene the BAC clone covering the 14q32 region: RP11-1143O10. The BACs were obtained from the Children’s Hospital Oakland Research Institute in Oakland, USA. We used commercial centromeric probes for chromosomes 12 and 14 (Vysis) as control.  Analysis of <italic>TARBP2</italic> and <italic>DICER1</italic> CpG island promoter methylation DNA samples were treated with sodium bisulfite and primers spanning the CpG island of the TARBP2 and DICER1 promoters were used for bisulfite genomic sequencing. Primer sequences and PCR conditions are available upon request. We analyzed ten clones per sample.  Protein blotting For protein blotting of TRBP and DICER1 expression, total protein extracts were immunoprobed with antibodies to TRBP (monoclonal ABNOVA 1:1,000) and DICER1 (1:500, Santa Cruz H212). We used an antibody against ?-actin (1:5000; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) or nucleolin (1:1000; Santa Cruz) as a loading control.  RNA isolation Total RNA was isolated by Trizol (Invitrogen). Extraction was carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Quantification of miRNAs with real-time PCR We used TaqMan MiRNA assays to quantify mature miRNAs as described previously 24 . Each reverse transcriptase (RT) reaction contained 10 ng of purified and DNase-treated (Turbo DNA-free, Ambion) total RNA, 50 nM stem-loop RT primer, 1 × RT buffer, dNTPs (each at 1 mM), 16.5 units of MultiScribe Reverse Transcriptase and 1.36 units of RNase inhibitor (Applied Biosystems). The reactions were incubated at 16 °C for 30 min, 42 °C for 30 min and 85 °C for 5 min. Real-time PCR reactions for each miRNA (10 µl volume) were done in triplicate, and each 10 µl reaction mixture included 2 µl of diluted RT product (1:15 dilution), 5 µl of TaqMan 2× Universal PCR Master Mix, 1× TaqMan MiRNA Assay (Applied Biosystems). Reactions were incubated in an Applied Biosystems 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR system in 384-well plates at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. We used the 2?(??Ct) method 17 to determine relative quantitative levels of individual miRNAs, using GADPH for normalization, and expressed values as the relative difference compared to the relevant controls. The primers used are described online in Supplementary Table 1 .  Precursor miRNA qPCR SuperScript III Platinum One-Step RT-qPCR kit (Invitrogen) was used to quantify precursor miRNAs by RT-qPCR 25 . The precursor miRNAs to be tested were selected according to the colorectal miRNAome identified by Cummins et al. 26 . The primers used are described online in Supplementary Table 1 .  miRNA processing efficiency The changes in miRNA processing efficiency were plotted as ‘relative processing’ and ‘processing fold’. Relative processing was defined as the ratio of mature to precursor miRNA. Processing fold was defined as the ratio of mature to precursor miRNA in transfected cells divided by the ratio of mature to precursor miRNA in empty vector transfected cells 4 . Processing fold = 2 ? ( ? Ct . miR / ? Ct . Pre ? miR ) Transfected 2 ? ( ? Ct . miR / ? Ct . Pre ? miR ) EmptyVector Total RNA was extracted from three independent experiments and the results presented are the means of these.  Northern blot Forty micrograms of total RNA together with Decade Marker (Ambion) were resolved in 15% denaturating polyacrylamide gel containing 7 M urea in 0.5XTBE buffer system and transferred onto Hybond-N+ membrane (Amersham) in 0.5XTBE. Probes were radioactively labeled with 25 µCie [?-32P] ATP (PerkinElmer) and T4 kinase (Invitrogen), and purified with Nucaway Spin columns (Ambion). Membranes were UV-cross linked (1200 jules), prehybridized in hybridization buffer and hybridized overnight in the same solution at 37 °C containing the radioactively labeled probed previously heated at 95 °C for 2 min. Membranes were washed at low stringency followed by film exposure. Probes used are described online in Supplementary Table 1 .  RNA interference TARBP2 - and DICER1 -specific small interfering RNAs (siRNA) were designed and synthesized by Qiagen. Two siRNA duplexes that recognized two different sequences were used against the TARBP2 gene, and likewise for the DICER1 gene. TARBP2 and DICER1 expression was analyzed by qRT-PCR and protein blotting; pre-miRNA and miRNAs were assessed by qRT-PCR, as described above.  Transfections of <italic>TARBP2</italic> and <italic>DICER1</italic> The wild-type TARBP2 expression vector (pLPC- TARBP2 wt) was constructed by cloning the cDNA corresponding to the wild-type gene TARBP2 into a pLPC vector. The truncated form of TRBP was constructed by cloning the cDNA corresponding to TARBP2 truncated from Co115 into a pCMV-Tag4B vector, pCMV-Tag4B- TARBP2 -Mut. The DICER1 expression vector pCMV-Tag4B- DICER1 was constructed by cloning the cDNA corresponding to the gene DICER1 into a pCMV-Tag4B vector. Transfection of Co115 cells was done by electroporating 107 cells in 0.8 ml PBS with 40 µg of the vector at 250 V and 975 µF. After electroporation, cells were washed with PBS and seeded in fresh medium. Clones expressing wild-type TRBP were selected in complete medium supplemented with 0.5 µg ml?1 puromycin; clones expressing the truncated form of TRBP were selected in complete medium supplemented with 1 mg ml?1 G418; clones expressing DICER1 were selected in complete medium supplemented with 1 mg ml?1 G418 and clones coexpressing TRBP wild-type and DICER1 were selected in complete medium supplemented with 0.5 µg ml?1 puromycin and 1 mg ml?1 G418.  Transfection of miRs precursor molecules miR-19a, miR-138, miR-30a, miR-148a, miR-12b1, miR-125b2 and miR let7a precursor molecules and negative control miRNAs were purchased from Ambion. We carried out experiments involving transient transfections of pre-miRNAs with oligofectamine (Invitrogen) using 100 nmol/l RNA duplexes. The cells were collected 48 h and 72 h after transfection, and the expression of precursor and mature miRNAs was assessed by qRT-PCR, as described above.  miRNA expression study by microarray Briefly, 5 µg of RNA from each tissue sample was labeled with biotin by reverse transcription using random octomers. Hybridization was carried out on the second version of a miRNA-chip 18 , which contained 238 probes for mature miRNAs. Each oligo was printed in duplicate in two different slide locations. Hybridization signals were detected by biotin binding of a Streptavidin-Alexa647 conjugate (one-color signal) using a GenePix 4000B scanner (Axon Instruments). We quantified images using the GenePix Pro 6.0 (Axon Instruments). Raw data were analyzed in BRB-ArrayTools developed by R. Simon and A.P. Lam (version: 3.6.1, May 2008; National Cancer Institute). Expression data were normalized by quantiles method of the Bioconductor package. Statistical comparisons were done using class comparison t -test.  Cell viability and colony formation assay We determined cell viability by the 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. For colony formation experiments, stable G418, puromycin and G418+ puromycin-resistant colonies were fixed and stained with MTT reagent.  Mouse xenograft model Athymic nu/nu mice, aged 4–5 weeks, were used for tumor xenografts. The animals were maintained in a sterile environment; their cages, food and bedding were sterilized by autoclaving. The experimental design was approved by the IDIBELL animal facility committee. Mice were anesthetized and tumor cells were subcutaneously injected. We subcutaneously injected 3 × 106 of empty vector cells (control) or cells stably transfected with TARBP2 wild-type, TARBP2 truncated form, DICER1 and TARBP2 wild-type + DICER1 diluted in 200 µl of PBS in both flanks of each animal ( n = 10). Mice were weighed, and tumor width (W) and length (L) were measured every 5 d. Tumor volume was estimated according to the formula V = ?/6 × L × W2. Mice were killed 30 d postinjection, and tumors from both groups were excised and weighed. The mean volume or tumor mass ± s.e.m. were calculated for each mouse group, and significance was assessed by means of a two-tailed independent samples t -test.  Supplementary Material Supplemental 