Mathematical Learning Disabilities in Special Populations: Phenotypic Variation and Cross-Disorder Comparisons What is mathematical learning disability (MLD)? The reviews in this special issue adopt different approaches to defining the construct of MLD. Collectively, they demonstrate the current status of efforts to establish a consensus definition and the challenges faced in this endeavor. In this commentary, we reflect upon the proposed pathways to mathematical learning difficulties and disabilities presented across the reviews. Specifically we consider how each of the reviews contributes to identifying the MLD phenotype by specifying the range of assets and deficits in mathematics, identifying sources of individual variation, and characterizing the natural progression of MLD over the life course. We show how principled comparisons across disorders address issues about the cognitive and behavioral co-morbidities of MLD, and whether commonalities in brain dysmorphology are associated with common mathematics performance profiles. We project the status of MLD research ten years hence with respect to theoretical gains, advances in methodology, and principled intervention studies.  MATHEMATICAL LEARNING DISABILITIES RESEARCH BY THE YEAR 2019 As we read the papers in this special issue, we found ourselves reflecting on what a second edition of this issue might look like a decade from now. Our thoughts about this question, which amount to a wish list for the future, include theoretical gains, advances in methodology, and principled intervention studies. Theoretical approaches to MLD stand to benefit from more fully articulated models of the normal mathematical process and increased focus on delineating core deficit s (we emphasize the plural form here, as it appears that a single core deficit is unlikely to account for the multifaceted nature of mathematical learning disabilities [see Pennington, 2006 , for a detailed and thoughtful treatment of this issue with respect to dyslexia]). Methodological gains may range from approaches in study design (participant matching, including multiple disorders in a single study), and experimental tasks based on theoretical advances. Theoretical and methodological advances are not mutually exclusive—consider their integration in research focused on parallel conceptualizations of mathematics as passive versus active processing (e.g., passive storage of information versus active, on-line construction of mathematical “meaning”). Moreover, as these advances contribute to intervention research, we stand to gain a greater understanding of the interplay among the genetic, biological, and environmental pathways that produce MLD and mediate its manifestation and outcome. Theoretical Advances by 2019 Models of the normal mathematical process The papers in this special issue highlight some lacunae in our understanding of the normal process of mathematics. In this context, we will consider the role of executive function, notably the executive resource of working memory, in current models of math. Working memory is an important feature of many models of mathematical cognition, although its role in specific components of mathematical processing is currently under debate [ Landerl et al., 2004 ; LeFevre et al., 2005 ; Butterworth and Reigosa Crespo, 2007 ; Swanson and Kim, 2007 ; Berch, 2008 ]. Certainly, working memory does not account for the particular math disabilities in some developmental disorders such as 22q11.DS [ De Smedt et al., 2009 ]. Because there is almost no complex cognitive process that does not involve working memory, it is important to move toward a fuller specification of how working memory operates in models of math. Geary [2004] has probably made the most significant progress to date in this regard, spelling out precisely how deficits in the central executive, phonological loop, and visuo-spatial sketchpad (as per Baddeley’s [1998] model) may contribute to impairments in various components of math performance exhibited by children with MLD. In the present issue, English et al. propose that working memory might foster the acquisition of math skills in iterative cycles of mastery, and they suggest that breakdowns in various points in the cycles might lead to math deficits and perpetuate a cycle of academic underachievement. Finally, as Berch [2008] has pointed out, the working memory model of Unsworth and Engle [2007] which emphasizes the important role played by the context in which the retrieval of information takes place may have important implications for studying children with MLD. According to this view, individual differences in working memory capacity may arise in part because of variation in the ability to retrieve relevant information from secondary memory in the presence of highly distracting information. Consequently, as Berch notes, the comparatively poor recall by children with MLD in complex span tasks (e.g., counting span) may be partially attributable to a poorer discrimination process at retrieval. For the most part, the models of mathematics that currently inform our research function primarily as useful heuristics. In contrast, the models we would hope to review ten years hence will most likely be more comprehensive and fully articulated. Some of the issues we would want to have clarified by 2019 include: Do the domains of mathematical processing that require working memory operate in the same way? Do capacity-limited executive resources (such as working memory) and knowledge structures of executive function (such as planning and problem solving) play distinct roles in mathematical thinking? Is a deficit in working memory capacity a necessary or sufficient pathway to MLD, and can we make a principled distinction between MLD with and without a serviceable working memory pathway? Are alternative models of working memory better suited to delineating MLD, specific MLD subtypes, or specific genetic etiologies of MLD than are the commonly studied capacity-limited models? (see a recent, in-depth treatment of the latter issue by Berch [2008] ). Increased focus on understanding deficits rather than on generating typologies Categorical and typological classifications continue to be sought for MLD, just as for other forms of LD. What the articles in the special issue illustrate is that some traditional typologies provide an imperfect characterization of the math phenotype in several different developmental disorders. Moore [2009] points out that learning disabilities in NF-1 would be poorly characterized as nonverbal learning disabilities [ Harnadek and Rourke, 1994 ], being neither nonverbal nor restricted to mathematics. English et al. [2009] report a mathematics profile in children with SBM that includes relative preservation of mechanical arithmetic skills, a cardinal deficit in the nonverbal learning disabilities framework. In 22q11DS, the characteristic nonverbal learning disabilities IQ pattern (Verbal IQ > Performance IQ) is attenuated or reversed [ De Smedt et al., 2009 ]. For these and other disorders (such as Turner syndrome), the framework fails to specify within-disorder specificity, much less to differentiate these disorders from each one. In ADHD research, an earlier focus on typologies has largely given way to a search for core deficits and endophenotypes, [ Gottesman and Gould, 2003 ], hypothetical constructs intervening between genes and behaviors [ Almasy and Blangero, 2001 ] that are common in affected individuals (sensitive), relatively unique to the disorder (specific), and comparatively uncommon in the normal population [ Biederman et al., 1995 ; Crosbie et al., 2008 ]. The search has been productive in identifying a limited number of candidate endophenotypes (e.g., response inhibition) that are deficient in individuals with ADHD (however typologized) and that are demonstrably related to some of the genetic anomalies (e.g., in dopamine transporter genes) and brain pathways (e.g., prefrontal-dorsal striatum and orbitofrontal-ventral striatum circuits) associated with the ADHD phenotype. The papers in this special issue have demonstrated not only the range of skills we think of as “mathematical,” but also how dissociable combinations of these skills may be within and across disorders. Looking forward, it is possible that a special issue in 2019 might elaborate on the myriad of explanations as to why a core deficit (or most likely a set of core deficits) cannot adequately characterize a disorder as complex as MLD. Alternatively, the 2019 special issue might include an update on the status of current core deficits and impaired processes (e.g., fact retrieval, poor number knowledge, spatio-temporal resolution, spatial orienting, and nonsymbolic magnitude representation), as well as new information about whether systematic comparisons across disorders has provided us with sufficient data about sensitivity and specificity to consider any or all of these deficits as candidate endophenotypes. Advances in MLD subtyping Over the past 15 years, we have witnessed a progression from the earliest models of MLD, which focused on differentiating subtypes, toward models aligned with advances being made in other areas of mathematical cognition. This transition can be characterized as a shift from examining specific skills in the context of a proposed MLD subtype to delineating the broader conceptualization of a subtype per se . For instance, response time (RT) is a dimension of math performance that is poorly articulated in subtyping schemes. Often considered evidence of a process loosely referred to as “fact retrieval”, researchers have already demonstrated the variability in types of “processing” involved in the act of “retrieval” (as discussed further, below [also see LeFevre et al., 1996 ]). Yet slow RT during arithmetic calculations is a proposed characteristic of an MLD subtype (semantic memory), and a proposed core characteristic of children with mathematical learning difficulties [ Baroody et al., 2009 ]. RT and fact retrieval are overlapping, but separate, issues. For some disorders (22q11DS), RT problems seem relatively non-salient; for others (Turner syndrome, SBM) slower RTs are apparent on mathematical and non-mathematical tasks, such as stimulus orienting. The specificity of RT slowing to mathematics is not always obvious, because slower RTs among a wide range of tasks suggests a general processing speed deficit rather than deficits with mathematics per se, as was proposed for the Turner syndrome phenotype in the 1980s. But further studies revealed selective slow responding in Turner syndrome [e.g. Simon et al., 2008 ]. The reason under-specification of RT in math models matters is that conditions such as Turner syndrome and SBM sit uneasily as a Semantic math subtype [ Geary, 1993 ]. This lack of fit occurs because although math fact retrieval is accurate in persons with SBM or Turner syndrome it is also slow [ English et al. 2009 ; Mazzocco, 2009 ]. Advances in conceptualizing constructs like RT will likely be crucial for making further progress in delineating subtle processing deficits that may accumulate over time and eventuate in impaired or inaccurate mathematical performance. A recent example of such an approach comes from a study of transcoding —translating from one numeric code to another, such as reading (i.e., verbalizing) a visually presented Arabic numeral. van Loosbroek et al. [2009] measured the so-called “planning time” in seconds, needed by 9-year-old children with or without MLD to begin writing an Arabic numeral (e.g., 7) in response to a dictated number word (“seven”). Not only were the children with MLD slower overall in planning time, but unlike their typically achieving peers, they exhibited a problem-size effect for numbers smaller than 10—taking an increasingly (linear) amount of time to begin writing the numerals as the magnitude of the numbers increased! The authors argue that these findings suggest an inefficient semantic linking of numerical symbols to analog numerical representations, rather than transcoding via a more direct, nonsemantic route as appeared to be carried out by the typically-achieving children. Finally, future research assessing RTs must take into account the methodological complexities associated with the multiple factors that contribute to measures of processing time. For example, slower RTs in a math fact retrieval task can be partially attributed to slower, global processing speed, search time, response preparation, and the like. Furthermore, developmental changes in such processing components can complicate the interpretations of age-related differences in RT. Indeed, Kiselev et al. [2009] have recently demonstrated process-specific, age-related differences in processing speed for simple discrimination, and choice reaction-time tasks (that did not require reading). As these authors point out, such findings are consistent with the principle of the “heterochronicity” of brain development during childhood—that “different brain structures and areas follow temporally distinct maturational trajectories that should be manifest on tasks that demand the concomitant distinct cognitive processes subserved by these brain structures” [ Kiselev et al., 2009 , p. 163]. Advances in Models of MLD subtypes are likely to see gains during the next decade of MLD research. Some of these advances will come not from the study of MLD itself, but from better-articulated cognitive models that can be exploited to understand pathways to MLD. In the domain of attention, the prototypical disorder is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which is dopaminergically mediated and characteristically involves intact stimulus orienting but poor response control. More recent models of childhood attention deficits [e.g., Dennis et al., 2008 ] have identified a contrasting profile of disordered attention that concerns poor stimulus orienting, with difficulty disengaging and shifting attention. It remains to be seen whether the non-ADHD stimulus orienting attention disorders observed in SBM and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (and apparently also in 22q11DS) are related to mathematics skills in these conditions. We have already seen advances in clarifying the construct of the Spatial subtype of MLD, which has progressed from its original focus on overtly spatial products (misalignment of numbers during paper and pencil calculations) and scaffolds (using graph paper to help maintain proper alignment) during mathematics [ Geary, 1993 ] to its more current emphasis on spatial components of basic mathematical cognition including the mental number line and the conceptual understanding of place value (i.e., the base-10, positional meaning of multidigit numbers) [ Dehaene et al., 2003 ; Geary and Hoard, 2005 ; Simon et al., 2008 ]. The evolution of the Spatial subtype, in its short history, illustrates not only how advances in characterizing basic mathematical processes can inform research on MLD, but also how the lack of evidence based on a single construct could not definitively rule out a potential theoretical pathway. As such the field needs to be as mindful of its potential false negatives in research outcomes as of its tantalizing “hits.” Methodological Advances Defining comparison groups One source of potential false negatives in phenotype research is the methodological approach to defining comparison groups, or in defining MLD. In learning disabilities (LD) research (as seen in the papers included in this special issue), one important distinction in the approaches used is between the use of low achievement criteria (defined in terms of age norms or age expectations) and discrepancy definitions (defined relative to IQ or some other measure of cognitive development). At the broadest level, the choice of one definition of MLD (or other mathematical difficulties) over another represents an implicit view of a long-standing controversy about discrepancy versus low achievement definitions of LD [see Francis et al., 1996 , for a discussion]. In developmental disorders with a shorter MLD research history, such as very low birth weight and very preterm birth (VLBW/VPTB), discrepancy definitions, IQ controls, or mental age matching have played a role in helping define the phenotype of mathematical abilities. In disorders with a longer MLD research history such as 22q11DS and Turner syndrome, studies have moved towards a focus on comparing index groups on developmentally appropriate skills like reading and on experimental tasks of functions, such as the representation of quantity, that have theoretically-specified and testable relations to math. Children with MLD, as a group, often have lower IQ scores than their typically achieving peers. To the extent that the same neurodevelopmental events that produced the low IQ also produced the MLD, IQ and MLD are not fully separable, which means that one cannot be subtracted from, or covaried out of, the other (for a discussion, see Dennis et al. [in press ]). This erroneous assumption may be most obvious when an arithmetic subtest is included in the IQ measure, and although omitting such a subtest would be an improvement in the right direction, it fails to fully account for the central issue, which is that, especially in genetic and brain disorders, lowered IQ and MLD are tied to each other and to their shared condition. The existence of IQ differences forces the MLD researcher to consider low achievement and discrepancy measures of the construct, the choice of which, in turn, presupposes one type of control or comparison group rather than another. In some studies, only one measure is used to assess mathematical difficulties or disabilities; in others, both measures are used and produce different results with different math measures [ Taylor et al., 2009 ]. In the papers of this special issue, comparison groups may include mental age comparisons, matching on age, or matching on age and IQ, comparison to children with other developmental disorders, or some combination of the above. Although a researcher’s confidence in the findings that emerge when IQ matching is employed may not necessarily be unwarranted, the risk of false negatives may inadvertently lead us to exclude MLD from a phenotype when absolute performance differences are significant. A number of researchers have adopted reporting absolute and relative outcomes in a single study [e.g., Mazzocco et al., 2006 ], which, while perhaps cumbersome, at least allows the reader to consider both types of outcome. Analyses of different definitions of the MLD construct should serve to make us more mindful of our interpretations. The advantages and disadvantages of each approach hinder any single one from emerging as the “best” approach, but explorations of the outcomes of each approach can promote advances in this area. The choice of how we define control and comparison groups has consequences for establishing the incidence of MLD. Even within the confines of disorders for which superior performance does not occur, there is variability in the frequency with which members of a population meet criteria for MLD, and how relative frequency compared to a control group varies further as a function of how that control group is defined. For instance, the incidence of MLD among young girls with Turner syndrome is four times greater than the rate observed in an age- and IQ-matched group of girls without Turner syndrome; whereas the difference in rates for girls with versus without fragile X syndrome is 2.5:1. This suggests a higher incidence of MLD in Turner syndrome than fragile X, but the reverse is true because of different characteristics of the IQ-matched comparison groups used across these two analyses [ Mazzocco, 2001 ]. Of practical importance, somewhat different conclusions about MLD treatment might be shaped by focusing on whether deficits in math are absolute or relative to IQ. For instance, compared to those from more advantaged backgrounds, children with unrelieved socio-economic disadvantage may have lower IQ scores. If IQ discrepancy scores are used to identify mathematical learning difficulties, such children will be less likely to be targeted for remedial mathematics education that might enhance their number competence and foster greater mathematical learning. Math as both storage of learned math facts and active, on-line construction of number solutions Some of the advances to be gained in MLD research can be guided by the lessons learned from research on reading disabilities. Much of an earlier research era in reading disabilities was concerned with failures of word decoding as the defining deficit of dyslexia. This constituted a reasonable focus at the time, given the importance of understanding why word decoding could become a rapid, obligatory, and automatic process for most children—but not for those with dyslexia. More recently, reading research has been broadened to include issues concerned with the active, on-line construction of meaning in texts, including the process by which inferences are made from the textual “facts,” from the situation described by the text but not literally “in” the text, and from real-world knowledge. Contemporary research focuses on the process by which the individual’s reading goals modify how a text is read. An important contribution of the current special issue is to show that both fact retrieval and active construction are important for math, even for such seemingly basic math skills as math fact manipulation [ Baroody et al., 2009 ]. In other words, although proficiency in arithmetic and higher forms of mathematics demonstrably requires adequate storage and efficient retrieval of math facts in semantic memory, memorizing these facts in a meaningful manner (i.e., active construction) can lessen the amount of time and practice needed to achieve mastery, minimize retrieval errors, and permit existing knowledge to be applied to the learning of new arithmetic combinations [ Baroody, 2009 ]. We predict that future research will devote increased attention to the study of active constructive processes in mathematical learning, including such questions as: Which kinds of inferences do children make using math facts they have successfully retrieved? Do inferences play a greater role in intuitive, informal numerical skills than in formal math ability and achievement measures? How does a child construct mental models involving number and extent, and how do these mental models constrain the inferences the child makes about possible numeric solutions? Are measures of executive top-down control associated with how children adjust their mathematical problem solving in accordance with different goals? And finally, how can children with MLD be successfully taught to engage in more active construction for learning basic math facts if such an approach seems to simultaneously require both of the following: A deeper understanding of mathematical concepts (including a well-interconnected knowledge of arithmetic facts, principles, and processes) that are quite difficult for these individuals to comprehend, and a comparatively unstructured, inquiry-based learning environment (where they may be expected to take advantage of opportunities for “ discovering patterns and relations”), in which children with LD typically fare poorly? Studying the neural correlates of MLD Despite some recent advances in the cognitive neuroscience of both typical and atypical cognitive development (see a recent review by Ansari et al. [2008] ), there remain numerous conceptual, methodological and statistical challenges in characterizing not only the neural correlates of MLD, but also the confluence of factors that may play a causal role in producing the phenotypic impairments in performance described throughout the current collection of papers. Future progress in this area will require careful attention to recent advances being made in the use of various neuroimaging and related modalities. For thoughtful treatments of the complex issues associated with the study of developmental changes in mathematical cognition both in children with and without MLD, future researchers should consult the recent papers by Ansari et al. [2008] and Kaufman [2008] . Interplay Among Genetic, Biological, and Environmental Pathways to MLD Variation in mathematical abilities has been associated with differences in endogenous features within children, such as genetic polymorphisms, genetic mutations, and brain dysmorphisms, as well as with factors exogenous to the child, such as poverty and socioeconomic disadvantage [ Jordan and Levine, 2009 ]. The home environment and early learning experiences are important influences on subsequent mathematics achievement at 10 years of age [ Melhuish et al., 2008 ]. Although endogenous and exogenous pathways to MLD have largely been considered separately, recent research in other domains suggests that they are interrelated. For example, the brain systems with the most protracted postnatal development (e.g., the perisylvian areas important for language) are most susceptible to environmental influences and show the strongest associations with socioeconomic status [ Noble et al., 2005 ; Farah et al., 2006 ], so it is important to understand that unrelieved poverty and socioeconomic disadvantage will change, not only the environment for learning math, but also the brain resources of the mathematics learner. Ten years from now, we would hope that the interplay between genetic, brain, and environmental pathways to MLD will be better understood.  Theoretical Advances by 2019 Models of the normal mathematical process The papers in this special issue highlight some lacunae in our understanding of the normal process of mathematics. In this context, we will consider the role of executive function, notably the executive resource of working memory, in current models of math. Working memory is an important feature of many models of mathematical cognition, although its role in specific components of mathematical processing is currently under debate [ Landerl et al., 2004 ; LeFevre et al., 2005 ; Butterworth and Reigosa Crespo, 2007 ; Swanson and Kim, 2007 ; Berch, 2008 ]. Certainly, working memory does not account for the particular math disabilities in some developmental disorders such as 22q11.DS [ De Smedt et al., 2009 ]. Because there is almost no complex cognitive process that does not involve working memory, it is important to move toward a fuller specification of how working memory operates in models of math. Geary [2004] has probably made the most significant progress to date in this regard, spelling out precisely how deficits in the central executive, phonological loop, and visuo-spatial sketchpad (as per Baddeley’s [1998] model) may contribute to impairments in various components of math performance exhibited by children with MLD. In the present issue, English et al. propose that working memory might foster the acquisition of math skills in iterative cycles of mastery, and they suggest that breakdowns in various points in the cycles might lead to math deficits and perpetuate a cycle of academic underachievement. Finally, as Berch [2008] has pointed out, the working memory model of Unsworth and Engle [2007] which emphasizes the important role played by the context in which the retrieval of information takes place may have important implications for studying children with MLD. According to this view, individual differences in working memory capacity may arise in part because of variation in the ability to retrieve relevant information from secondary memory in the presence of highly distracting information. Consequently, as Berch notes, the comparatively poor recall by children with MLD in complex span tasks (e.g., counting span) may be partially attributable to a poorer discrimination process at retrieval. For the most part, the models of mathematics that currently inform our research function primarily as useful heuristics. In contrast, the models we would hope to review ten years hence will most likely be more comprehensive and fully articulated. Some of the issues we would want to have clarified by 2019 include: Do the domains of mathematical processing that require working memory operate in the same way? Do capacity-limited executive resources (such as working memory) and knowledge structures of executive function (such as planning and problem solving) play distinct roles in mathematical thinking? Is a deficit in working memory capacity a necessary or sufficient pathway to MLD, and can we make a principled distinction between MLD with and without a serviceable working memory pathway? Are alternative models of working memory better suited to delineating MLD, specific MLD subtypes, or specific genetic etiologies of MLD than are the commonly studied capacity-limited models? (see a recent, in-depth treatment of the latter issue by Berch [2008] ). Increased focus on understanding deficits rather than on generating typologies Categorical and typological classifications continue to be sought for MLD, just as for other forms of LD. What the articles in the special issue illustrate is that some traditional typologies provide an imperfect characterization of the math phenotype in several different developmental disorders. Moore [2009] points out that learning disabilities in NF-1 would be poorly characterized as nonverbal learning disabilities [ Harnadek and Rourke, 1994 ], being neither nonverbal nor restricted to mathematics. English et al. [2009] report a mathematics profile in children with SBM that includes relative preservation of mechanical arithmetic skills, a cardinal deficit in the nonverbal learning disabilities framework. In 22q11DS, the characteristic nonverbal learning disabilities IQ pattern (Verbal IQ > Performance IQ) is attenuated or reversed [ De Smedt et al., 2009 ]. For these and other disorders (such as Turner syndrome), the framework fails to specify within-disorder specificity, much less to differentiate these disorders from each one. In ADHD research, an earlier focus on typologies has largely given way to a search for core deficits and endophenotypes, [ Gottesman and Gould, 2003 ], hypothetical constructs intervening between genes and behaviors [ Almasy and Blangero, 2001 ] that are common in affected individuals (sensitive), relatively unique to the disorder (specific), and comparatively uncommon in the normal population [ Biederman et al., 1995 ; Crosbie et al., 2008 ]. The search has been productive in identifying a limited number of candidate endophenotypes (e.g., response inhibition) that are deficient in individuals with ADHD (however typologized) and that are demonstrably related to some of the genetic anomalies (e.g., in dopamine transporter genes) and brain pathways (e.g., prefrontal-dorsal striatum and orbitofrontal-ventral striatum circuits) associated with the ADHD phenotype. The papers in this special issue have demonstrated not only the range of skills we think of as “mathematical,” but also how dissociable combinations of these skills may be within and across disorders. Looking forward, it is possible that a special issue in 2019 might elaborate on the myriad of explanations as to why a core deficit (or most likely a set of core deficits) cannot adequately characterize a disorder as complex as MLD. Alternatively, the 2019 special issue might include an update on the status of current core deficits and impaired processes (e.g., fact retrieval, poor number knowledge, spatio-temporal resolution, spatial orienting, and nonsymbolic magnitude representation), as well as new information about whether systematic comparisons across disorders has provided us with sufficient data about sensitivity and specificity to consider any or all of these deficits as candidate endophenotypes. Advances in MLD subtyping Over the past 15 years, we have witnessed a progression from the earliest models of MLD, which focused on differentiating subtypes, toward models aligned with advances being made in other areas of mathematical cognition. This transition can be characterized as a shift from examining specific skills in the context of a proposed MLD subtype to delineating the broader conceptualization of a subtype per se . For instance, response time (RT) is a dimension of math performance that is poorly articulated in subtyping schemes. Often considered evidence of a process loosely referred to as “fact retrieval”, researchers have already demonstrated the variability in types of “processing” involved in the act of “retrieval” (as discussed further, below [also see LeFevre et al., 1996 ]). Yet slow RT during arithmetic calculations is a proposed characteristic of an MLD subtype (semantic memory), and a proposed core characteristic of children with mathematical learning difficulties [ Baroody et al., 2009 ]. RT and fact retrieval are overlapping, but separate, issues. For some disorders (22q11DS), RT problems seem relatively non-salient; for others (Turner syndrome, SBM) slower RTs are apparent on mathematical and non-mathematical tasks, such as stimulus orienting. The specificity of RT slowing to mathematics is not always obvious, because slower RTs among a wide range of tasks suggests a general processing speed deficit rather than deficits with mathematics per se, as was proposed for the Turner syndrome phenotype in the 1980s. But further studies revealed selective slow responding in Turner syndrome [e.g. Simon et al., 2008 ]. The reason under-specification of RT in math models matters is that conditions such as Turner syndrome and SBM sit uneasily as a Semantic math subtype [ Geary, 1993 ]. This lack of fit occurs because although math fact retrieval is accurate in persons with SBM or Turner syndrome it is also slow [ English et al. 2009 ; Mazzocco, 2009 ]. Advances in conceptualizing constructs like RT will likely be crucial for making further progress in delineating subtle processing deficits that may accumulate over time and eventuate in impaired or inaccurate mathematical performance. A recent example of such an approach comes from a study of transcoding —translating from one numeric code to another, such as reading (i.e., verbalizing) a visually presented Arabic numeral. van Loosbroek et al. [2009] measured the so-called “planning time” in seconds, needed by 9-year-old children with or without MLD to begin writing an Arabic numeral (e.g., 7) in response to a dictated number word (“seven”). Not only were the children with MLD slower overall in planning time, but unlike their typically achieving peers, they exhibited a problem-size effect for numbers smaller than 10—taking an increasingly (linear) amount of time to begin writing the numerals as the magnitude of the numbers increased! The authors argue that these findings suggest an inefficient semantic linking of numerical symbols to analog numerical representations, rather than transcoding via a more direct, nonsemantic route as appeared to be carried out by the typically-achieving children. Finally, future research assessing RTs must take into account the methodological complexities associated with the multiple factors that contribute to measures of processing time. For example, slower RTs in a math fact retrieval task can be partially attributed to slower, global processing speed, search time, response preparation, and the like. Furthermore, developmental changes in such processing components can complicate the interpretations of age-related differences in RT. Indeed, Kiselev et al. [2009] have recently demonstrated process-specific, age-related differences in processing speed for simple discrimination, and choice reaction-time tasks (that did not require reading). As these authors point out, such findings are consistent with the principle of the “heterochronicity” of brain development during childhood—that “different brain structures and areas follow temporally distinct maturational trajectories that should be manifest on tasks that demand the concomitant distinct cognitive processes subserved by these brain structures” [ Kiselev et al., 2009 , p. 163]. Advances in Models of MLD subtypes are likely to see gains during the next decade of MLD research. Some of these advances will come not from the study of MLD itself, but from better-articulated cognitive models that can be exploited to understand pathways to MLD. In the domain of attention, the prototypical disorder is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which is dopaminergically mediated and characteristically involves intact stimulus orienting but poor response control. More recent models of childhood attention deficits [e.g., Dennis et al., 2008 ] have identified a contrasting profile of disordered attention that concerns poor stimulus orienting, with difficulty disengaging and shifting attention. It remains to be seen whether the non-ADHD stimulus orienting attention disorders observed in SBM and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (and apparently also in 22q11DS) are related to mathematics skills in these conditions. We have already seen advances in clarifying the construct of the Spatial subtype of MLD, which has progressed from its original focus on overtly spatial products (misalignment of numbers during paper and pencil calculations) and scaffolds (using graph paper to help maintain proper alignment) during mathematics [ Geary, 1993 ] to its more current emphasis on spatial components of basic mathematical cognition including the mental number line and the conceptual understanding of place value (i.e., the base-10, positional meaning of multidigit numbers) [ Dehaene et al., 2003 ; Geary and Hoard, 2005 ; Simon et al., 2008 ]. The evolution of the Spatial subtype, in its short history, illustrates not only how advances in characterizing basic mathematical processes can inform research on MLD, but also how the lack of evidence based on a single construct could not definitively rule out a potential theoretical pathway. As such the field needs to be as mindful of its potential false negatives in research outcomes as of its tantalizing “hits.”  Models of the normal mathematical process The papers in this special issue highlight some lacunae in our understanding of the normal process of mathematics. In this context, we will consider the role of executive function, notably the executive resource of working memory, in current models of math. Working memory is an important feature of many models of mathematical cognition, although its role in specific components of mathematical processing is currently under debate [ Landerl et al., 2004 ; LeFevre et al., 2005 ; Butterworth and Reigosa Crespo, 2007 ; Swanson and Kim, 2007 ; Berch, 2008 ]. Certainly, working memory does not account for the particular math disabilities in some developmental disorders such as 22q11.DS [ De Smedt et al., 2009 ]. Because there is almost no complex cognitive process that does not involve working memory, it is important to move toward a fuller specification of how working memory operates in models of math. Geary [2004] has probably made the most significant progress to date in this regard, spelling out precisely how deficits in the central executive, phonological loop, and visuo-spatial sketchpad (as per Baddeley’s [1998] model) may contribute to impairments in various components of math performance exhibited by children with MLD. In the present issue, English et al. propose that working memory might foster the acquisition of math skills in iterative cycles of mastery, and they suggest that breakdowns in various points in the cycles might lead to math deficits and perpetuate a cycle of academic underachievement. Finally, as Berch [2008] has pointed out, the working memory model of Unsworth and Engle [2007] which emphasizes the important role played by the context in which the retrieval of information takes place may have important implications for studying children with MLD. According to this view, individual differences in working memory capacity may arise in part because of variation in the ability to retrieve relevant information from secondary memory in the presence of highly distracting information. Consequently, as Berch notes, the comparatively poor recall by children with MLD in complex span tasks (e.g., counting span) may be partially attributable to a poorer discrimination process at retrieval. For the most part, the models of mathematics that currently inform our research function primarily as useful heuristics. In contrast, the models we would hope to review ten years hence will most likely be more comprehensive and fully articulated. Some of the issues we would want to have clarified by 2019 include: Do the domains of mathematical processing that require working memory operate in the same way? Do capacity-limited executive resources (such as working memory) and knowledge structures of executive function (such as planning and problem solving) play distinct roles in mathematical thinking? Is a deficit in working memory capacity a necessary or sufficient pathway to MLD, and can we make a principled distinction between MLD with and without a serviceable working memory pathway? Are alternative models of working memory better suited to delineating MLD, specific MLD subtypes, or specific genetic etiologies of MLD than are the commonly studied capacity-limited models? (see a recent, in-depth treatment of the latter issue by Berch [2008] ).  Increased focus on understanding deficits rather than on generating typologies Categorical and typological classifications continue to be sought for MLD, just as for other forms of LD. What the articles in the special issue illustrate is that some traditional typologies provide an imperfect characterization of the math phenotype in several different developmental disorders. Moore [2009] points out that learning disabilities in NF-1 would be poorly characterized as nonverbal learning disabilities [ Harnadek and Rourke, 1994 ], being neither nonverbal nor restricted to mathematics. English et al. [2009] report a mathematics profile in children with SBM that includes relative preservation of mechanical arithmetic skills, a cardinal deficit in the nonverbal learning disabilities framework. In 22q11DS, the characteristic nonverbal learning disabilities IQ pattern (Verbal IQ > Performance IQ) is attenuated or reversed [ De Smedt et al., 2009 ]. For these and other disorders (such as Turner syndrome), the framework fails to specify within-disorder specificity, much less to differentiate these disorders from each one. In ADHD research, an earlier focus on typologies has largely given way to a search for core deficits and endophenotypes, [ Gottesman and Gould, 2003 ], hypothetical constructs intervening between genes and behaviors [ Almasy and Blangero, 2001 ] that are common in affected individuals (sensitive), relatively unique to the disorder (specific), and comparatively uncommon in the normal population [ Biederman et al., 1995 ; Crosbie et al., 2008 ]. The search has been productive in identifying a limited number of candidate endophenotypes (e.g., response inhibition) that are deficient in individuals with ADHD (however typologized) and that are demonstrably related to some of the genetic anomalies (e.g., in dopamine transporter genes) and brain pathways (e.g., prefrontal-dorsal striatum and orbitofrontal-ventral striatum circuits) associated with the ADHD phenotype. The papers in this special issue have demonstrated not only the range of skills we think of as “mathematical,” but also how dissociable combinations of these skills may be within and across disorders. Looking forward, it is possible that a special issue in 2019 might elaborate on the myriad of explanations as to why a core deficit (or most likely a set of core deficits) cannot adequately characterize a disorder as complex as MLD. Alternatively, the 2019 special issue might include an update on the status of current core deficits and impaired processes (e.g., fact retrieval, poor number knowledge, spatio-temporal resolution, spatial orienting, and nonsymbolic magnitude representation), as well as new information about whether systematic comparisons across disorders has provided us with sufficient data about sensitivity and specificity to consider any or all of these deficits as candidate endophenotypes.  Advances in MLD subtyping Over the past 15 years, we have witnessed a progression from the earliest models of MLD, which focused on differentiating subtypes, toward models aligned with advances being made in other areas of mathematical cognition. This transition can be characterized as a shift from examining specific skills in the context of a proposed MLD subtype to delineating the broader conceptualization of a subtype per se . For instance, response time (RT) is a dimension of math performance that is poorly articulated in subtyping schemes. Often considered evidence of a process loosely referred to as “fact retrieval”, researchers have already demonstrated the variability in types of “processing” involved in the act of “retrieval” (as discussed further, below [also see LeFevre et al., 1996 ]). Yet slow RT during arithmetic calculations is a proposed characteristic of an MLD subtype (semantic memory), and a proposed core characteristic of children with mathematical learning difficulties [ Baroody et al., 2009 ]. RT and fact retrieval are overlapping, but separate, issues. For some disorders (22q11DS), RT problems seem relatively non-salient; for others (Turner syndrome, SBM) slower RTs are apparent on mathematical and non-mathematical tasks, such as stimulus orienting. The specificity of RT slowing to mathematics is not always obvious, because slower RTs among a wide range of tasks suggests a general processing speed deficit rather than deficits with mathematics per se, as was proposed for the Turner syndrome phenotype in the 1980s. But further studies revealed selective slow responding in Turner syndrome [e.g. Simon et al., 2008 ]. The reason under-specification of RT in math models matters is that conditions such as Turner syndrome and SBM sit uneasily as a Semantic math subtype [ Geary, 1993 ]. This lack of fit occurs because although math fact retrieval is accurate in persons with SBM or Turner syndrome it is also slow [ English et al. 2009 ; Mazzocco, 2009 ]. Advances in conceptualizing constructs like RT will likely be crucial for making further progress in delineating subtle processing deficits that may accumulate over time and eventuate in impaired or inaccurate mathematical performance. A recent example of such an approach comes from a study of transcoding —translating from one numeric code to another, such as reading (i.e., verbalizing) a visually presented Arabic numeral. van Loosbroek et al. [2009] measured the so-called “planning time” in seconds, needed by 9-year-old children with or without MLD to begin writing an Arabic numeral (e.g., 7) in response to a dictated number word (“seven”). Not only were the children with MLD slower overall in planning time, but unlike their typically achieving peers, they exhibited a problem-size effect for numbers smaller than 10—taking an increasingly (linear) amount of time to begin writing the numerals as the magnitude of the numbers increased! The authors argue that these findings suggest an inefficient semantic linking of numerical symbols to analog numerical representations, rather than transcoding via a more direct, nonsemantic route as appeared to be carried out by the typically-achieving children. Finally, future research assessing RTs must take into account the methodological complexities associated with the multiple factors that contribute to measures of processing time. For example, slower RTs in a math fact retrieval task can be partially attributed to slower, global processing speed, search time, response preparation, and the like. Furthermore, developmental changes in such processing components can complicate the interpretations of age-related differences in RT. Indeed, Kiselev et al. [2009] have recently demonstrated process-specific, age-related differences in processing speed for simple discrimination, and choice reaction-time tasks (that did not require reading). As these authors point out, such findings are consistent with the principle of the “heterochronicity” of brain development during childhood—that “different brain structures and areas follow temporally distinct maturational trajectories that should be manifest on tasks that demand the concomitant distinct cognitive processes subserved by these brain structures” [ Kiselev et al., 2009 , p. 163]. Advances in Models of MLD subtypes are likely to see gains during the next decade of MLD research. Some of these advances will come not from the study of MLD itself, but from better-articulated cognitive models that can be exploited to understand pathways to MLD. In the domain of attention, the prototypical disorder is attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which is dopaminergically mediated and characteristically involves intact stimulus orienting but poor response control. More recent models of childhood attention deficits [e.g., Dennis et al., 2008 ] have identified a contrasting profile of disordered attention that concerns poor stimulus orienting, with difficulty disengaging and shifting attention. It remains to be seen whether the non-ADHD stimulus orienting attention disorders observed in SBM and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (and apparently also in 22q11DS) are related to mathematics skills in these conditions. We have already seen advances in clarifying the construct of the Spatial subtype of MLD, which has progressed from its original focus on overtly spatial products (misalignment of numbers during paper and pencil calculations) and scaffolds (using graph paper to help maintain proper alignment) during mathematics [ Geary, 1993 ] to its more current emphasis on spatial components of basic mathematical cognition including the mental number line and the conceptual understanding of place value (i.e., the base-10, positional meaning of multidigit numbers) [ Dehaene et al., 2003 ; Geary and Hoard, 2005 ; Simon et al., 2008 ]. The evolution of the Spatial subtype, in its short history, illustrates not only how advances in characterizing basic mathematical processes can inform research on MLD, but also how the lack of evidence based on a single construct could not definitively rule out a potential theoretical pathway. As such the field needs to be as mindful of its potential false negatives in research outcomes as of its tantalizing “hits.”  Methodological Advances Defining comparison groups One source of potential false negatives in phenotype research is the methodological approach to defining comparison groups, or in defining MLD. In learning disabilities (LD) research (as seen in the papers included in this special issue), one important distinction in the approaches used is between the use of low achievement criteria (defined in terms of age norms or age expectations) and discrepancy definitions (defined relative to IQ or some other measure of cognitive development). At the broadest level, the choice of one definition of MLD (or other mathematical difficulties) over another represents an implicit view of a long-standing controversy about discrepancy versus low achievement definitions of LD [see Francis et al., 1996 , for a discussion]. In developmental disorders with a shorter MLD research history, such as very low birth weight and very preterm birth (VLBW/VPTB), discrepancy definitions, IQ controls, or mental age matching have played a role in helping define the phenotype of mathematical abilities. In disorders with a longer MLD research history such as 22q11DS and Turner syndrome, studies have moved towards a focus on comparing index groups on developmentally appropriate skills like reading and on experimental tasks of functions, such as the representation of quantity, that have theoretically-specified and testable relations to math. Children with MLD, as a group, often have lower IQ scores than their typically achieving peers. To the extent that the same neurodevelopmental events that produced the low IQ also produced the MLD, IQ and MLD are not fully separable, which means that one cannot be subtracted from, or covaried out of, the other (for a discussion, see Dennis et al. [in press ]). This erroneous assumption may be most obvious when an arithmetic subtest is included in the IQ measure, and although omitting such a subtest would be an improvement in the right direction, it fails to fully account for the central issue, which is that, especially in genetic and brain disorders, lowered IQ and MLD are tied to each other and to their shared condition. The existence of IQ differences forces the MLD researcher to consider low achievement and discrepancy measures of the construct, the choice of which, in turn, presupposes one type of control or comparison group rather than another. In some studies, only one measure is used to assess mathematical difficulties or disabilities; in others, both measures are used and produce different results with different math measures [ Taylor et al., 2009 ]. In the papers of this special issue, comparison groups may include mental age comparisons, matching on age, or matching on age and IQ, comparison to children with other developmental disorders, or some combination of the above. Although a researcher’s confidence in the findings that emerge when IQ matching is employed may not necessarily be unwarranted, the risk of false negatives may inadvertently lead us to exclude MLD from a phenotype when absolute performance differences are significant. A number of researchers have adopted reporting absolute and relative outcomes in a single study [e.g., Mazzocco et al., 2006 ], which, while perhaps cumbersome, at least allows the reader to consider both types of outcome. Analyses of different definitions of the MLD construct should serve to make us more mindful of our interpretations. The advantages and disadvantages of each approach hinder any single one from emerging as the “best” approach, but explorations of the outcomes of each approach can promote advances in this area. The choice of how we define control and comparison groups has consequences for establishing the incidence of MLD. Even within the confines of disorders for which superior performance does not occur, there is variability in the frequency with which members of a population meet criteria for MLD, and how relative frequency compared to a control group varies further as a function of how that control group is defined. For instance, the incidence of MLD among young girls with Turner syndrome is four times greater than the rate observed in an age- and IQ-matched group of girls without Turner syndrome; whereas the difference in rates for girls with versus without fragile X syndrome is 2.5:1. This suggests a higher incidence of MLD in Turner syndrome than fragile X, but the reverse is true because of different characteristics of the IQ-matched comparison groups used across these two analyses [ Mazzocco, 2001 ]. Of practical importance, somewhat different conclusions about MLD treatment might be shaped by focusing on whether deficits in math are absolute or relative to IQ. For instance, compared to those from more advantaged backgrounds, children with unrelieved socio-economic disadvantage may have lower IQ scores. If IQ discrepancy scores are used to identify mathematical learning difficulties, such children will be less likely to be targeted for remedial mathematics education that might enhance their number competence and foster greater mathematical learning. Math as both storage of learned math facts and active, on-line construction of number solutions Some of the advances to be gained in MLD research can be guided by the lessons learned from research on reading disabilities. Much of an earlier research era in reading disabilities was concerned with failures of word decoding as the defining deficit of dyslexia. This constituted a reasonable focus at the time, given the importance of understanding why word decoding could become a rapid, obligatory, and automatic process for most children—but not for those with dyslexia. More recently, reading research has been broadened to include issues concerned with the active, on-line construction of meaning in texts, including the process by which inferences are made from the textual “facts,” from the situation described by the text but not literally “in” the text, and from real-world knowledge. Contemporary research focuses on the process by which the individual’s reading goals modify how a text is read. An important contribution of the current special issue is to show that both fact retrieval and active construction are important for math, even for such seemingly basic math skills as math fact manipulation [ Baroody et al., 2009 ]. In other words, although proficiency in arithmetic and higher forms of mathematics demonstrably requires adequate storage and efficient retrieval of math facts in semantic memory, memorizing these facts in a meaningful manner (i.e., active construction) can lessen the amount of time and practice needed to achieve mastery, minimize retrieval errors, and permit existing knowledge to be applied to the learning of new arithmetic combinations [ Baroody, 2009 ]. We predict that future research will devote increased attention to the study of active constructive processes in mathematical learning, including such questions as: Which kinds of inferences do children make using math facts they have successfully retrieved? Do inferences play a greater role in intuitive, informal numerical skills than in formal math ability and achievement measures? How does a child construct mental models involving number and extent, and how do these mental models constrain the inferences the child makes about possible numeric solutions? Are measures of executive top-down control associated with how children adjust their mathematical problem solving in accordance with different goals? And finally, how can children with MLD be successfully taught to engage in more active construction for learning basic math facts if such an approach seems to simultaneously require both of the following: A deeper understanding of mathematical concepts (including a well-interconnected knowledge of arithmetic facts, principles, and processes) that are quite difficult for these individuals to comprehend, and a comparatively unstructured, inquiry-based learning environment (where they may be expected to take advantage of opportunities for “ discovering patterns and relations”), in which children with LD typically fare poorly? Studying the neural correlates of MLD Despite some recent advances in the cognitive neuroscience of both typical and atypical cognitive development (see a recent review by Ansari et al. [2008] ), there remain numerous conceptual, methodological and statistical challenges in characterizing not only the neural correlates of MLD, but also the confluence of factors that may play a causal role in producing the phenotypic impairments in performance described throughout the current collection of papers. Future progress in this area will require careful attention to recent advances being made in the use of various neuroimaging and related modalities. For thoughtful treatments of the complex issues associated with the study of developmental changes in mathematical cognition both in children with and without MLD, future researchers should consult the recent papers by Ansari et al. [2008] and Kaufman [2008] .  Defining comparison groups One source of potential false negatives in phenotype research is the methodological approach to defining comparison groups, or in defining MLD. In learning disabilities (LD) research (as seen in the papers included in this special issue), one important distinction in the approaches used is between the use of low achievement criteria (defined in terms of age norms or age expectations) and discrepancy definitions (defined relative to IQ or some other measure of cognitive development). At the broadest level, the choice of one definition of MLD (or other mathematical difficulties) over another represents an implicit view of a long-standing controversy about discrepancy versus low achievement definitions of LD [see Francis et al., 1996 , for a discussion]. In developmental disorders with a shorter MLD research history, such as very low birth weight and very preterm birth (VLBW/VPTB), discrepancy definitions, IQ controls, or mental age matching have played a role in helping define the phenotype of mathematical abilities. In disorders with a longer MLD research history such as 22q11DS and Turner syndrome, studies have moved towards a focus on comparing index groups on developmentally appropriate skills like reading and on experimental tasks of functions, such as the representation of quantity, that have theoretically-specified and testable relations to math. Children with MLD, as a group, often have lower IQ scores than their typically achieving peers. To the extent that the same neurodevelopmental events that produced the low IQ also produced the MLD, IQ and MLD are not fully separable, which means that one cannot be subtracted from, or covaried out of, the other (for a discussion, see Dennis et al. [in press ]). This erroneous assumption may be most obvious when an arithmetic subtest is included in the IQ measure, and although omitting such a subtest would be an improvement in the right direction, it fails to fully account for the central issue, which is that, especially in genetic and brain disorders, lowered IQ and MLD are tied to each other and to their shared condition. The existence of IQ differences forces the MLD researcher to consider low achievement and discrepancy measures of the construct, the choice of which, in turn, presupposes one type of control or comparison group rather than another. In some studies, only one measure is used to assess mathematical difficulties or disabilities; in others, both measures are used and produce different results with different math measures [ Taylor et al., 2009 ]. In the papers of this special issue, comparison groups may include mental age comparisons, matching on age, or matching on age and IQ, comparison to children with other developmental disorders, or some combination of the above. Although a researcher’s confidence in the findings that emerge when IQ matching is employed may not necessarily be unwarranted, the risk of false negatives may inadvertently lead us to exclude MLD from a phenotype when absolute performance differences are significant. A number of researchers have adopted reporting absolute and relative outcomes in a single study [e.g., Mazzocco et al., 2006 ], which, while perhaps cumbersome, at least allows the reader to consider both types of outcome. Analyses of different definitions of the MLD construct should serve to make us more mindful of our interpretations. The advantages and disadvantages of each approach hinder any single one from emerging as the “best” approach, but explorations of the outcomes of each approach can promote advances in this area. The choice of how we define control and comparison groups has consequences for establishing the incidence of MLD. Even within the confines of disorders for which superior performance does not occur, there is variability in the frequency with which members of a population meet criteria for MLD, and how relative frequency compared to a control group varies further as a function of how that control group is defined. For instance, the incidence of MLD among young girls with Turner syndrome is four times greater than the rate observed in an age- and IQ-matched group of girls without Turner syndrome; whereas the difference in rates for girls with versus without fragile X syndrome is 2.5:1. This suggests a higher incidence of MLD in Turner syndrome than fragile X, but the reverse is true because of different characteristics of the IQ-matched comparison groups used across these two analyses [ Mazzocco, 2001 ]. Of practical importance, somewhat different conclusions about MLD treatment might be shaped by focusing on whether deficits in math are absolute or relative to IQ. For instance, compared to those from more advantaged backgrounds, children with unrelieved socio-economic disadvantage may have lower IQ scores. If IQ discrepancy scores are used to identify mathematical learning difficulties, such children will be less likely to be targeted for remedial mathematics education that might enhance their number competence and foster greater mathematical learning.  Math as both storage of learned math facts and active, on-line construction of number solutions Some of the advances to be gained in MLD research can be guided by the lessons learned from research on reading disabilities. Much of an earlier research era in reading disabilities was concerned with failures of word decoding as the defining deficit of dyslexia. This constituted a reasonable focus at the time, given the importance of understanding why word decoding could become a rapid, obligatory, and automatic process for most children—but not for those with dyslexia. More recently, reading research has been broadened to include issues concerned with the active, on-line construction of meaning in texts, including the process by which inferences are made from the textual “facts,” from the situation described by the text but not literally “in” the text, and from real-world knowledge. Contemporary research focuses on the process by which the individual’s reading goals modify how a text is read. An important contribution of the current special issue is to show that both fact retrieval and active construction are important for math, even for such seemingly basic math skills as math fact manipulation [ Baroody et al., 2009 ]. In other words, although proficiency in arithmetic and higher forms of mathematics demonstrably requires adequate storage and efficient retrieval of math facts in semantic memory, memorizing these facts in a meaningful manner (i.e., active construction) can lessen the amount of time and practice needed to achieve mastery, minimize retrieval errors, and permit existing knowledge to be applied to the learning of new arithmetic combinations [ Baroody, 2009 ]. We predict that future research will devote increased attention to the study of active constructive processes in mathematical learning, including such questions as: Which kinds of inferences do children make using math facts they have successfully retrieved? Do inferences play a greater role in intuitive, informal numerical skills than in formal math ability and achievement measures? How does a child construct mental models involving number and extent, and how do these mental models constrain the inferences the child makes about possible numeric solutions? Are measures of executive top-down control associated with how children adjust their mathematical problem solving in accordance with different goals? And finally, how can children with MLD be successfully taught to engage in more active construction for learning basic math facts if such an approach seems to simultaneously require both of the following: A deeper understanding of mathematical concepts (including a well-interconnected knowledge of arithmetic facts, principles, and processes) that are quite difficult for these individuals to comprehend, and a comparatively unstructured, inquiry-based learning environment (where they may be expected to take advantage of opportunities for “ discovering patterns and relations”), in which children with LD typically fare poorly?  Studying the neural correlates of MLD Despite some recent advances in the cognitive neuroscience of both typical and atypical cognitive development (see a recent review by Ansari et al. [2008] ), there remain numerous conceptual, methodological and statistical challenges in characterizing not only the neural correlates of MLD, but also the confluence of factors that may play a causal role in producing the phenotypic impairments in performance described throughout the current collection of papers. Future progress in this area will require careful attention to recent advances being made in the use of various neuroimaging and related modalities. For thoughtful treatments of the complex issues associated with the study of developmental changes in mathematical cognition both in children with and without MLD, future researchers should consult the recent papers by Ansari et al. [2008] and Kaufman [2008] .  Interplay Among Genetic, Biological, and Environmental Pathways to MLD Variation in mathematical abilities has been associated with differences in endogenous features within children, such as genetic polymorphisms, genetic mutations, and brain dysmorphisms, as well as with factors exogenous to the child, such as poverty and socioeconomic disadvantage [ Jordan and Levine, 2009 ]. The home environment and early learning experiences are important influences on subsequent mathematics achievement at 10 years of age [ Melhuish et al., 2008 ]. Although endogenous and exogenous pathways to MLD have largely been considered separately, recent research in other domains suggests that they are interrelated. For example, the brain systems with the most protracted postnatal development (e.g., the perisylvian areas important for language) are most susceptible to environmental influences and show the strongest associations with socioeconomic status [ Noble et al., 2005 ; Farah et al., 2006 ], so it is important to understand that unrelieved poverty and socioeconomic disadvantage will change, not only the environment for learning math, but also the brain resources of the mathematics learner. Ten years from now, we would hope that the interplay between genetic, brain, and environmental pathways to MLD will be better understood.  A FINAL THOUGHT Those of us working with developmental disabilities have sometimes supposed that the cascading changes in development that involve defective genes and alterations in neurogenesis, cell migration and neuronal connectivity must project a permanently bleak cognitive outcome, and that any mutability in outcome can only exist in disorders whose origins lie in exogenous factors, such as environmental disadvantage. Genetics researchers caution against such an interpretation, emphasizing that etiology need not predetermine a definitive outcome for developmental profiles and trajectories. Instructional interventions should clearly be a focus of future studies, but recent animal models of neurodevelopmental disorders show, somewhat surprisingly, that reversing underlying molecular defects may improve function, even if treatments begin only in adulthood [ Ehninger et al., 2008 ]. In the future, cognitive deficits, including those in math, may prove to be more malleable, and through more diverse pathways, throughout the life course of individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders than we currently imagine. 