Effects of an HCV Risk Reduction Motivational Intervention on Alcohol Use, Injection and Sexual Risk Behaviors Objectives Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the most prevalent bloodborne infection in the United States, and alcohol use increases HCV progression. We compared the effects of two interventions on alcohol use, injection risk, and sexual risk in a community sample of injecting drug users. Methods Eight hundred fifty-one out-of-treatment injecting drug users were recruited through street outreach and randomized to either a 6-session educational intervention or a 6-session motivational intervention. Intervention effects were examined at 6 and 12 months post enrollment. Results In multiple logistic regression analyses, adjusted for baseline alcohol use and HCV status, participants assigned to the motivational intervention were significantly less likely than participants in to be drinking at 6-month follow-up (odds ratio = 0.67, 95% confidence interval = 0.46, 0.97). There were no significant between group differences in injection risk or sexual risk at either follow-up. Conclusions The motivational intervention was more effective than the educational intervention in reducing alcohol use at 6-month follow-up. Reducing alcohol use among people with HCV may slow disease progression and provide important health benefits.  INTRODUCTION Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is the most prevalent bloodborne infection in the United States with an estimated 3.2 to 3.5 million people chronically infected. 1 , 2 Although incidence has decreased since the early 1990s, prevalence remains high because of the slow progression of the disease. 3 HCV currently accounts for an estimated 8,000 to 12,000 deaths annually, and that number is predicted to grow substantially as people are infected longer. 4 HCV-related liver disease is projected to cause 165,900 deaths in the United States from 2010 to 2019. An additional 27,200 deaths due to HCV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are projected during the same period. 2 HCV is a particular problem among injecting drug users (IDUs), with prevalence among them ranging from 50% to 90% 5 , 6 and incidence rates ranging from 13% to 47% per year. 7 – 9 Although HCV incidence among IDUs has declined, 50% of new HCV infections still occur among this risk group. 10 Clearly more effective interventions are needed to reduce incidence among HCV-negative IDUs, but simultaneously increased efforts are also needed to identify and treat HCV-positive IDUs. 5 , 11 , 12 Current treatment options, however, have a number of drawbacks; they produce a sustained response in only 50% of patients, have severe side effects, and are expensive. 13 , 14 Furthermore, many people infected with HCV may not even need treatment, and those who do may be either unwilling or unable to access it. 15 – 18 In light of the limitations of current treatment options, it seems clear that a priority for public health workers should be the development of behavioral interventions to slow disease progression among infected individuals. One obvious behavioral target for these interventions is reducing or eliminating alcohol use. Heavy alcohol use is one of the most important behavioral predictors of HCV progression. 19 – 22 Alcohol use is also common among IDUs. In one study of young HCV-positive IDUs, 37% met criteria for harmful drinking on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test. 23 About a quarter of heroin users entering treatment in 2002 reported alcohol as a secondary substance, 23 and Hillebrand and colleagues 24 found that 41% of their methadone maintenance patients met DSM-IV criteria for past-year alcohol dependence. These statistics are particularly disturbing in light of recent evidence showing deleterious effects on HCV progression and liver disease of even moderate alcohol use. 25 , 26 One approach that has shown promise in reducing alcohol use is motivational interviewing (MI). MI is a client-centered intervention approach that has been used to reduce alcohol use and other problem behaviors in a variety of settings. 27 A meta-analysis of brief MI interventions found that it was more effective in reducing alcohol use than a variety of other brief interventions, with an aggregate effect size of 0.43. 28 MI has also been shown to reduce alcohol use among IDUs that were needle exchange clients. 29 However, the effectiveness of MI in reducing sexual and injection-related HIV risk behaviors has been mixed. 30 – 32 This paper presents the results of a randomized trial of two HCV risk-reduction interventions with IDUs. The trial compared a motivational intervention to an educational intervention, both of which emphasized reductions in alcohol use as well as injecting and sexual risk behaviors. The primary objective of the study was to compare the effects of a motivational intervention to an educational intervention on eliminating alcohol use among out-of-treatment IDUs, a majority of whom are infected with HCV. Secondary objectives of the study were to compare the effects of the motivational intervention to the educational intervention on reducing injecting and sexual risk behaviors among out-of-treatment IDUs.  Sample characteristics The baseline characteristics of the 625 participants that completed one or more follow-up interviews are shown by intervention condition in Table 2 . The sample was predominantly male (73%) and African-American (66%) with a mean age of 41 years (standard deviation [S.D.] = 9 years). Sixty-nine percent had completed high school, 70% were unemployed, 35% were homeless and 20% were married or living as married. Sixty-seven percent had been in substance abuse treatment and 57% had been in prison. HIV prevalence was 9% and HCV prevalence was 55%. Drug use and risk behavior data are shown in Table 2 by intervention group. With the exception of alcohol use, which was significantly higher in the motivational group, the groups were statistically similar on all of the variables on which we compared them.  Intervention outcomes Within-group baseline to follow-up changes There were significant decreases in the percentages reporting drinking alcohol in the previous 30 days in each intervention condition at both 6- and 12-month follow-up interviews. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use in the previous 30 days decreased from 67% to 54% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 67% to 48% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use decreased from 74% to 48% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 74% to 52% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). The percentage of participants in the educational group who reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 87% at baseline, 88% at 6-month follow-up, and 82% at 12-month follow-up. The percentage of participants in the motivational group that reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 88% at baseline, 91% at 6-month follow-up and 89% at 12-month follow-up. None of these within-group differences in use of a new syringe at last injection were statistically significant at p < 0.05. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 54% to 35% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 37% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 59% to 39% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 38% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). Between-group intervention effects Alcohol use (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for baseline alcohol use and HCV status, participants in the motivational group were significantly less likely to be drinking at 6-month follow-up than participants in the educational condition (OR = 0.67; 95% C.I. = 0.46, 0.97; p = 0.035). Intervention condition was not a significant predictor of alcohol use at 12-month follow-up. Injection risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for use of a new syringe at last injection at baseline, intervention condition was not significantly associated with use of a new syringe at last injection at either 6-month or at 12-month follow-up.. Sexual Risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In logistic regression models that adjusted for unprotected intercourse at last sexual encounter at baseline and partner type (i.e., main or casual), intervention condition was not a significant predictor of unprotected intercourse during last sexual encounter at either 6-month or 12-month follow-up  Within-group baseline to follow-up changes There were significant decreases in the percentages reporting drinking alcohol in the previous 30 days in each intervention condition at both 6- and 12-month follow-up interviews. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use in the previous 30 days decreased from 67% to 54% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 67% to 48% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use decreased from 74% to 48% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 74% to 52% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). The percentage of participants in the educational group who reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 87% at baseline, 88% at 6-month follow-up, and 82% at 12-month follow-up. The percentage of participants in the motivational group that reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 88% at baseline, 91% at 6-month follow-up and 89% at 12-month follow-up. None of these within-group differences in use of a new syringe at last injection were statistically significant at p < 0.05. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 54% to 35% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 37% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 59% to 39% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 38% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001).  Between-group intervention effects Alcohol use (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for baseline alcohol use and HCV status, participants in the motivational group were significantly less likely to be drinking at 6-month follow-up than participants in the educational condition (OR = 0.67; 95% C.I. = 0.46, 0.97; p = 0.035). Intervention condition was not a significant predictor of alcohol use at 12-month follow-up. Injection risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for use of a new syringe at last injection at baseline, intervention condition was not significantly associated with use of a new syringe at last injection at either 6-month or at 12-month follow-up.. Sexual Risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In logistic regression models that adjusted for unprotected intercourse at last sexual encounter at baseline and partner type (i.e., main or casual), intervention condition was not a significant predictor of unprotected intercourse during last sexual encounter at either 6-month or 12-month follow-up  Alcohol use (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for baseline alcohol use and HCV status, participants in the motivational group were significantly less likely to be drinking at 6-month follow-up than participants in the educational condition (OR = 0.67; 95% C.I. = 0.46, 0.97; p = 0.035). Intervention condition was not a significant predictor of alcohol use at 12-month follow-up.  Injection risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for use of a new syringe at last injection at baseline, intervention condition was not significantly associated with use of a new syringe at last injection at either 6-month or at 12-month follow-up..  Sexual Risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In logistic regression models that adjusted for unprotected intercourse at last sexual encounter at baseline and partner type (i.e., main or casual), intervention condition was not a significant predictor of unprotected intercourse during last sexual encounter at either 6-month or 12-month follow-up  Methods Eight hundred fifty-one out-of-treatment injecting drug users were recruited through street outreach and randomized to either a 6-session educational intervention or a 6-session motivational intervention. Intervention effects were examined at 6 and 12 months post enrollment.  Results In multiple logistic regression analyses, adjusted for baseline alcohol use and HCV status, participants assigned to the motivational intervention were significantly less likely than participants in to be drinking at 6-month follow-up (odds ratio = 0.67, 95% confidence interval = 0.46, 0.97). There were no significant between group differences in injection risk or sexual risk at either follow-up.  Conclusions The motivational intervention was more effective than the educational intervention in reducing alcohol use at 6-month follow-up. Reducing alcohol use among people with HCV may slow disease progression and provide important health benefits.  METHODS Eight hundred fifty-one out-of-treatment IDUs were enrolled in the study between July 2003 and January 2006 in the Raleigh-Durham, North Carolina, area. Participants were recruited using a targeted sampling approach 33 , 34 that included street outreach, where recovering drug users went into communities to recruit active drug users and distribute risk reduction materials (e.g., bleach, condoms). 36 After field screening, prospective participants were referred to a project office where they received a detailed description of the study and provided informed consent. To minimize underreporting of sensitive behaviors and social desirability, data collection was performed using audio computer-assisted self-interview (ACASI) technology. Upon completion of the initial interview, participants were randomized to either an educational or a motivational intervention. Baseline data were collected across two visits, which were completed about 1 week apart. Follow-up interviews were scheduled for 6 and 12 months after enrollment. Eligibility criteria for the study included: a minimum age of 18 years; self-reported injecting drug use in the previous 30 days; visible tracks (injection marks) and or a urine specimen positive for heroin (morphine), cocaine, or methamphetamine; no formal substance abuse treatment in the previous 30 days; and current residence in one of the two counties in which the study was conducted. This study was approved by RTI International’s Office of Research Protection Screening and Recruitment Outreach workers completed 1786 brief screening interviews in the field, and in 1236 of those the person screened met preliminary eligibility criteria for the study and was referred to a field site. Eight-hundred sixty-one people were screened at the field sites and 855 were enrolled in the study. Four of these were later identified as duplicates and dropped from the study. Since we did not collect and retain identifying information on people until they were screened in the office and provided written informed consent, it is not possible to calculate refusal rates or to assess differences between potentially eligible people that enrolled in the study and those that did not from the screening data. Attrition and Intervention Participation Of the 847 participants enrolled in the study that were still alive on the date that their 6-month follow-up was due, 74% completed at least 1 follow-up interview (n=625). At the 6-month follow-up excluding participants who had died, moved out of the area or were incarcerated, 75% completed an interview. At the 12-month follow-up excluding participants who had died, moved out of area, were incarcerated or who were not yet due for a follow-up interview when the study ended, 72% completed an interview. Participants who did not complete a follow-up were significantly less likely to be female (19% vs. 27%, p = 0.049) and African-American (49% vs. 66%, p < 0.001) and more likely to be younger with a mean age of 38.3 (S.D. 9.9) years versus 41.2 (S.D. 9.3) years (p = 0.001). Additionally, they were less likely to test positive for HCV (45% vs. 55%, p = 0.050). Additional details regarding attrition and intervention participation are displayed in the study flow diagram in Figure 1 . Interventions Participants in both intervention conditions were offered testing for HIV, HCV, and hepatitis B virus (HBV) antibodies at the end of their first intervention session. Those who were tested received their test results and appropriate referrals during their second session. A description of each intervention follows, and additional details are provided in Table 1 . Educational Intervention The educational intervention consisted of six sessions. The first two sessions were based on the cue cards from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Standard intervention that was revised in 2000 to include information on HBV and HCV in addition to HIV. 31 These sessions were followed by four additional sessions based on videos that lasted approximately 1 hour each. Topics covered during these sessions included hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV, indirect sharing practices, and addiction. Participants were given a $10 food coupon at the end of sessions 3 through 6. Motivational Intervention The motivational intervention also consisted of six sessions. Participants assigned to the motivational intervention received two cue-card sessions presented as PowerPoint slides followed by four additional motivational sessions. Session 1 included 20 slides that were adapted from the Revised NIDA Standard Intervention 35 and lasted approximately 45 minutes. Session 2 included 24 slides; however, the number of slides a participant was shown was determined by his or her test results. The four additional motivational sessions lasted approximately 30 minutes each and focused on increasing motivation to change, developing a plan for change, reviewing progress, and reaffirming commitment to change. These sessions were conducted by lay people from the community who were trained in motivational interviewing techniques. While the explicit emphasis of the sessions was on increasing motivation to change, the activities were also designed to build self-efficacy and self-regulation skills. Participants received a $10 food coupon at the end of each session. Measures Biological Testing. Participants were screened for HIV antibodies using the Orasure HIV-1 ELISA test (Orasure Technologies, Bethlehem, PA). Specimens that were reactive on two ELISAs were confirmed by Orasure Western Blot. Participants were screened for HCV antibodies using the HCV EIA 3.0 test (Orthoclinical Diagnostics, Rochester, NY) with a signal to cutoff ratio of >8. Specimens with a signal to cutoff ratio <8 were confirmed using qualitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Specimens were initially tested for HBV core antibodies (anti-HBc). Anti-HBc positive specimens were tested for the HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) to distinguish between resolved and active infection. Five participants refused the HIV antibody test and 15 refused HCV antibody testing, which required a blood draw. Intervention outcomes were examined at 6-month and 12-month follow-up separately. The primary outcome of interest was any alcohol use in the previous 30 days. We chose no alcohol use, rather than reductions in alcohol use, as the primary outcome because safe levels of alcohol use for people with HCV infection are poorly defined and abstinence is recommended. 20 , 36 , 37 Use of a new syringe at last injection, and condom use at last sex were selected to assess secondary outcomes for injection and sexual risk reduction respectively. Because we were comparing two potentially effective interventions, we assessed the effects of each intervention separately on each outcome as well as compared the relative effectiveness of the two interventions. Analysis McNemar’s test was used to assess the significance of within-group changes from baseline to each follow-up separately for each intervention condition. Multiple logistic regression analyses were performed to assess intervention effects on alcohol use during the previous 30 days, use of a new syringe at last injection, and unprotected intercourse at last sexual encounter while adjusting for baseline behavior. In addition, the alcohol use models included HCV status because of the effect of alcohol on HCV progression. For each of the outcomes, we ran models to look at intervention effects at the 6- and at the 12-month follow-up separately.  Screening and Recruitment Outreach workers completed 1786 brief screening interviews in the field, and in 1236 of those the person screened met preliminary eligibility criteria for the study and was referred to a field site. Eight-hundred sixty-one people were screened at the field sites and 855 were enrolled in the study. Four of these were later identified as duplicates and dropped from the study. Since we did not collect and retain identifying information on people until they were screened in the office and provided written informed consent, it is not possible to calculate refusal rates or to assess differences between potentially eligible people that enrolled in the study and those that did not from the screening data.  Attrition and Intervention Participation Of the 847 participants enrolled in the study that were still alive on the date that their 6-month follow-up was due, 74% completed at least 1 follow-up interview (n=625). At the 6-month follow-up excluding participants who had died, moved out of the area or were incarcerated, 75% completed an interview. At the 12-month follow-up excluding participants who had died, moved out of area, were incarcerated or who were not yet due for a follow-up interview when the study ended, 72% completed an interview. Participants who did not complete a follow-up were significantly less likely to be female (19% vs. 27%, p = 0.049) and African-American (49% vs. 66%, p < 0.001) and more likely to be younger with a mean age of 38.3 (S.D. 9.9) years versus 41.2 (S.D. 9.3) years (p = 0.001). Additionally, they were less likely to test positive for HCV (45% vs. 55%, p = 0.050). Additional details regarding attrition and intervention participation are displayed in the study flow diagram in Figure 1 . Interventions Participants in both intervention conditions were offered testing for HIV, HCV, and hepatitis B virus (HBV) antibodies at the end of their first intervention session. Those who were tested received their test results and appropriate referrals during their second session. A description of each intervention follows, and additional details are provided in Table 1 . Educational Intervention The educational intervention consisted of six sessions. The first two sessions were based on the cue cards from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Standard intervention that was revised in 2000 to include information on HBV and HCV in addition to HIV. 31 These sessions were followed by four additional sessions based on videos that lasted approximately 1 hour each. Topics covered during these sessions included hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV, indirect sharing practices, and addiction. Participants were given a $10 food coupon at the end of sessions 3 through 6. Motivational Intervention The motivational intervention also consisted of six sessions. Participants assigned to the motivational intervention received two cue-card sessions presented as PowerPoint slides followed by four additional motivational sessions. Session 1 included 20 slides that were adapted from the Revised NIDA Standard Intervention 35 and lasted approximately 45 minutes. Session 2 included 24 slides; however, the number of slides a participant was shown was determined by his or her test results. The four additional motivational sessions lasted approximately 30 minutes each and focused on increasing motivation to change, developing a plan for change, reviewing progress, and reaffirming commitment to change. These sessions were conducted by lay people from the community who were trained in motivational interviewing techniques. While the explicit emphasis of the sessions was on increasing motivation to change, the activities were also designed to build self-efficacy and self-regulation skills. Participants received a $10 food coupon at the end of each session.  Interventions Participants in both intervention conditions were offered testing for HIV, HCV, and hepatitis B virus (HBV) antibodies at the end of their first intervention session. Those who were tested received their test results and appropriate referrals during their second session. A description of each intervention follows, and additional details are provided in Table 1 . Educational Intervention The educational intervention consisted of six sessions. The first two sessions were based on the cue cards from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Standard intervention that was revised in 2000 to include information on HBV and HCV in addition to HIV. 31 These sessions were followed by four additional sessions based on videos that lasted approximately 1 hour each. Topics covered during these sessions included hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV, indirect sharing practices, and addiction. Participants were given a $10 food coupon at the end of sessions 3 through 6. Motivational Intervention The motivational intervention also consisted of six sessions. Participants assigned to the motivational intervention received two cue-card sessions presented as PowerPoint slides followed by four additional motivational sessions. Session 1 included 20 slides that were adapted from the Revised NIDA Standard Intervention 35 and lasted approximately 45 minutes. Session 2 included 24 slides; however, the number of slides a participant was shown was determined by his or her test results. The four additional motivational sessions lasted approximately 30 minutes each and focused on increasing motivation to change, developing a plan for change, reviewing progress, and reaffirming commitment to change. These sessions were conducted by lay people from the community who were trained in motivational interviewing techniques. While the explicit emphasis of the sessions was on increasing motivation to change, the activities were also designed to build self-efficacy and self-regulation skills. Participants received a $10 food coupon at the end of each session.  Educational Intervention The educational intervention consisted of six sessions. The first two sessions were based on the cue cards from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) Standard intervention that was revised in 2000 to include information on HBV and HCV in addition to HIV. 31 These sessions were followed by four additional sessions based on videos that lasted approximately 1 hour each. Topics covered during these sessions included hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV, indirect sharing practices, and addiction. Participants were given a $10 food coupon at the end of sessions 3 through 6.  Motivational Intervention The motivational intervention also consisted of six sessions. Participants assigned to the motivational intervention received two cue-card sessions presented as PowerPoint slides followed by four additional motivational sessions. Session 1 included 20 slides that were adapted from the Revised NIDA Standard Intervention 35 and lasted approximately 45 minutes. Session 2 included 24 slides; however, the number of slides a participant was shown was determined by his or her test results. The four additional motivational sessions lasted approximately 30 minutes each and focused on increasing motivation to change, developing a plan for change, reviewing progress, and reaffirming commitment to change. These sessions were conducted by lay people from the community who were trained in motivational interviewing techniques. While the explicit emphasis of the sessions was on increasing motivation to change, the activities were also designed to build self-efficacy and self-regulation skills. Participants received a $10 food coupon at the end of each session.  Measures Biological Testing. Participants were screened for HIV antibodies using the Orasure HIV-1 ELISA test (Orasure Technologies, Bethlehem, PA). Specimens that were reactive on two ELISAs were confirmed by Orasure Western Blot. Participants were screened for HCV antibodies using the HCV EIA 3.0 test (Orthoclinical Diagnostics, Rochester, NY) with a signal to cutoff ratio of >8. Specimens with a signal to cutoff ratio <8 were confirmed using qualitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Specimens were initially tested for HBV core antibodies (anti-HBc). Anti-HBc positive specimens were tested for the HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) to distinguish between resolved and active infection. Five participants refused the HIV antibody test and 15 refused HCV antibody testing, which required a blood draw. Intervention outcomes were examined at 6-month and 12-month follow-up separately. The primary outcome of interest was any alcohol use in the previous 30 days. We chose no alcohol use, rather than reductions in alcohol use, as the primary outcome because safe levels of alcohol use for people with HCV infection are poorly defined and abstinence is recommended. 20 , 36 , 37 Use of a new syringe at last injection, and condom use at last sex were selected to assess secondary outcomes for injection and sexual risk reduction respectively. Because we were comparing two potentially effective interventions, we assessed the effects of each intervention separately on each outcome as well as compared the relative effectiveness of the two interventions.  Analysis McNemar’s test was used to assess the significance of within-group changes from baseline to each follow-up separately for each intervention condition. Multiple logistic regression analyses were performed to assess intervention effects on alcohol use during the previous 30 days, use of a new syringe at last injection, and unprotected intercourse at last sexual encounter while adjusting for baseline behavior. In addition, the alcohol use models included HCV status because of the effect of alcohol on HCV progression. For each of the outcomes, we ran models to look at intervention effects at the 6- and at the 12-month follow-up separately.  RESULTS Sample characteristics The baseline characteristics of the 625 participants that completed one or more follow-up interviews are shown by intervention condition in Table 2 . The sample was predominantly male (73%) and African-American (66%) with a mean age of 41 years (standard deviation [S.D.] = 9 years). Sixty-nine percent had completed high school, 70% were unemployed, 35% were homeless and 20% were married or living as married. Sixty-seven percent had been in substance abuse treatment and 57% had been in prison. HIV prevalence was 9% and HCV prevalence was 55%. Drug use and risk behavior data are shown in Table 2 by intervention group. With the exception of alcohol use, which was significantly higher in the motivational group, the groups were statistically similar on all of the variables on which we compared them. Intervention outcomes Within-group baseline to follow-up changes There were significant decreases in the percentages reporting drinking alcohol in the previous 30 days in each intervention condition at both 6- and 12-month follow-up interviews. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use in the previous 30 days decreased from 67% to 54% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 67% to 48% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use decreased from 74% to 48% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 74% to 52% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). The percentage of participants in the educational group who reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 87% at baseline, 88% at 6-month follow-up, and 82% at 12-month follow-up. The percentage of participants in the motivational group that reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 88% at baseline, 91% at 6-month follow-up and 89% at 12-month follow-up. None of these within-group differences in use of a new syringe at last injection were statistically significant at p < 0.05. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 54% to 35% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 37% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 59% to 39% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 38% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). Between-group intervention effects Alcohol use (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for baseline alcohol use and HCV status, participants in the motivational group were significantly less likely to be drinking at 6-month follow-up than participants in the educational condition (OR = 0.67; 95% C.I. = 0.46, 0.97; p = 0.035). Intervention condition was not a significant predictor of alcohol use at 12-month follow-up. Injection risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for use of a new syringe at last injection at baseline, intervention condition was not significantly associated with use of a new syringe at last injection at either 6-month or at 12-month follow-up.. Sexual Risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In logistic regression models that adjusted for unprotected intercourse at last sexual encounter at baseline and partner type (i.e., main or casual), intervention condition was not a significant predictor of unprotected intercourse during last sexual encounter at either 6-month or 12-month follow-up  RESULTS Sample characteristics The baseline characteristics of the 625 participants that completed one or more follow-up interviews are shown by intervention condition in Table 2 . The sample was predominantly male (73%) and African-American (66%) with a mean age of 41 years (standard deviation [S.D.] = 9 years). Sixty-nine percent had completed high school, 70% were unemployed, 35% were homeless and 20% were married or living as married. Sixty-seven percent had been in substance abuse treatment and 57% had been in prison. HIV prevalence was 9% and HCV prevalence was 55%. Drug use and risk behavior data are shown in Table 2 by intervention group. With the exception of alcohol use, which was significantly higher in the motivational group, the groups were statistically similar on all of the variables on which we compared them. Intervention outcomes Within-group baseline to follow-up changes There were significant decreases in the percentages reporting drinking alcohol in the previous 30 days in each intervention condition at both 6- and 12-month follow-up interviews. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use in the previous 30 days decreased from 67% to 54% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 67% to 48% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants reporting alcohol use decreased from 74% to 48% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and from 74% to 52% between baseline and 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). The percentage of participants in the educational group who reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 87% at baseline, 88% at 6-month follow-up, and 82% at 12-month follow-up. The percentage of participants in the motivational group that reported using a new syringe for their last injection was 88% at baseline, 91% at 6-month follow-up and 89% at 12-month follow-up. None of these within-group differences in use of a new syringe at last injection were statistically significant at p < 0.05. In the educational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 54% to 35% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 37% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). In the motivational condition, the percentage of participants who reported engaging in unprotected intercourse during their last sexual encounter decreased from 59% to 39% between baseline and 6-month follow-up (p < 0.001) and to 38% at 12-month follow-up (p < 0.001). Between-group intervention effects Alcohol use (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for baseline alcohol use and HCV status, participants in the motivational group were significantly less likely to be drinking at 6-month follow-up than participants in the educational condition (OR = 0.67; 95% C.I. = 0.46, 0.97; p = 0.035). Intervention condition was not a significant predictor of alcohol use at 12-month follow-up. Injection risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In multiple logistic regression analyses that adjusted for use of a new syringe at last injection at baseline, intervention condition was not significantly associated with use of a new syringe at last injection at either 6-month or at 12-month follow-up.. Sexual Risk (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>) In logistic regression models that adjusted for unprotected intercourse at last sexual encounter at baseline and partner type (i.e., main or casual), intervention condition was not a significant predictor of unprotected intercourse during last sexual encounter at either 6-month or 12-month follow-up  DISCUSSION Findings from this randomized trial indicate that a brief six-session motivational intervention was more effective than a six-session educational intervention in reducing alcohol use at 6-month follow-up. There were no significant between-group differences in alcohol use at the 12-month follow-up, although alcohol use in both groups was still substantially lower than at baseline. While these results are encouraging, approximately 50% of participants both intervention conditions continued to drink, so more effective interventions are still needed. Injection risk was low at baseline with almost 90% of participants in each intervention condition reporting using and new syringe at baseline. Participants in both intervention groups were significantly less likely to report unprotected intercourse at the 6-month and 12-month follow-up interviews than they were at baseline, but there were no significant between group differences. The finding that 35% to 40% of participants in both groups reported engaging in unprotected intercourse at their last sexual encounter is disappointing, but not surprising. A common finding of intervention studies with IDUs is that interventions tend to be more successful in reducing injection-related risk behaviors than in reducing sexual risk behaviors. 38 The emphasis of this study on HCV, which is transmitted more efficiently through injecting than through sexual practices, may have inadvertently further diminished the effects of the motivational intervention on reducing sexual risk. Limitations As with most studies of drug users and other high-risk populations, this study suffers from several limitations. Most notably, there were high rates of study attrition, due to incarceration, death and moving out of the area, which is a typical problem with community-based studies of IDUs. Although ACASI technology was used to minimize socially desirable responses, the accuracy of self-reports of drug use and sexual behavior are difficult to verify. The reliability of self-reports may suffer from inaccurate recall, while validity may suffer from intentional misreporting in addition to faulty memory. We also cannot rule out the possibility that the association between the intervention and the behavioral risk reductions reflects self-selection with participants who were more motivated to change attending more sessions. A targeted sampling approach was used to recruit a geographically diverse and racially mixed sample. Despite these efforts, the sample was predominantly African American from the inner cities of Raleigh and Durham. Since outreach workers tend to reach drug users who are accessible on the street in high drug use areas, IDUs that spend large amounts of time in these areas are likely to be overrepresented. Conversely, suburban drug users, mid to upper level drug dealers, many working professionals and other employed drug users may be underrepresented in this sample. Therefore, caution should be used in generalizing findings in this study to IDU populations of other races and suburban IDUs. Conclusions Few HCV or HIV risk-reduction interventions designed to reduce risky injection and sexual practices among high-risk groups have focused on reductions in alcohol use. 39 Yet alcohol use has been shown to be associated with HCV in several important ways. Not only has alcohol use been shown to exacerbate many of the risky injection and sexual practices that lead to acquisition of these diseases, but also to affect health-related quality of life 40 and to promote HCV progression and liver disease among those already infected. This study demonstrated that a relatively brief and inexpensive motivational intervention was effective in significantly reducing alcohol use as well as reducing sexual risk and maintaining lower injection risk in a population of out-of-treatment IDUs. The high prevalence of HCV infection among IDUs, the barriers to HCV treatment, and the severe side effects and limited effectiveness of current treatments make this a population in particular need of new strategies for slowing HCV disease progression. In addition, given the millions of people already chronically infected with HCV and the fact that current treatments for this disease are expensive and have significant side effects, it is clear that new strategies are needed to slow HCV progression among all of those already infected. Although this intervention was conducted among a population of out-of-treatment IDUs, we expect that it could be easily adapted and be equally, if not more, effective among other groups with high rates of alcohol use and HCV infection, such as former injectors, methadone patients and U.S. military veterans. Indeed the fact that this intervention was effective among a population that is particularly challenging to recruit and retain in studies makes the findings of positive behavioral changes in this intervention all the more impressive. The motivational intervention in this study may be one such important alternative to treatment that not only has no side effects but is also less expensive and time-consuming to administer, and more accessible to those without insurance.  Limitations As with most studies of drug users and other high-risk populations, this study suffers from several limitations. Most notably, there were high rates of study attrition, due to incarceration, death and moving out of the area, which is a typical problem with community-based studies of IDUs. Although ACASI technology was used to minimize socially desirable responses, the accuracy of self-reports of drug use and sexual behavior are difficult to verify. The reliability of self-reports may suffer from inaccurate recall, while validity may suffer from intentional misreporting in addition to faulty memory. We also cannot rule out the possibility that the association between the intervention and the behavioral risk reductions reflects self-selection with participants who were more motivated to change attending more sessions. A targeted sampling approach was used to recruit a geographically diverse and racially mixed sample. Despite these efforts, the sample was predominantly African American from the inner cities of Raleigh and Durham. Since outreach workers tend to reach drug users who are accessible on the street in high drug use areas, IDUs that spend large amounts of time in these areas are likely to be overrepresented. Conversely, suburban drug users, mid to upper level drug dealers, many working professionals and other employed drug users may be underrepresented in this sample. Therefore, caution should be used in generalizing findings in this study to IDU populations of other races and suburban IDUs.  Conclusions Few HCV or HIV risk-reduction interventions designed to reduce risky injection and sexual practices among high-risk groups have focused on reductions in alcohol use. 39 Yet alcohol use has been shown to be associated with HCV in several important ways. Not only has alcohol use been shown to exacerbate many of the risky injection and sexual practices that lead to acquisition of these diseases, but also to affect health-related quality of life 40 and to promote HCV progression and liver disease among those already infected. This study demonstrated that a relatively brief and inexpensive motivational intervention was effective in significantly reducing alcohol use as well as reducing sexual risk and maintaining lower injection risk in a population of out-of-treatment IDUs. The high prevalence of HCV infection among IDUs, the barriers to HCV treatment, and the severe side effects and limited effectiveness of current treatments make this a population in particular need of new strategies for slowing HCV disease progression. In addition, given the millions of people already chronically infected with HCV and the fact that current treatments for this disease are expensive and have significant side effects, it is clear that new strategies are needed to slow HCV progression among all of those already infected. Although this intervention was conducted among a population of out-of-treatment IDUs, we expect that it could be easily adapted and be equally, if not more, effective among other groups with high rates of alcohol use and HCV infection, such as former injectors, methadone patients and U.S. military veterans. Indeed the fact that this intervention was effective among a population that is particularly challenging to recruit and retain in studies makes the findings of positive behavioral changes in this intervention all the more impressive. The motivational intervention in this study may be one such important alternative to treatment that not only has no side effects but is also less expensive and time-consuming to administer, and more accessible to those without insurance.  Figure and Tables Figure 1 Table 1 Comparison of Educational and Motivational Interventions Length, Format and Content Educational Motivational Session number Minutes Mean (S.D.) Format Content Minutes Mean (S.D.) Format Content 1 23 (11) 23 PowerPoint slides; demonstration and rehearsal of syringe cleaning and condom application; testing for HIV/HBV/HCV; passive referrals to substance abuse treatment and other services HIV/HBV/HCV disease, infection, transmission Modes of transmission Injection risk behaviors Syringe cleaning Sexual risk behaviors Male and female condom use Benefits of drug treatment Description of HIV, HBV, and HCV antibody tests 24 (13) 19 PowerPoint slides; demonstration and rehearsal of syringe cleaning and condom application by interventionist; testing for HIV/HBV/HCV; passive referrals to substance abuse treatment and other services HIV/HCV/HBV disease, infection, transmission Modes of transmission Injection risk behaviors Syringe cleaning Sexual risk behaviors Male and female condom use Benefits of drug treatment. Description of HIV, HCV, and HBV antibody tests 2 20 (10) 6 PowerPoint slides; HIV/HCV/HBV test results; educational materials; active referrals to substance abuse treatment, HAV/HBV vaccinations, HIV care, HCV follow-up Description of the meaning of positive and negative HIV, HBV, HCV test results Information on slowing or preventing onset of serious liver disease for people with chronic HCV or HBV infection including recommendations not to drink Referrals to HIV treatment and HCV, HBV evaluation for positive participants and HBV vaccination for HBV-negative participants 19 (9) 24 PowerPoint slides; HIV/HCV/HBV test results; educational materials; active referrals to substance abuse treatment, HAV/HBV vaccinations, HIV care, HCV follow-up Description of the meaning of HIV, HBV, HCV positive and negative test results Disease specific prevention measures negative participants Disease specific control measures for positive participants Treatment information for each disease Information on probably outcomes of HCV infection and on slowing HCV disease progression 3 52 (14) Video Video on HAV, HBV, and HCV 41 (14) Counseling Focused on beginning motivation to change 4 78 (15) Video HIV informational video regarding HIV transmission, natural history, and treatment and prevention 37 (14) Counseling Focused on developing a plan for change 5 39 (10) Video Video on drug preparation and sharing demonstrating how a drug mixture becomes contaminated at different points in the process; video on HCV 35 (12) Counseling Reviewed progress and worked on overcoming obstacles to change 6 50 (9) Video In this video, recovering drug users describe consequences of addiction and programs that have helped them conquer it 35 (9) Counseling Reviewed progress, developed strategies for overcoming obstacles, and reaffirmed commitment to change Table 2 Baseline Characteristics by Intervention Condition Background characteristics Total (n = 625) Educational Motivational p-value Age, mean (SD) years 41.2 (9.3) 41.1 (8.9) 41.3 (9.7) 0.78 Race/ethnicity 0.97 ?African American 66.4 66.6 66.2 ?Non-Hispanic white 26.8 26.4 27.2 ?Other 6.8 7.0 6.6 % male 72.9 70.2 76.0 0.11 High school graduate 69.2 71.1 66.9 0.26 Unemployed 69.9 67.3 72.8 0.14 Married or living as married 20.3 21.0 19.5 0.66 Currently homeless 34.8 33.9 35.8 0.63 Ever in substance abuse treatment (lifetime) 67.1 65.0 69.5 0.24 Ever in prison (lifetime) 57.0 58.4 55.5 0.47 HIV positive 8.9 7.6 10.3 0.24 HCV positive 54.8 55.3 54.2 0.78 Alcohol and drug use (previous 30 days) ?Used alcohol 70.4 66.9 74.5 0.04 ?Mean # of days drank alcohol (S.D.) 11.9 (11.8) 11.0 (11.9) 13.0 (11.7) 0.04 ?Mean # of drinks per day when drinking (S.D.) 4.1 (4.9) 3.6 (4.4) 4.7 (5.4) 0.004 ?Used crack 72.5 73.0 72.0 0.79 ?Used powder cocaine 64.8 63.3 66.4 0.42 ?Heroin 69.6 68.5 70.9 0.53 ?Speedball (heroin and cocaine in combination) 58.4 ?Methamphetamine 12.1 10.5 140 0.18 ?Injection risk behaviors ?Ever shared a syringe (lifetime) 47.5 45.8 49.3 0.39 ?Shared a syringe previous 30 days 17.0 16.0 18.2 0.47 ?Shared cooker, cotton or rinse water previous 30 days 23.2 22.5 24.1 0.63 ?Used a new syringe at last injection 87.1 86.2 88.1 0.47 ?Sexual behavior previous 30 days ?> 1 sexual partner 26.5 27.0 26.0 0.77 Gave money or drugs for sex previous 30 days 24.0 23.5 24.6 0.73 ?Traded sex for money or drugs previous 30 days 15.8 16.7 14.8 0.52 ?Unprotected intercourse at last sex 57.4 56.1 58.8 0.52 Table 3 Intervention Outcomes Variable Beta OR (95% C.I.) Beta OR (95% C.I.) Alcohol use previous 30 days ?6-month follow-up (n = 495) 12-month follow-up (n = 447) ??Motivational condition ?0.40 0.67 (0.46, 0.97) * 0.01 1.01 (0.69, 1.49) ??Baseline alcohol use 1.38 3.97 (2.58, 6.11) *** 1.20 3.32 (2.13, 5.20) *** ??HCV positive ?0.44 0.65 (0.44, 0.94) * ?0.06 0.94 (0.64, 1.38) Used a new syringe last injection ?6-month follow-up (n = 503) 12-month follow-up (n = 454) ??Motivational condition 0.36 1.43 (0.79, 2.60) 0.51 1.67 (0.97, 2.87) * ??Used a new syringe last injection at baseline 1.01 2.75 (1.37, 5.52) ** 0.64 1.89 (0.97, 3.69) Unprotected vaginal or anal intercourse at last sexual encounter ?6-month follow-up (n = 436) 12-month follow-up (n = 397) ??Motivational condition 0.07 1.08 (0.69, 1.67) 0.00 1.00 (0.65, 1.56) ??Unprotected intercourse at baseline 1.81 6.09 (3.76, 9.84) *** 1.40 4.04 (2.55, 6.39) *** ??Primary partner 1.30 3.68 (2.29, 5.92) *** 0.90 2.46 (1.54, 3.91) *** * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001 