Perception of risk and knowledge of risk factors in women at high risk for stroke Background and purpose Women face a higher mortality after stroke and have different risk factors than men. Despite educational campaigns, women continue to underestimate their own risk for stroke. We present a theoretical model to understand risk perception in high-risk women. Methods 805 women, ages 50 to 70, were selected from the University of Connecticut Cardiology Center with at least one risk factor for stroke. A five-part questionnaire addressed stroke knowledge, risk perception, risk factors, access to health care and demographics. 215 women responded by mail (28% response rate) and de-identified data was entered in SPSS. Descriptive, bivariate and multivariate techniques assessed the proposed model. Results The cohort was predominantly white (91.5%), higher income (33.1% of the population earned >$75,000) and well-educated (28.6% attended graduate or professional school). Only 7 of the 37 (18.9%) women with atrial fibrillation and 11 out of the 71 women with heart disease (15.5%) identified their health condition as a risk factor for stroke. Predictors of risk perception included: other women’s risk (B=.336, p<.001), worrying about stroke (B=.734, p<.001), having hypertension (B=.686, p=.037) and diabetes (B=.893, p=.004). Only 63.9% of women with atrial fibrillation (n=23) reported taking warfarin. Conclusions Women were often unable to identify their health condition as a risk factor for stroke. In addition, many women were not undertaking primary prevention behaviors. Risk perception was low, and high risk women perceived their risk of stroke to be the same as their peers. Educational strategies must advocate for and target high-risk women.  Methods 805 women, ages 50 to 70, were selected from the University of Connecticut Cardiology Center with at least one risk factor for stroke. A five-part questionnaire addressed stroke knowledge, risk perception, risk factors, access to health care and demographics. 215 women responded by mail (28% response rate) and de-identified data was entered in SPSS. Descriptive, bivariate and multivariate techniques assessed the proposed model.  Results The cohort was predominantly white (91.5%), higher income (33.1% of the population earned >$75,000) and well-educated (28.6% attended graduate or professional school). Only 7 of the 37 (18.9%) women with atrial fibrillation and 11 out of the 71 women with heart disease (15.5%) identified their health condition as a risk factor for stroke. Predictors of risk perception included: other women’s risk (B=.336, p<.001), worrying about stroke (B=.734, p<.001), having hypertension (B=.686, p=.037) and diabetes (B=.893, p=.004). Only 63.9% of women with atrial fibrillation (n=23) reported taking warfarin.  Conclusions Women were often unable to identify their health condition as a risk factor for stroke. In addition, many women were not undertaking primary prevention behaviors. Risk perception was low, and high risk women perceived their risk of stroke to be the same as their peers. Educational strategies must advocate for and target high-risk women.  Methods Research model A model was developed to show predicted relationships between studied variables ( Figure 1 ). The key independent variables were personal risk factors and knowledge or risk factors. Perception of risk was the major dependent variable. Participants The University of Connecticut and the Hartford Hospital Institutional Review Board approved the study. 805 female patients, ages 50 to 70, from the University of Connecticut Cardiology Center (ages 50 to 70) were selected from the following ICD-9 billing codes: 250.0; 272.4; 401.1; 401.9; 410.1; 410.4; 411.1; 413.9; 414.0; 414.9; 427.31; 436.0; 440.21 and 443.9. The women received the survey in two separate mailings, with 37 envelope returned for incorrect addresses. 129 women responded to the first mailing, and an additional 86 responded to the second mailing, for a total of 215 returned (28% response rate). Questionnaire A 36-item, five-part questionnaire was developed using elements from prior surveys about knowledge, warning signs 9 – 11 and risk perception 12 – 14 . Section one asked about knowledge of warning signs and risk factors for stroke. Section two addressed risk perception and section three asked about personal risk factors. Section four addressed indicators for access to health care and section five inquired about socio-demographic factors. Women were asked to list up to five warning signs for stroke, for which coded answers included: weakness or numbness, vision changes loss of balance or dizziness, headache, confusion and speech problems ( Figure 2A ). Women were asked to identify up to seven modifiable risk factors for stroke, of which there were eleven coded responses ( Table 2B ). Coded responses were determined after analyzing frequencies of responses and identifying reasonable groupings. Personal risk factors were identified, including: hypertension, high cholesterol, atrial fibrillation, heart disease, diabetes, stroke or transient ischemic event (TIA), carotid artery stenosis and smoking (current and former). Perception of risk was asked on a 10-point visual analogue scale. Subjects rated their perceived personal risk and that of other women. Women were asked how often they worried about stroke. In addition, subjects answered questions about personal health conditions and risk factors, access to medical care, and demographic information. Surveys were returned in provided envelopes and did not contain any identifying personal information. De-identified data was entered in Statistical Program for the Social Sciences (SPSS). Warning signs and risk factors were coded as nominal responses, while risk perception remained a scale variable. Descriptives, such as frequencies and means, were examined to interpret results. Bivariate correlations were assessed with risk perception and length of time since a primary care office visit as dependent variables. Relationships that were significant at the p<. 05 level were included as independent variables in multivariate analysis. Linear regression was performed using the ENTER method; independent variables were added as a group to the model and analyzed using standard multiple regression. In this technique, a variable is assessed to determine what it adds to the prediction of the dependent variable that is different from the predictability afforded by other independent variables. This is in contrast to sequential (or hierarchical) and stepwise regression techniques, where the order of entry of variables is determined by the researcher and subject to interpretation. In standard multiple regression, it is possible for an independent variable to appear unimportant to the solution when it is actually highly correlated. For this reason, the full correlation and the semipartal correlation ( Table 3B ) were considered. In the semipartial correlation, the contribution of other independent variables is taken out of the independent variable of interest so that only this variable’s contribution is assessed. The semipartial correlation is related to the change in R2 when a variable is added to an equation, so that the higher the number, the more important the variable’s contribution is to the correlation coefficient. The B value reflects the slope of the regression line, as determined by the contributions of each significant independent variable. A B value greater than zero represents a positive correlation, with a larger number indicating a more robust relationship. A B value less than zero indicates and inverse relationship, with a more negative number indicating a more robust relationship. The p value evaluates the unique variance that an independent variable adds to the regression coefficient, and thus an important independent variable that shares variance with another independent variable may be insignificant in the analysis. The 95% confidence intervals for the B value were also included ( Table 3B ) to show that the slope did not cross zero.  Research model A model was developed to show predicted relationships between studied variables ( Figure 1 ). The key independent variables were personal risk factors and knowledge or risk factors. Perception of risk was the major dependent variable.  Participants The University of Connecticut and the Hartford Hospital Institutional Review Board approved the study. 805 female patients, ages 50 to 70, from the University of Connecticut Cardiology Center (ages 50 to 70) were selected from the following ICD-9 billing codes: 250.0; 272.4; 401.1; 401.9; 410.1; 410.4; 411.1; 413.9; 414.0; 414.9; 427.31; 436.0; 440.21 and 443.9. The women received the survey in two separate mailings, with 37 envelope returned for incorrect addresses. 129 women responded to the first mailing, and an additional 86 responded to the second mailing, for a total of 215 returned (28% response rate).  Questionnaire A 36-item, five-part questionnaire was developed using elements from prior surveys about knowledge, warning signs 9 – 11 and risk perception 12 – 14 . Section one asked about knowledge of warning signs and risk factors for stroke. Section two addressed risk perception and section three asked about personal risk factors. Section four addressed indicators for access to health care and section five inquired about socio-demographic factors. Women were asked to list up to five warning signs for stroke, for which coded answers included: weakness or numbness, vision changes loss of balance or dizziness, headache, confusion and speech problems ( Figure 2A ). Women were asked to identify up to seven modifiable risk factors for stroke, of which there were eleven coded responses ( Table 2B ). Coded responses were determined after analyzing frequencies of responses and identifying reasonable groupings. Personal risk factors were identified, including: hypertension, high cholesterol, atrial fibrillation, heart disease, diabetes, stroke or transient ischemic event (TIA), carotid artery stenosis and smoking (current and former). Perception of risk was asked on a 10-point visual analogue scale. Subjects rated their perceived personal risk and that of other women. Women were asked how often they worried about stroke. In addition, subjects answered questions about personal health conditions and risk factors, access to medical care, and demographic information. Surveys were returned in provided envelopes and did not contain any identifying personal information. De-identified data was entered in Statistical Program for the Social Sciences (SPSS). Warning signs and risk factors were coded as nominal responses, while risk perception remained a scale variable. Descriptives, such as frequencies and means, were examined to interpret results. Bivariate correlations were assessed with risk perception and length of time since a primary care office visit as dependent variables. Relationships that were significant at the p<. 05 level were included as independent variables in multivariate analysis. Linear regression was performed using the ENTER method; independent variables were added as a group to the model and analyzed using standard multiple regression. In this technique, a variable is assessed to determine what it adds to the prediction of the dependent variable that is different from the predictability afforded by other independent variables. This is in contrast to sequential (or hierarchical) and stepwise regression techniques, where the order of entry of variables is determined by the researcher and subject to interpretation. In standard multiple regression, it is possible for an independent variable to appear unimportant to the solution when it is actually highly correlated. For this reason, the full correlation and the semipartal correlation ( Table 3B ) were considered. In the semipartial correlation, the contribution of other independent variables is taken out of the independent variable of interest so that only this variable’s contribution is assessed. The semipartial correlation is related to the change in R2 when a variable is added to an equation, so that the higher the number, the more important the variable’s contribution is to the correlation coefficient. The B value reflects the slope of the regression line, as determined by the contributions of each significant independent variable. A B value greater than zero represents a positive correlation, with a larger number indicating a more robust relationship. A B value less than zero indicates and inverse relationship, with a more negative number indicating a more robust relationship. The p value evaluates the unique variance that an independent variable adds to the regression coefficient, and thus an important independent variable that shares variance with another independent variable may be insignificant in the analysis. The 95% confidence intervals for the B value were also included ( Table 3B ) to show that the slope did not cross zero.  Results Sample Characteristics (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T1">Table 1</xref>) Women ranged in age from 50 to 73, with a mean age of 63.0 years (SD7.2). The majority of the sample was white (91.5%). 33.1% of the population earned more than $75,000 annually and 28.6% of the population had attended graduate or professional school. Stroke Knowledge and Risk Factors Women identified an average of 2.7 (SD 1.6) out of 6 possible warning signs ( Figure 2A ). While 71.2% of women identified weakness or numbness as a warning sign, approximately one third of respondents named vision changes (34.1%), dizziness or balance problems (33.6%), headache (32.2%) or confusion (26%) as a warning sign. 69.3% of women identified trouble speaking as a warning sign. Patient’s risk factors for stroke are shown in Table 2A . Women also were asked to identify any risk factors for stroke ( Table 2B ). An average of 3.9 (SD 1.8) out of eleven coded modifiable risk factors were identified. Only 3.3% of women (n=7) identified atrial fibrillation as a risk factor for stroke. Heart disease was identified as a risk factor 16.3% of the time (n=35). Women often did not identify their own risk factors as placing them at risk for stroke ( Figure 2B ). For example, only 7 of the 37 (18.9%) women with atrial fibrillation and 11 out of the 71 women with heart disease (15.5%) identified their own health condition as a risk factor. Stroke knowledge, measured by number of stroke warning signs and risk factors identified, did not correlate with worrying about stroke or risk perception in bivariate analysis. Perception of risk Mean perception of risk was 5.7 (SD 2.3, 10-point scale) and perception of other women’s risk was rated as 5.5 (SD 1.7, 10-point scale) ( Table 3A ). Women saw their risk to be similar to that of their peers. A majority of women worry about stroke rarely or never, while one-third of women worry about stroke sometimes or frequently. 64.6% of women perceived their health as good or excellent. Predictors of risk perception in multivariate analysis included: other women’s risk of stroke (B=.336, p<.001), worrying about stroke (B=.734, p<.001) and having hypertension (B=.686, p=.037) and diabetes (B=.893, p=.004). Variables included in the model showed a significant correlation with bivariate analysis. The following variables were not significant in the model: perceived health; prior stroke; prior TIA; carotid artery stenosis; smoking (at least 100 lifetime cigarettes); and HMO coverage ( Table 3B ). Access to Health Care The majority of the sample had health insurance, prescription coverage and a primary care doctor. However, even in this population, 9.9% of women (n=21) reported being unable to attend a medical appointment because of cost, and 17.8% of women (n=37) reported being unable to take a medication because of cost. Women had seen their primary care physician an average of 7.5 months prior, with a range from 0 to 84 months. The average office co-pay was $16.97 (SD $31.90) and the average spent per month on prescriptions was $97.49 (SD $157.24). In multivariate analysis, having prescription coverage (B=?41.803, p<.001) and a primary care provider (B=?10.391, p=.017) was inversely related to the length of time since an office visit. Statistically significant in bivariate correlations but not in the model were: having health insurance; being unable to see doctor of cost (in the past 12 months) and amount of office visit co-pay. Those who lack prescription coverage and a primary care provider are more likely to have increased time in between office visits. There was no significant relationship for number of health conditions and length of time since seeing a physician. Primary Prevention Several aspects of primary prevention were addressed in this survey. 86.6% (n=136) of hypertensive patients reported good control, with blood pressures less than 140/90. Over half of women (52.4%, n=111) had smoked over 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, but only 7.1% of women (n=15) still smoked. 62.1% (n=41) of diabetics reported having an A1C less than 6.5%. Only 63.9% of women with atrial fibrillation (n=23) reported taking warfarin. Cholesterol control was defined as an LDL of less than 100, and 68.3% (n=97) patients reported obtaining this goal. 62.6% (n=132) of subjects reported taking daily aspirin, while 22.2% (n=46) had a medical condition that made taking aspirin unsafe.  Results Sample Characteristics (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T1">Table 1</xref>) Women ranged in age from 50 to 73, with a mean age of 63.0 years (SD7.2). The majority of the sample was white (91.5%). 33.1% of the population earned more than $75,000 annually and 28.6% of the population had attended graduate or professional school. Stroke Knowledge and Risk Factors Women identified an average of 2.7 (SD 1.6) out of 6 possible warning signs ( Figure 2A ). While 71.2% of women identified weakness or numbness as a warning sign, approximately one third of respondents named vision changes (34.1%), dizziness or balance problems (33.6%), headache (32.2%) or confusion (26%) as a warning sign. 69.3% of women identified trouble speaking as a warning sign. Patient’s risk factors for stroke are shown in Table 2A . Women also were asked to identify any risk factors for stroke ( Table 2B ). An average of 3.9 (SD 1.8) out of eleven coded modifiable risk factors were identified. Only 3.3% of women (n=7) identified atrial fibrillation as a risk factor for stroke. Heart disease was identified as a risk factor 16.3% of the time (n=35). Women often did not identify their own risk factors as placing them at risk for stroke ( Figure 2B ). For example, only 7 of the 37 (18.9%) women with atrial fibrillation and 11 out of the 71 women with heart disease (15.5%) identified their own health condition as a risk factor. Stroke knowledge, measured by number of stroke warning signs and risk factors identified, did not correlate with worrying about stroke or risk perception in bivariate analysis. Perception of risk Mean perception of risk was 5.7 (SD 2.3, 10-point scale) and perception of other women’s risk was rated as 5.5 (SD 1.7, 10-point scale) ( Table 3A ). Women saw their risk to be similar to that of their peers. A majority of women worry about stroke rarely or never, while one-third of women worry about stroke sometimes or frequently. 64.6% of women perceived their health as good or excellent. Predictors of risk perception in multivariate analysis included: other women’s risk of stroke (B=.336, p<.001), worrying about stroke (B=.734, p<.001) and having hypertension (B=.686, p=.037) and diabetes (B=.893, p=.004). Variables included in the model showed a significant correlation with bivariate analysis. The following variables were not significant in the model: perceived health; prior stroke; prior TIA; carotid artery stenosis; smoking (at least 100 lifetime cigarettes); and HMO coverage ( Table 3B ). Access to Health Care The majority of the sample had health insurance, prescription coverage and a primary care doctor. However, even in this population, 9.9% of women (n=21) reported being unable to attend a medical appointment because of cost, and 17.8% of women (n=37) reported being unable to take a medication because of cost. Women had seen their primary care physician an average of 7.5 months prior, with a range from 0 to 84 months. The average office co-pay was $16.97 (SD $31.90) and the average spent per month on prescriptions was $97.49 (SD $157.24). In multivariate analysis, having prescription coverage (B=?41.803, p<.001) and a primary care provider (B=?10.391, p=.017) was inversely related to the length of time since an office visit. Statistically significant in bivariate correlations but not in the model were: having health insurance; being unable to see doctor of cost (in the past 12 months) and amount of office visit co-pay. Those who lack prescription coverage and a primary care provider are more likely to have increased time in between office visits. There was no significant relationship for number of health conditions and length of time since seeing a physician. Primary Prevention Several aspects of primary prevention were addressed in this survey. 86.6% (n=136) of hypertensive patients reported good control, with blood pressures less than 140/90. Over half of women (52.4%, n=111) had smoked over 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, but only 7.1% of women (n=15) still smoked. 62.1% (n=41) of diabetics reported having an A1C less than 6.5%. Only 63.9% of women with atrial fibrillation (n=23) reported taking warfarin. Cholesterol control was defined as an LDL of less than 100, and 68.3% (n=97) patients reported obtaining this goal. 62.6% (n=132) of subjects reported taking daily aspirin, while 22.2% (n=46) had a medical condition that made taking aspirin unsafe.  Sample Characteristics (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T1">Table 1</xref>) Women ranged in age from 50 to 73, with a mean age of 63.0 years (SD7.2). The majority of the sample was white (91.5%). 33.1% of the population earned more than $75,000 annually and 28.6% of the population had attended graduate or professional school.  Sample Characteristics (<xref ref-type="table" rid="T1">Table 1</xref>) Women ranged in age from 50 to 73, with a mean age of 63.0 years (SD7.2). The majority of the sample was white (91.5%). 33.1% of the population earned more than $75,000 annually and 28.6% of the population had attended graduate or professional school.  Stroke Knowledge and Risk Factors Women identified an average of 2.7 (SD 1.6) out of 6 possible warning signs ( Figure 2A ). While 71.2% of women identified weakness or numbness as a warning sign, approximately one third of respondents named vision changes (34.1%), dizziness or balance problems (33.6%), headache (32.2%) or confusion (26%) as a warning sign. 69.3% of women identified trouble speaking as a warning sign. Patient’s risk factors for stroke are shown in Table 2A . Women also were asked to identify any risk factors for stroke ( Table 2B ). An average of 3.9 (SD 1.8) out of eleven coded modifiable risk factors were identified. Only 3.3% of women (n=7) identified atrial fibrillation as a risk factor for stroke. Heart disease was identified as a risk factor 16.3% of the time (n=35). Women often did not identify their own risk factors as placing them at risk for stroke ( Figure 2B ). For example, only 7 of the 37 (18.9%) women with atrial fibrillation and 11 out of the 71 women with heart disease (15.5%) identified their own health condition as a risk factor. Stroke knowledge, measured by number of stroke warning signs and risk factors identified, did not correlate with worrying about stroke or risk perception in bivariate analysis.  Stroke Knowledge and Risk Factors Women identified an average of 2.7 (SD 1.6) out of 6 possible warning signs ( Figure 2A ). While 71.2% of women identified weakness or numbness as a warning sign, approximately one third of respondents named vision changes (34.1%), dizziness or balance problems (33.6%), headache (32.2%) or confusion (26%) as a warning sign. 69.3% of women identified trouble speaking as a warning sign. Patient’s risk factors for stroke are shown in Table 2A . Women also were asked to identify any risk factors for stroke ( Table 2B ). An average of 3.9 (SD 1.8) out of eleven coded modifiable risk factors were identified. Only 3.3% of women (n=7) identified atrial fibrillation as a risk factor for stroke. Heart disease was identified as a risk factor 16.3% of the time (n=35). Women often did not identify their own risk factors as placing them at risk for stroke ( Figure 2B ). For example, only 7 of the 37 (18.9%) women with atrial fibrillation and 11 out of the 71 women with heart disease (15.5%) identified their own health condition as a risk factor. Stroke knowledge, measured by number of stroke warning signs and risk factors identified, did not correlate with worrying about stroke or risk perception in bivariate analysis.  Perception of risk Mean perception of risk was 5.7 (SD 2.3, 10-point scale) and perception of other women’s risk was rated as 5.5 (SD 1.7, 10-point scale) ( Table 3A ). Women saw their risk to be similar to that of their peers. A majority of women worry about stroke rarely or never, while one-third of women worry about stroke sometimes or frequently. 64.6% of women perceived their health as good or excellent. Predictors of risk perception in multivariate analysis included: other women’s risk of stroke (B=.336, p<.001), worrying about stroke (B=.734, p<.001) and having hypertension (B=.686, p=.037) and diabetes (B=.893, p=.004). Variables included in the model showed a significant correlation with bivariate analysis. The following variables were not significant in the model: perceived health; prior stroke; prior TIA; carotid artery stenosis; smoking (at least 100 lifetime cigarettes); and HMO coverage ( Table 3B ).  Perception of risk Mean perception of risk was 5.7 (SD 2.3, 10-point scale) and perception of other women’s risk was rated as 5.5 (SD 1.7, 10-point scale) ( Table 3A ). Women saw their risk to be similar to that of their peers. A majority of women worry about stroke rarely or never, while one-third of women worry about stroke sometimes or frequently. 64.6% of women perceived their health as good or excellent. Predictors of risk perception in multivariate analysis included: other women’s risk of stroke (B=.336, p<.001), worrying about stroke (B=.734, p<.001) and having hypertension (B=.686, p=.037) and diabetes (B=.893, p=.004). Variables included in the model showed a significant correlation with bivariate analysis. The following variables were not significant in the model: perceived health; prior stroke; prior TIA; carotid artery stenosis; smoking (at least 100 lifetime cigarettes); and HMO coverage ( Table 3B ).  Access to Health Care The majority of the sample had health insurance, prescription coverage and a primary care doctor. However, even in this population, 9.9% of women (n=21) reported being unable to attend a medical appointment because of cost, and 17.8% of women (n=37) reported being unable to take a medication because of cost. Women had seen their primary care physician an average of 7.5 months prior, with a range from 0 to 84 months. The average office co-pay was $16.97 (SD $31.90) and the average spent per month on prescriptions was $97.49 (SD $157.24). In multivariate analysis, having prescription coverage (B=?41.803, p<.001) and a primary care provider (B=?10.391, p=.017) was inversely related to the length of time since an office visit. Statistically significant in bivariate correlations but not in the model were: having health insurance; being unable to see doctor of cost (in the past 12 months) and amount of office visit co-pay. Those who lack prescription coverage and a primary care provider are more likely to have increased time in between office visits. There was no significant relationship for number of health conditions and length of time since seeing a physician.  Access to Health Care The majority of the sample had health insurance, prescription coverage and a primary care doctor. However, even in this population, 9.9% of women (n=21) reported being unable to attend a medical appointment because of cost, and 17.8% of women (n=37) reported being unable to take a medication because of cost. Women had seen their primary care physician an average of 7.5 months prior, with a range from 0 to 84 months. The average office co-pay was $16.97 (SD $31.90) and the average spent per month on prescriptions was $97.49 (SD $157.24). In multivariate analysis, having prescription coverage (B=?41.803, p<.001) and a primary care provider (B=?10.391, p=.017) was inversely related to the length of time since an office visit. Statistically significant in bivariate correlations but not in the model were: having health insurance; being unable to see doctor of cost (in the past 12 months) and amount of office visit co-pay. Those who lack prescription coverage and a primary care provider are more likely to have increased time in between office visits. There was no significant relationship for number of health conditions and length of time since seeing a physician.  Primary Prevention Several aspects of primary prevention were addressed in this survey. 86.6% (n=136) of hypertensive patients reported good control, with blood pressures less than 140/90. Over half of women (52.4%, n=111) had smoked over 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, but only 7.1% of women (n=15) still smoked. 62.1% (n=41) of diabetics reported having an A1C less than 6.5%. Only 63.9% of women with atrial fibrillation (n=23) reported taking warfarin. Cholesterol control was defined as an LDL of less than 100, and 68.3% (n=97) patients reported obtaining this goal. 62.6% (n=132) of subjects reported taking daily aspirin, while 22.2% (n=46) had a medical condition that made taking aspirin unsafe.  Primary Prevention Several aspects of primary prevention were addressed in this survey. 86.6% (n=136) of hypertensive patients reported good control, with blood pressures less than 140/90. Over half of women (52.4%, n=111) had smoked over 100 cigarettes in their lifetime, but only 7.1% of women (n=15) still smoked. 62.1% (n=41) of diabetics reported having an A1C less than 6.5%. Only 63.9% of women with atrial fibrillation (n=23) reported taking warfarin. Cholesterol control was defined as an LDL of less than 100, and 68.3% (n=97) patients reported obtaining this goal. 62.6% (n=132) of subjects reported taking daily aspirin, while 22.2% (n=46) had a medical condition that made taking aspirin unsafe.  Discussion This survey analysis found that a group of high-risk women have low perception of their personal risk for stroke and that they do not perceive their risk to be different from other women. In light of recent data that shows a stroke surge in women ages 45 to 54 8 , this may be the group who most serves to gain from primary prevention efforts. The lack of knowledge and risk perception in this population is a strong call to action to make stroke education a priority for women of all racial/ethnic and socio-economic backgrounds. Stroke Knowledge of warning signs and risk factors Health literacy was measured in our model ( Figure 1 ) by stroke knowledge of warning signs and risk factors as well as correctly identifying personal health conditions as stroke risk factors. Low knowledge of risk factors and warning signs for stroke has been documented in large-scale surveys 9 , 15 – 18 . People are generally able to name risk factors such as stress, high blood pressure, diet and smoking as a cause of stroke, but do not identify health conditions such as atrial fibrillation or diabetes. Our data supported these findings. Knowledge of warning signs is still lacking in many at risk populations, which may directly affect emergency room arrival times 16 .. Many women listed warning signs such as chest pain, or arm pain, suggesting that confusion remains about the difference between a stroke and a heart attack. In one study, knowledge of a risk factor was shown to be superior in those affected by it 19 . Our results suggest that this is not the case in our population. Surprisingly persons with atrial fibrillation or carotid stenosis often did not identify these conditions as a risk factor for stroke, even though they are known to dramatically increase risk. Stroke knowledge has been shown to be poorest in groups at highest risk 9 , 10 and these groups represent missed opportunities for primary prevention. Perception of Risk Risk perception, as is suggested by the Health Belief Model (HBM), is a key element in understanding how persons become motivated to change health behaviors 20 . Many factors such as: education, presence of disease specific symptoms, media campaigns, physician or peer recommendations, socio-economic variables or cultural beliefs can influence the likelihood of behavioral change. This model can be used to study the primary prevention of stroke, in that individual risk perception may modulate primary prevention measures such as blood pressure control, medication adherence or behavioral and lifestyle changes. In assessment of our model, stroke knowledge of risk factors or warning signs did not predict perception of risk. The number of risk factors also did not correlate with risk perception. This suggests that risk perception is a subjective measure, which is not entirely modulated by stroke knowledge or actual risk. Breast cancer campaigns targeted at women, such as “Race for the Cure” 21 and the pink ribbon campaign are an example of a successful education and outreach initiative that has increased risk perception. Women perceive breast cancer to be one of the largest health concerns they face today, despite the fact that six times more women die of stroke and heart disease 1 . Patient’s perception of high self-risk has been shown to be a reliable predictor of mammography screening rates 22 . Most women do not perceive stroke or heart disease to be a major health concern and report that they are not well informed about their risk 15 . The American Heart Association recent campaign “Go Red for heart disease” may serve as a vehicle to increase risk perception about heart disease and stroke. Access to health care The patient population studied had increased access, considering that they had received specialty care within the past year at a Cardiology practice. However, even in this select population, there were barriers to optimal care. A proportion of women reported being unable to see a physician for a scheduled appointment in the past year because of cost. Whether this was a primary care visit or specialty visit was not reported. An even greater percentage was unable to take a medication because of cost in the past year. Efforts in education and increasing risk perception are undermined if high-risk populations are unable to obtain the advice, or the medications that are essential to reducing their stroke risk factors. Surprisingly, perception of risk was not related to access to a physician, or length of time since follow-up. This suggests that specialty physicians, treating conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and heart disease, are not emphasizing patient’s stroke risk in clinical encounters. Primary prevention Primary prevention is the goal, and the final step in our model, which is intrinsically dependent on access to care and adherence to treatment. In women, it has been shown that a healthy lifestyle, consisting of low body mass index, abstinence from smoking, moderate consumption of alcohol and health diet and regular exercise were associated with a lower incidence of ischemic and total stroke 1 . This survey did not address health outcomes, but even in this patient population who seeks regular specialty care, there were still women smoking, not taking aspirin with no contraindication not to do so, and with poorly controlled hypertension and cholesterol. Most surprisingly, more than a third of our sample with atrial fibrillation reported not taking warfarin. This population may represent a mix of women with true contraindications to warfarin use as well as reflect patients for whom physicians are averse to prescribing anticoagulation therapy. This is despite evidence that patients with a stroke and a history of atrial fibrillation, the majority are sub-therapeutic or not taking warfarin at the time of their event 23 . In addition, women with atrial fibrillation have higher rates of off-warfarin thromboembolic risk compared to men 24 , placing them at higher risk. There are several limitations of this study. As in all survey studies, there was a selection bias for women that returned the survey. Women were predominately white, and living in a suburban area and whether these results can be extended to a more urban, ethnically diverse population is unknown. It would be expected that barriers to primary prevention would be greater in such populations. In addition, all women were asked to identify warning signs and risk factors without any prompting, which would tend to underreport what women actually know. The benefit of this method is that there is a sense of relationships that women have between health and behavior, without cues. It is also possible that women do not identify medical terms such as “atrial fibrillation” unless they themselves have the condition.  Discussion This survey analysis found that a group of high-risk women have low perception of their personal risk for stroke and that they do not perceive their risk to be different from other women. In light of recent data that shows a stroke surge in women ages 45 to 54 8 , this may be the group who most serves to gain from primary prevention efforts. The lack of knowledge and risk perception in this population is a strong call to action to make stroke education a priority for women of all racial/ethnic and socio-economic backgrounds. Stroke Knowledge of warning signs and risk factors Health literacy was measured in our model ( Figure 1 ) by stroke knowledge of warning signs and risk factors as well as correctly identifying personal health conditions as stroke risk factors. Low knowledge of risk factors and warning signs for stroke has been documented in large-scale surveys 9 , 15 – 18 . People are generally able to name risk factors such as stress, high blood pressure, diet and smoking as a cause of stroke, but do not identify health conditions such as atrial fibrillation or diabetes. Our data supported these findings. Knowledge of warning signs is still lacking in many at risk populations, which may directly affect emergency room arrival times 16 .. Many women listed warning signs such as chest pain, or arm pain, suggesting that confusion remains about the difference between a stroke and a heart attack. In one study, knowledge of a risk factor was shown to be superior in those affected by it 19 . Our results suggest that this is not the case in our population. Surprisingly persons with atrial fibrillation or carotid stenosis often did not identify these conditions as a risk factor for stroke, even though they are known to dramatically increase risk. Stroke knowledge has been shown to be poorest in groups at highest risk 9 , 10 and these groups represent missed opportunities for primary prevention. Perception of Risk Risk perception, as is suggested by the Health Belief Model (HBM), is a key element in understanding how persons become motivated to change health behaviors 20 . Many factors such as: education, presence of disease specific symptoms, media campaigns, physician or peer recommendations, socio-economic variables or cultural beliefs can influence the likelihood of behavioral change. This model can be used to study the primary prevention of stroke, in that individual risk perception may modulate primary prevention measures such as blood pressure control, medication adherence or behavioral and lifestyle changes. In assessment of our model, stroke knowledge of risk factors or warning signs did not predict perception of risk. The number of risk factors also did not correlate with risk perception. This suggests that risk perception is a subjective measure, which is not entirely modulated by stroke knowledge or actual risk. Breast cancer campaigns targeted at women, such as “Race for the Cure” 21 and the pink ribbon campaign are an example of a successful education and outreach initiative that has increased risk perception. Women perceive breast cancer to be one of the largest health concerns they face today, despite the fact that six times more women die of stroke and heart disease 1 . Patient’s perception of high self-risk has been shown to be a reliable predictor of mammography screening rates 22 . Most women do not perceive stroke or heart disease to be a major health concern and report that they are not well informed about their risk 15 . The American Heart Association recent campaign “Go Red for heart disease” may serve as a vehicle to increase risk perception about heart disease and stroke. Access to health care The patient population studied had increased access, considering that they had received specialty care within the past year at a Cardiology practice. However, even in this select population, there were barriers to optimal care. A proportion of women reported being unable to see a physician for a scheduled appointment in the past year because of cost. Whether this was a primary care visit or specialty visit was not reported. An even greater percentage was unable to take a medication because of cost in the past year. Efforts in education and increasing risk perception are undermined if high-risk populations are unable to obtain the advice, or the medications that are essential to reducing their stroke risk factors. Surprisingly, perception of risk was not related to access to a physician, or length of time since follow-up. This suggests that specialty physicians, treating conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and heart disease, are not emphasizing patient’s stroke risk in clinical encounters. Primary prevention Primary prevention is the goal, and the final step in our model, which is intrinsically dependent on access to care and adherence to treatment. In women, it has been shown that a healthy lifestyle, consisting of low body mass index, abstinence from smoking, moderate consumption of alcohol and health diet and regular exercise were associated with a lower incidence of ischemic and total stroke 1 . This survey did not address health outcomes, but even in this patient population who seeks regular specialty care, there were still women smoking, not taking aspirin with no contraindication not to do so, and with poorly controlled hypertension and cholesterol. Most surprisingly, more than a third of our sample with atrial fibrillation reported not taking warfarin. This population may represent a mix of women with true contraindications to warfarin use as well as reflect patients for whom physicians are averse to prescribing anticoagulation therapy. This is despite evidence that patients with a stroke and a history of atrial fibrillation, the majority are sub-therapeutic or not taking warfarin at the time of their event 23 . In addition, women with atrial fibrillation have higher rates of off-warfarin thromboembolic risk compared to men 24 , placing them at higher risk. There are several limitations of this study. As in all survey studies, there was a selection bias for women that returned the survey. Women were predominately white, and living in a suburban area and whether these results can be extended to a more urban, ethnically diverse population is unknown. It would be expected that barriers to primary prevention would be greater in such populations. In addition, all women were asked to identify warning signs and risk factors without any prompting, which would tend to underreport what women actually know. The benefit of this method is that there is a sense of relationships that women have between health and behavior, without cues. It is also possible that women do not identify medical terms such as “atrial fibrillation” unless they themselves have the condition.  Stroke Knowledge of warning signs and risk factors Health literacy was measured in our model ( Figure 1 ) by stroke knowledge of warning signs and risk factors as well as correctly identifying personal health conditions as stroke risk factors. Low knowledge of risk factors and warning signs for stroke has been documented in large-scale surveys 9 , 15 – 18 . People are generally able to name risk factors such as stress, high blood pressure, diet and smoking as a cause of stroke, but do not identify health conditions such as atrial fibrillation or diabetes. Our data supported these findings. Knowledge of warning signs is still lacking in many at risk populations, which may directly affect emergency room arrival times 16 .. Many women listed warning signs such as chest pain, or arm pain, suggesting that confusion remains about the difference between a stroke and a heart attack. In one study, knowledge of a risk factor was shown to be superior in those affected by it 19 . Our results suggest that this is not the case in our population. Surprisingly persons with atrial fibrillation or carotid stenosis often did not identify these conditions as a risk factor for stroke, even though they are known to dramatically increase risk. Stroke knowledge has been shown to be poorest in groups at highest risk 9 , 10 and these groups represent missed opportunities for primary prevention.  Stroke Knowledge of warning signs and risk factors Health literacy was measured in our model ( Figure 1 ) by stroke knowledge of warning signs and risk factors as well as correctly identifying personal health conditions as stroke risk factors. Low knowledge of risk factors and warning signs for stroke has been documented in large-scale surveys 9 , 15 – 18 . People are generally able to name risk factors such as stress, high blood pressure, diet and smoking as a cause of stroke, but do not identify health conditions such as atrial fibrillation or diabetes. Our data supported these findings. Knowledge of warning signs is still lacking in many at risk populations, which may directly affect emergency room arrival times 16 .. Many women listed warning signs such as chest pain, or arm pain, suggesting that confusion remains about the difference between a stroke and a heart attack. In one study, knowledge of a risk factor was shown to be superior in those affected by it 19 . Our results suggest that this is not the case in our population. Surprisingly persons with atrial fibrillation or carotid stenosis often did not identify these conditions as a risk factor for stroke, even though they are known to dramatically increase risk. Stroke knowledge has been shown to be poorest in groups at highest risk 9 , 10 and these groups represent missed opportunities for primary prevention.  Perception of Risk Risk perception, as is suggested by the Health Belief Model (HBM), is a key element in understanding how persons become motivated to change health behaviors 20 . Many factors such as: education, presence of disease specific symptoms, media campaigns, physician or peer recommendations, socio-economic variables or cultural beliefs can influence the likelihood of behavioral change. This model can be used to study the primary prevention of stroke, in that individual risk perception may modulate primary prevention measures such as blood pressure control, medication adherence or behavioral and lifestyle changes. In assessment of our model, stroke knowledge of risk factors or warning signs did not predict perception of risk. The number of risk factors also did not correlate with risk perception. This suggests that risk perception is a subjective measure, which is not entirely modulated by stroke knowledge or actual risk. Breast cancer campaigns targeted at women, such as “Race for the Cure” 21 and the pink ribbon campaign are an example of a successful education and outreach initiative that has increased risk perception. Women perceive breast cancer to be one of the largest health concerns they face today, despite the fact that six times more women die of stroke and heart disease 1 . Patient’s perception of high self-risk has been shown to be a reliable predictor of mammography screening rates 22 . Most women do not perceive stroke or heart disease to be a major health concern and report that they are not well informed about their risk 15 . The American Heart Association recent campaign “Go Red for heart disease” may serve as a vehicle to increase risk perception about heart disease and stroke.  Perception of Risk Risk perception, as is suggested by the Health Belief Model (HBM), is a key element in understanding how persons become motivated to change health behaviors 20 . Many factors such as: education, presence of disease specific symptoms, media campaigns, physician or peer recommendations, socio-economic variables or cultural beliefs can influence the likelihood of behavioral change. This model can be used to study the primary prevention of stroke, in that individual risk perception may modulate primary prevention measures such as blood pressure control, medication adherence or behavioral and lifestyle changes. In assessment of our model, stroke knowledge of risk factors or warning signs did not predict perception of risk. The number of risk factors also did not correlate with risk perception. This suggests that risk perception is a subjective measure, which is not entirely modulated by stroke knowledge or actual risk. Breast cancer campaigns targeted at women, such as “Race for the Cure” 21 and the pink ribbon campaign are an example of a successful education and outreach initiative that has increased risk perception. Women perceive breast cancer to be one of the largest health concerns they face today, despite the fact that six times more women die of stroke and heart disease 1 . Patient’s perception of high self-risk has been shown to be a reliable predictor of mammography screening rates 22 . Most women do not perceive stroke or heart disease to be a major health concern and report that they are not well informed about their risk 15 . The American Heart Association recent campaign “Go Red for heart disease” may serve as a vehicle to increase risk perception about heart disease and stroke.  Access to health care The patient population studied had increased access, considering that they had received specialty care within the past year at a Cardiology practice. However, even in this select population, there were barriers to optimal care. A proportion of women reported being unable to see a physician for a scheduled appointment in the past year because of cost. Whether this was a primary care visit or specialty visit was not reported. An even greater percentage was unable to take a medication because of cost in the past year. Efforts in education and increasing risk perception are undermined if high-risk populations are unable to obtain the advice, or the medications that are essential to reducing their stroke risk factors. Surprisingly, perception of risk was not related to access to a physician, or length of time since follow-up. This suggests that specialty physicians, treating conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and heart disease, are not emphasizing patient’s stroke risk in clinical encounters.  Access to health care The patient population studied had increased access, considering that they had received specialty care within the past year at a Cardiology practice. However, even in this select population, there were barriers to optimal care. A proportion of women reported being unable to see a physician for a scheduled appointment in the past year because of cost. Whether this was a primary care visit or specialty visit was not reported. An even greater percentage was unable to take a medication because of cost in the past year. Efforts in education and increasing risk perception are undermined if high-risk populations are unable to obtain the advice, or the medications that are essential to reducing their stroke risk factors. Surprisingly, perception of risk was not related to access to a physician, or length of time since follow-up. This suggests that specialty physicians, treating conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and heart disease, are not emphasizing patient’s stroke risk in clinical encounters.  Primary prevention Primary prevention is the goal, and the final step in our model, which is intrinsically dependent on access to care and adherence to treatment. In women, it has been shown that a healthy lifestyle, consisting of low body mass index, abstinence from smoking, moderate consumption of alcohol and health diet and regular exercise were associated with a lower incidence of ischemic and total stroke 1 . This survey did not address health outcomes, but even in this patient population who seeks regular specialty care, there were still women smoking, not taking aspirin with no contraindication not to do so, and with poorly controlled hypertension and cholesterol. Most surprisingly, more than a third of our sample with atrial fibrillation reported not taking warfarin. This population may represent a mix of women with true contraindications to warfarin use as well as reflect patients for whom physicians are averse to prescribing anticoagulation therapy. This is despite evidence that patients with a stroke and a history of atrial fibrillation, the majority are sub-therapeutic or not taking warfarin at the time of their event 23 . In addition, women with atrial fibrillation have higher rates of off-warfarin thromboembolic risk compared to men 24 , placing them at higher risk. There are several limitations of this study. As in all survey studies, there was a selection bias for women that returned the survey. Women were predominately white, and living in a suburban area and whether these results can be extended to a more urban, ethnically diverse population is unknown. It would be expected that barriers to primary prevention would be greater in such populations. In addition, all women were asked to identify warning signs and risk factors without any prompting, which would tend to underreport what women actually know. The benefit of this method is that there is a sense of relationships that women have between health and behavior, without cues. It is also possible that women do not identify medical terms such as “atrial fibrillation” unless they themselves have the condition.  Primary prevention Primary prevention is the goal, and the final step in our model, which is intrinsically dependent on access to care and adherence to treatment. In women, it has been shown that a healthy lifestyle, consisting of low body mass index, abstinence from smoking, moderate consumption of alcohol and health diet and regular exercise were associated with a lower incidence of ischemic and total stroke 1 . This survey did not address health outcomes, but even in this patient population who seeks regular specialty care, there were still women smoking, not taking aspirin with no contraindication not to do so, and with poorly controlled hypertension and cholesterol. Most surprisingly, more than a third of our sample with atrial fibrillation reported not taking warfarin. This population may represent a mix of women with true contraindications to warfarin use as well as reflect patients for whom physicians are averse to prescribing anticoagulation therapy. This is despite evidence that patients with a stroke and a history of atrial fibrillation, the majority are sub-therapeutic or not taking warfarin at the time of their event 23 . In addition, women with atrial fibrillation have higher rates of off-warfarin thromboembolic risk compared to men 24 , placing them at higher risk. There are several limitations of this study. As in all survey studies, there was a selection bias for women that returned the survey. Women were predominately white, and living in a suburban area and whether these results can be extended to a more urban, ethnically diverse population is unknown. It would be expected that barriers to primary prevention would be greater in such populations. In addition, all women were asked to identify warning signs and risk factors without any prompting, which would tend to underreport what women actually know. The benefit of this method is that there is a sense of relationships that women have between health and behavior, without cues. It is also possible that women do not identify medical terms such as “atrial fibrillation” unless they themselves have the condition.  Public Health Significance Peri-menopausal women have an increasing level of risk factors related to the metabolic syndrome and increased stroke rates, compared to men 8 . To reduce stroke risk, this population must be motivated to produce behavioral change. Risk perception is a parameter that is separate from stroke knowledge and presence of personal risk factors. This parameter may predict the likelihood of behavioral change for primary prevention efforts for reducing stroke risk, such as obtaining blood pressure goals, maintaining A1C below an acceptable level, quitting smoking, or increasing exercise. Our study shows that risk perception for stroke is generally low, and that women often do not identify their personal health conditions placing them at increased risk. Future education campaigns should target risk perception as an outcome measure to move toward reducing the burden that stroke places on all communities.  Public Health Significance Peri-menopausal women have an increasing level of risk factors related to the metabolic syndrome and increased stroke rates, compared to men 8 . To reduce stroke risk, this population must be motivated to produce behavioral change. Risk perception is a parameter that is separate from stroke knowledge and presence of personal risk factors. This parameter may predict the likelihood of behavioral change for primary prevention efforts for reducing stroke risk, such as obtaining blood pressure goals, maintaining A1C below an acceptable level, quitting smoking, or increasing exercise. Our study shows that risk perception for stroke is generally low, and that women often do not identify their personal health conditions placing them at increased risk. Future education campaigns should target risk perception as an outcome measure to move toward reducing the burden that stroke places on all communities.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Research model We hypothesized that a woman’s risk factors for stroke and risk perception, as well as her access to medical care, would mediate the success of primary prevention measures. We also predicted that health literacy measures, such as education and knowledge of stroke warning signs/risk factors would predict perceived risk. Figure 2 A) Warning signs of stroke and B) Identification of personal risk factors A) Shown is the percentage of women who identified a particular warning sign for stroke. Subjects were asked to list up to five warning signs. Only the above responses were coded. B) RF=risk factor; HBP=high blood pressure; Chol=high cholesterol; Tob=lifetime tobacco use; DM=Diabetes Mellitus; HD/MI=heart disease or myocardial infarction; CS=carotid stenosis; A Fib =atrial fibrillation; Total= # women responding The dark grey bar identifies the number of women who had the particular risk factor and identified it as a risk factor for stroke. The light grey bar is the number of women responding to the question. The difference between the two bars is the number of women with a particular risk factor who did not identify it as a risk factor for stroke. Table 1 Sample characteristics Sample Characteristics N % Mean age (years) 63.0 +/? 7.2 Race   White 194 91.5   Black 12 5.6   Other 6 2.9 Marital Status   Married 124 57.9   Divorced/Separated 44 21.5   Widowed 24 11.2   Never Married 22 10.3 Income   <$25,000 42 21.6   $25,000 to 34,999 22 11.3   $35,000 to 49,999 22 11.3   $50,000 to 74,999 44 22.7   $75,000+ 64 33.1 Education   Some high school or less 17 8   High school diploma or GED 43 20.2   Some college or trade school 47 22.1   College degree 45 21.1   Graduate or professional school 61 28.6 Table 2 A) Presence of risk factors and B) Identification of risk factors A) Have Risk Factor N % B) Identified Risk Factor N % Hypertension 162 76.4 Hypertension 154 71.6 High cholesterol 157 77.3 Smoking 135 62.8 Smoke ever 111 52.4 Overweight 122 56.7 Diabetes 68 32.5 High cholesterol 116 54 Angina/coronary artery disease 55 27 Lack of exercise 102 47.4 Atrial fibrillation 37 17.8 Diabetes 78 36.3 Carotid stenosis 37 17.9 Poor diet 74 34.4 Prior heart attack 36 17.1 Increased stress 46 21.5 Prior stroke/TIA 23 11.1 Heart disease/CAD 35 16.3 Smoke currently 15 7.1 Carotid stenosis/ atherosclerosis 16 7.9 Atrial fibrillation 7 3.3 Table 3 A) Perception of risk and B) Multivariate analysis: Predictors of Risk Perception *ENTER method Perception of risk was the dependent variable. Variables included in model but with B values not significant include: perceived health; prior stroke; prior TIA; carotid artery stenosis; smoking (100 lifetime); and HMO coverage. As can be seen, worrying about stroke was the most significant predictor of risk perception, followed by perceiving that other women are at risk for stroke. A woman having either hypertension or diabetes contributed moderately to the dependent variable. Notable omissions in the model include socio-demographic characteristics, stroke knowledge of warning signs and risk factors, which was not significant under bivariate correlations. A) Mean +/? SD N % Mean risk perception 5.7 +/? 2.3 (scale 1 to 10) Perception of other women’s risk (scale 1 to 10) 5.5+/?1.7 Worry about stroke   Never/rarely 147 71.0   Sometimes/frequently 60 29.0 Perceived Health   Poor/fair 74 35.4   Good/excellent 135 64.6 B) B p Confidence Interval Semipartial Correlation Other women’s risk of stroke .336 <.001 .175 to .498 .249 Worry about stroke .734 <.001 .422 to 1.045 .282 Have hypertension .686 .037 .043 to 1.330 .128 Have diabetes .893 .004 .298 to 1.489 .090  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Research model We hypothesized that a woman’s risk factors for stroke and risk perception, as well as her access to medical care, would mediate the success of primary prevention measures. We also predicted that health literacy measures, such as education and knowledge of stroke warning signs/risk factors would predict perceived risk. Figure 2 A) Warning signs of stroke and B) Identification of personal risk factors A) Shown is the percentage of women who identified a particular warning sign for stroke. Subjects were asked to list up to five warning signs. Only the above responses were coded. B) RF=risk factor; HBP=high blood pressure; Chol=high cholesterol; Tob=lifetime tobacco use; DM=Diabetes Mellitus; HD/MI=heart disease or myocardial infarction; CS=carotid stenosis; A Fib =atrial fibrillation; Total= # women responding The dark grey bar identifies the number of women who had the particular risk factor and identified it as a risk factor for stroke. The light grey bar is the number of women responding to the question. The difference between the two bars is the number of women with a particular risk factor who did not identify it as a risk factor for stroke. Table 1 Sample characteristics Sample Characteristics N % Mean age (years) 63.0 +/? 7.2 Race   White 194 91.5   Black 12 5.6   Other 6 2.9 Marital Status   Married 124 57.9   Divorced/Separated 44 21.5   Widowed 24 11.2   Never Married 22 10.3 Income   <$25,000 42 21.6   $25,000 to 34,999 22 11.3   $35,000 to 49,999 22 11.3   $50,000 to 74,999 44 22.7   $75,000+ 64 33.1 Education   Some high school or less 17 8   High school diploma or GED 43 20.2   Some college or trade school 47 22.1   College degree 45 21.1   Graduate or professional school 61 28.6 Table 2 A) Presence of risk factors and B) Identification of risk factors A) Have Risk Factor N % B) Identified Risk Factor N % Hypertension 162 76.4 Hypertension 154 71.6 High cholesterol 157 77.3 Smoking 135 62.8 Smoke ever 111 52.4 Overweight 122 56.7 Diabetes 68 32.5 High cholesterol 116 54 Angina/coronary artery disease 55 27 Lack of exercise 102 47.4 Atrial fibrillation 37 17.8 Diabetes 78 36.3 Carotid stenosis 37 17.9 Poor diet 74 34.4 Prior heart attack 36 17.1 Increased stress 46 21.5 Prior stroke/TIA 23 11.1 Heart disease/CAD 35 16.3 Smoke currently 15 7.1 Carotid stenosis/ atherosclerosis 16 7.9 Atrial fibrillation 7 3.3 Table 3 A) Perception of risk and B) Multivariate analysis: Predictors of Risk Perception *ENTER method Perception of risk was the dependent variable. Variables included in model but with B values not significant include: perceived health; prior stroke; prior TIA; carotid artery stenosis; smoking (100 lifetime); and HMO coverage. As can be seen, worrying about stroke was the most significant predictor of risk perception, followed by perceiving that other women are at risk for stroke. A woman having either hypertension or diabetes contributed moderately to the dependent variable. Notable omissions in the model include socio-demographic characteristics, stroke knowledge of warning signs and risk factors, which was not significant under bivariate correlations. A) Mean +/? SD N % Mean risk perception 5.7 +/? 2.3 (scale 1 to 10) Perception of other women’s risk (scale 1 to 10) 5.5+/?1.7 Worry about stroke   Never/rarely 147 71.0   Sometimes/frequently 60 29.0 Perceived Health   Poor/fair 74 35.4   Good/excellent 135 64.6 B) B p Confidence Interval Semipartial Correlation Other women’s risk of stroke .336 <.001 .175 to .498 .249 Worry about stroke .734 <.001 .422 to 1.045 .282 Have hypertension .686 .037 .043 to 1.330 .128 Have diabetes .893 .004 .298 to 1.489 .090 