ChIP-seq accurately predicts tissue-specific activity of enhancers A major yet unresolved quest in decoding the human genome is the identification of the regulatory sequences that control the spatial and temporal expression of genes. Distant-acting transcriptional enhancers are particularly challenging to uncover because they are scattered among the vast non-coding portion of the genome. Evolutionary sequence constraint can facilitate the discovery of enhancers, but fails to predict when and where they are active in vivo . Here we present the results of chromatin immunoprecipitation with the enhancer-associated protein p300 followed by massively parallel sequencing, and map several thousand in vivo binding sites of p300 in mouse embryonic forebrain, midbrain and limb tissue. We tested 86 of these sequences in a transgenic mouse assay, which in nearly all cases demonstrated reproducible enhancer activity in the tissues that were predicted by p300 binding. Our results indicate that in vivo mapping of p300 binding is a highly accurate means for identifying enhancers and their associated activities, and suggest that such data sets will be useful to study the role of tissue-specific enhancers in human biology and disease on a genome-wide scale.  METHODS SUMMARY Embryonic forebrain, midbrain and limb tissue was isolated from mouse embryos at E11.5. Cross-linking, chromatin isolation, sonication and immuno-precipitation using an anti-p300 antibody were performed as previously described 40 , 46 . ChIP DNA was further sheared by sonication, end-repaired, ligated to sequencing adapters and amplified by emulsion PCR as previously described 47 . Gel-purified amplified ChIP DNA between 300 and 500 bp was sequenced on the Illumina Genome Analyzer II platform to generate 36-bp reads. Sequence reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome (mm9) using BLAT 48 . Uniquely aligned reads were extended to 300 bp in the 3? direction and used to determine the read coverage at individual nucleotides at 25-bp intervals throughout the mouse genome. p300-enriched regions (peaks) with an estimated FDR of ? 0.01 were identified by comparison with a random distribution of the same number of reads. Candidate peaks mapping to repetitive regions were removed as probable artefacts. Candidate regions for transgenic testing were selected based on ChIP-seq results and cover a wide spectrum of conservation. Enhancer candidate regions were amplified by PCR from human genomic DNA and cloned into an Hsp68-promoter-LacZ reporter vector as previously described 6 , 31 . Transgenic mouse embryos were generated and evaluated for reproducible LacZ activity at E11.5 as previously described 6 . Total RNA from E11.5 whole embryos and forebrain tissue was hybridized to GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix) and analysed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Forebrain- and whole-embryo-enriched genes were identified as having at least 2.5-fold greater expression in one data set compared with the other, and a minimum signal intensity of 100. Limb-enriched genes were identified by comparison with publicly available wild-type E11.5 proximal hindlimb gene expression data (Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) series GSE10516, samples GSM264689, GSM264690 and GSM264691) 49 .  METHODS Tissue dissection and chromatin immunoprecipitation Embryonic forebrain, midbrain and limb tissue was isolated from timed-pregnant CD-1 strain mouse embryos at E11.5 by microdissection in cold PBS along the anatomical boundaries indicated in Fig. 1 . Tissue samples were cross-linked (1% formaldehyde, 10 ?M NaCl, 100 mM EDTA, 50 ?M EGTA, 5 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) for 15 min at room temperature. Cross-linking was terminated by the addition of 125 mM glycine and cells were dissociated in a glass douncer. Chromatin isolation, sonication and immunoprecipitation were performed as previously described 40 , 46 .In brief, 1 mg of sonicated chromatin (OD260) was incubated with 10 ?g of antibody (rabbit polyclonal anti-p300 (C-20), Santa Cruz Biotechnology) coupled to IgG magnetic beads (Dynal Biotech) overnight at 4 °C. The magnetic beads were washed eight times with RIPA buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.7% DOC and 0.5 M LiCl, supplemented with complete protease inhibitors from Roche Applied Science), and washed once with TE buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA). After washing, bound DNA was eluted at 65 °C in elution buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA and 1% SDS) for 10 min and incubated at 65 °C overnight to reverse cross-links. After the reversal of cross-linking, immunoprecipitated DNA was treated sequentially with proteinase K and RNase A, and desalted using the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). Amplification and Illumina sequencing of ChIP DNA ChIP DNA was quantified by Qubit assay HS kit. Approximately 0.1 ng of each ChIP DNA sample was sheared using Sonicator XL2020 (Misonix) with a microplate horn for 10 min at 55% power output and 90% amplitude. Sheared ChIP DNA extract was end-repaired using the End-It DNA End-Repair Kit (Epicentre). Illumina adapters (56 bp and 34 bp) were ligated using T4 DNA ligase (5 U ?l?1, Fermentas) and recovered using a MinElute Reaction Cleanup Kit (Qiagen). Linker ligated ChIP DNA was amplified by emulsion PCR for 40 cycles as previously described 47 . Amplified ChIP DNA between 300 and 500 bp was gel purified on 2% agarose and sequenced on the Illumina Genome Analyzer II according to the manufacturer's instructions except that emulsion PCR-amplified DNA containing the GA2 sequencing adaptor was applied directly to the cluster station for bridge amplification. The resulting flow-cell was sequenced for 36 cycles to generate 36-bp reads. Processing of Illumina sequence data Unfiltered 36-bp Illumina sequence reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome (NCBI build 37, mm9) using BLAT 48 with optional parameters (minScore = 20, minIdentity = 80, stepSize = 5). BLAT was performed in parallel on a sge-cluster. For each read, the two highest-scoring alignments were compared and reads were rejected as repetitive unless the score of the best alignment was at least two greater than that of the second best alignment. The remaining reads were further filtered to reject those with a BLAT alignment score <21, with >1 bp insertion or deletion, or with >2 unaligned bases at the start of the read. Finally, reads with identical start sites in the mouse genome were considered likely to be duplicate sequences arising as an artefact of sample amplification or sequencing, and were counted only once. The remaining reads were classed as uniquely aligned to the mouse genome. Uniquely aligned reads were extended to 300 bp in the 3? direction to account for the average length of size-selected p300 ChIP fragments used for sequencing. These extended read coordinates were used to determine the read coverage at individual nucleotides at 25 bp intervals throughout the mouse genome. This data was used to produce coverage plots for visualization in the UCSC genome browser. To identify p300-enriched regions (peaks), we compared the observed frequency of coverage depths with those expected from a random distribution of the same number of reads generated computationally as described previously 17 . In brief, the probability of observing a peak with a coverage depth of at least H reads is given by a sum of Poisson probabilities as: 1 ? ? k = 0 H ? 1 e ? ? ? k k ! in which ? is the average genome-wide coverage of extended reads given by: (read length × number of aligned reads)/alignable genome length. To estimate the alignable genome length, one million randomly selected 36-base-polymers from the mouse genome were realigned to the mouse genome using the same alignment and filtering scheme as for reads. A total of 77.3% of 36-base-polymers were uniquely mapped back to the mouse genome, resulting in an alignable genome length of 2.107 Gb. For each sample, we determined the read coverage depth at which the observed frequency of sites with that coverage exceeded the expected frequency by a factor of 100 (FDR ? 0.01). Candidate peaks were identified as sites in which the coverage exceeded this threshold, and peak boundaries were extended to the nearest flanking positions at which read coverage fell below two reads. All consecutive regions of enrichment separated by regions of continuous coverage greater than two reads were merged into a single peak. Candidate peaks mapping to chr_random contigs, centromeric regions, telomeric regions, segmental duplications, satellite repeats, ribosomal RNA repeats or regions of >70% repeat sequence, and those coinciding with enriched regions in the control sample (input DNA) were removed as probable artefacts due to misalignment of heterochromatic sequences that are not at present represented in the mouse reference genome sequence. The remaining peaks represent high-confidence p300-enriched regions and putative enhancers with activity in specific tissues. Annotation of p300 ChIP-seq read data sets with respect to nearby genes (UCSC known genes 50 ), internal exons (mouse RefSeq 51 exons >30 kb from the ends of transcripts) and conserved non-coding sequences (top 50,000 constrained non-coding human-mouse-rat conserved elements identified using GUMBY with R -ratio parameter R = 50; refs 9 , 11 ) was performed using Galaxy 52 and custom Perl scripts. Annotation of p300-enriched regions with respect to UCSC known genes and vertebrate phastCons elements 34 was performed using custom Perl scripts. Transgenic mouse enhancer assay Candidate regions for transgenic testing were selected based on ChIP-seq results. Peaks for which human orthologous regions could not be unambiguously established and those without detectable conservation in opossum 53 were excluded from transgenic testing. Thus, the tested peaks cover a wide spectrum of conservation, but are overall more constrained than all peaks identified genome-wide (median score of 457 for all peaks versus 626 for tested peaks). Enhancer candidate regions (average size of 2.4 kb) were amplified by PCR from human genomic DNA (Clontech) and cloned into an Hsp68-promoter-LacZ reporter vector upstream of an Hsp68-promoter coupled to a LacZ reporter gene as previously described 6 , 31 . Candidate sequences were not cloned in any particular orientation, effectively resulting in randomized insert orientation among the test constructs. Genomic coordinates of amplified regions are reported in Supplementary Table 5 . Transgenic mouse embryos were generated by pronuclear injection and F0 embryos were collected at E11.5 and stained for LacZ activity as previously described 6 . Only patterns that were observed in at least three different embryos resulting from independent transgenic integration events of the same construct were considered reproducible (see Supplementary Table 5 ). To account for minor variation in separating forebrain from midbrain during tissue dissection, forebrain and midbrain p300 peaks were also considered correct predictions if the reproducible in vivo pattern was located in the forebrain/midbrain boundary region, whereas absence of a p300 peak was only considered a false-negative prediction if the reproducible in vivo pattern clearly extended beyond the boundary region. Microarrays Tissue was isolated from timed-pregnant CD-1 strain mouse embryos at E11.5. Forebrains were further subdivided into basal telencephalon (subpallium), dorsal telencephalon (pallium), and diencephalon, which were processed separately in subsequent steps. For comparison, whole embryos (littermates) were collected. All samples were collected, processed and hybridized in duplicate. Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). Synthesis of complementary RNA, hybridization to GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix) and analysis of hybridization results was performed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. For each sample, the average expression value from duplicates was used for downstream analyses. Forebrain-enriched genes were defined as those with expression at least 2.5-fold greater expression in at least one of the three forebrain regions compared with the whole embryo, and with a minimum signal intensity of 100. Whole embryo-enriched genes are defined as those with at least 2.5-fold greater expression in the whole embryo than in each of the three forebrain regions, and a minimum signal intensity of 100. Distances between p300 peaks and the 5? end of Affymetrix consensus complementary DNA sequences from mouse MOE430 (A and B) aligned to the mouse reference genome (mm9) were used to determine the closest forebrain-enriched and whole embryo-enriched genes ( Supplementary Tables 8 and 9 ). The same procedure was used to analyse the correlation of limb p300 peaks with limb gene expression, except that limb expressed genes were identified by comparison of publicly available wild-type E11.5 proximal hind-limb gene expression data (GEO series GSE10516, samples GSM264689, GSM264690 and GSM264691) 49 , with the whole embryo gene expression data generated in the present study ( Supplementary Tables 10 and 11 ). Animal work All animal work was performed in accordance with protocols reviewed and approved by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Animal Welfare and Research Committee.  Tissue dissection and chromatin immunoprecipitation Embryonic forebrain, midbrain and limb tissue was isolated from timed-pregnant CD-1 strain mouse embryos at E11.5 by microdissection in cold PBS along the anatomical boundaries indicated in Fig. 1 . Tissue samples were cross-linked (1% formaldehyde, 10 ?M NaCl, 100 mM EDTA, 50 ?M EGTA, 5 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) for 15 min at room temperature. Cross-linking was terminated by the addition of 125 mM glycine and cells were dissociated in a glass douncer. Chromatin isolation, sonication and immunoprecipitation were performed as previously described 40 , 46 .In brief, 1 mg of sonicated chromatin (OD260) was incubated with 10 ?g of antibody (rabbit polyclonal anti-p300 (C-20), Santa Cruz Biotechnology) coupled to IgG magnetic beads (Dynal Biotech) overnight at 4 °C. The magnetic beads were washed eight times with RIPA buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.7% DOC and 0.5 M LiCl, supplemented with complete protease inhibitors from Roche Applied Science), and washed once with TE buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA). After washing, bound DNA was eluted at 65 °C in elution buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA and 1% SDS) for 10 min and incubated at 65 °C overnight to reverse cross-links. After the reversal of cross-linking, immunoprecipitated DNA was treated sequentially with proteinase K and RNase A, and desalted using the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen).  Amplification and Illumina sequencing of ChIP DNA ChIP DNA was quantified by Qubit assay HS kit. Approximately 0.1 ng of each ChIP DNA sample was sheared using Sonicator XL2020 (Misonix) with a microplate horn for 10 min at 55% power output and 90% amplitude. Sheared ChIP DNA extract was end-repaired using the End-It DNA End-Repair Kit (Epicentre). Illumina adapters (56 bp and 34 bp) were ligated using T4 DNA ligase (5 U ?l?1, Fermentas) and recovered using a MinElute Reaction Cleanup Kit (Qiagen). Linker ligated ChIP DNA was amplified by emulsion PCR for 40 cycles as previously described 47 . Amplified ChIP DNA between 300 and 500 bp was gel purified on 2% agarose and sequenced on the Illumina Genome Analyzer II according to the manufacturer's instructions except that emulsion PCR-amplified DNA containing the GA2 sequencing adaptor was applied directly to the cluster station for bridge amplification. The resulting flow-cell was sequenced for 36 cycles to generate 36-bp reads.  Processing of Illumina sequence data Unfiltered 36-bp Illumina sequence reads were aligned to the mouse reference genome (NCBI build 37, mm9) using BLAT 48 with optional parameters (minScore = 20, minIdentity = 80, stepSize = 5). BLAT was performed in parallel on a sge-cluster. For each read, the two highest-scoring alignments were compared and reads were rejected as repetitive unless the score of the best alignment was at least two greater than that of the second best alignment. The remaining reads were further filtered to reject those with a BLAT alignment score <21, with >1 bp insertion or deletion, or with >2 unaligned bases at the start of the read. Finally, reads with identical start sites in the mouse genome were considered likely to be duplicate sequences arising as an artefact of sample amplification or sequencing, and were counted only once. The remaining reads were classed as uniquely aligned to the mouse genome. Uniquely aligned reads were extended to 300 bp in the 3? direction to account for the average length of size-selected p300 ChIP fragments used for sequencing. These extended read coordinates were used to determine the read coverage at individual nucleotides at 25 bp intervals throughout the mouse genome. This data was used to produce coverage plots for visualization in the UCSC genome browser. To identify p300-enriched regions (peaks), we compared the observed frequency of coverage depths with those expected from a random distribution of the same number of reads generated computationally as described previously 17 . In brief, the probability of observing a peak with a coverage depth of at least H reads is given by a sum of Poisson probabilities as: 1 ? ? k = 0 H ? 1 e ? ? ? k k ! in which ? is the average genome-wide coverage of extended reads given by: (read length × number of aligned reads)/alignable genome length. To estimate the alignable genome length, one million randomly selected 36-base-polymers from the mouse genome were realigned to the mouse genome using the same alignment and filtering scheme as for reads. A total of 77.3% of 36-base-polymers were uniquely mapped back to the mouse genome, resulting in an alignable genome length of 2.107 Gb. For each sample, we determined the read coverage depth at which the observed frequency of sites with that coverage exceeded the expected frequency by a factor of 100 (FDR ? 0.01). Candidate peaks were identified as sites in which the coverage exceeded this threshold, and peak boundaries were extended to the nearest flanking positions at which read coverage fell below two reads. All consecutive regions of enrichment separated by regions of continuous coverage greater than two reads were merged into a single peak. Candidate peaks mapping to chr_random contigs, centromeric regions, telomeric regions, segmental duplications, satellite repeats, ribosomal RNA repeats or regions of >70% repeat sequence, and those coinciding with enriched regions in the control sample (input DNA) were removed as probable artefacts due to misalignment of heterochromatic sequences that are not at present represented in the mouse reference genome sequence. The remaining peaks represent high-confidence p300-enriched regions and putative enhancers with activity in specific tissues. Annotation of p300 ChIP-seq read data sets with respect to nearby genes (UCSC known genes 50 ), internal exons (mouse RefSeq 51 exons >30 kb from the ends of transcripts) and conserved non-coding sequences (top 50,000 constrained non-coding human-mouse-rat conserved elements identified using GUMBY with R -ratio parameter R = 50; refs 9 , 11 ) was performed using Galaxy 52 and custom Perl scripts. Annotation of p300-enriched regions with respect to UCSC known genes and vertebrate phastCons elements 34 was performed using custom Perl scripts.  Transgenic mouse enhancer assay Candidate regions for transgenic testing were selected based on ChIP-seq results. Peaks for which human orthologous regions could not be unambiguously established and those without detectable conservation in opossum 53 were excluded from transgenic testing. Thus, the tested peaks cover a wide spectrum of conservation, but are overall more constrained than all peaks identified genome-wide (median score of 457 for all peaks versus 626 for tested peaks). Enhancer candidate regions (average size of 2.4 kb) were amplified by PCR from human genomic DNA (Clontech) and cloned into an Hsp68-promoter-LacZ reporter vector upstream of an Hsp68-promoter coupled to a LacZ reporter gene as previously described 6 , 31 . Candidate sequences were not cloned in any particular orientation, effectively resulting in randomized insert orientation among the test constructs. Genomic coordinates of amplified regions are reported in Supplementary Table 5 . Transgenic mouse embryos were generated by pronuclear injection and F0 embryos were collected at E11.5 and stained for LacZ activity as previously described 6 . Only patterns that were observed in at least three different embryos resulting from independent transgenic integration events of the same construct were considered reproducible (see Supplementary Table 5 ). To account for minor variation in separating forebrain from midbrain during tissue dissection, forebrain and midbrain p300 peaks were also considered correct predictions if the reproducible in vivo pattern was located in the forebrain/midbrain boundary region, whereas absence of a p300 peak was only considered a false-negative prediction if the reproducible in vivo pattern clearly extended beyond the boundary region.  Microarrays Tissue was isolated from timed-pregnant CD-1 strain mouse embryos at E11.5. Forebrains were further subdivided into basal telencephalon (subpallium), dorsal telencephalon (pallium), and diencephalon, which were processed separately in subsequent steps. For comparison, whole embryos (littermates) were collected. All samples were collected, processed and hybridized in duplicate. Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). Synthesis of complementary RNA, hybridization to GeneChip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays (Affymetrix) and analysis of hybridization results was performed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. For each sample, the average expression value from duplicates was used for downstream analyses. Forebrain-enriched genes were defined as those with expression at least 2.5-fold greater expression in at least one of the three forebrain regions compared with the whole embryo, and with a minimum signal intensity of 100. Whole embryo-enriched genes are defined as those with at least 2.5-fold greater expression in the whole embryo than in each of the three forebrain regions, and a minimum signal intensity of 100. Distances between p300 peaks and the 5? end of Affymetrix consensus complementary DNA sequences from mouse MOE430 (A and B) aligned to the mouse reference genome (mm9) were used to determine the closest forebrain-enriched and whole embryo-enriched genes ( Supplementary Tables 8 and 9 ). The same procedure was used to analyse the correlation of limb p300 peaks with limb gene expression, except that limb expressed genes were identified by comparison of publicly available wild-type E11.5 proximal hind-limb gene expression data (GEO series GSE10516, samples GSM264689, GSM264690 and GSM264691) 49 , with the whole embryo gene expression data generated in the present study ( Supplementary Tables 10 and 11 ).  Animal work All animal work was performed in accordance with protocols reviewed and approved by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Animal Welfare and Research Committee.  Supplementary Material Supp 1 Supp 2 Supp 3 Supp 4  Figures Figure 1 Tissue dissection boundaries, overview of the ChIP-seq approach and summary of p300 results Tissue dissection boundaries are indicated in a representative unstained E11.5 mouse embryo. For each sample, tissue was pooled from more than 150 embryos and ChIP-seq was performed with a p300-antibody. Reads obtained for each of the three tissues that unambiguously aligned to the reference mouse genome were used to define peaks (FDR < 0.01). A more comprehensive overview of sequencing and mapping results is provided in Supplementary Table 1 . fb, forebrain; li, limb; mb, midbrain. Figure 2 p300 binding accurately predicts enhancers and their tissue-specific activity patterns Bar height indicates the frequency of in vivo enhancers (reproducible at E11.5) that are active in any tissue (grey bars and coloured bars) and the fraction of enhancers in which the pattern includes or is restricted to reproducible forebrain (blue bars), midbrain (red bars) or limb activity (green bars). In each case, candidate elements predicted by p300 peaks in forebrain, midbrain or limb were compared to the frequency of the respective pattern in a background set of 528 previously tested sequences identified through extreme evolutionary conservation (combined data sets from refs 10 and 11 ). The component activities of elements predicted to be active in several tissues were counted separately. * P < 0.00005, Fisher's exact test, one-tailed. Figure 3 Examples of successful prediction of <italic>in vivo</italic> enhancers by p300 binding in embryonic tissues a, Coverage by extended p300 reads in forebrain (blue), midbrain (red) and limb (green). Asterisks indicate significant (FDR < 0.01) p300 enrichment in chromatin isolated from the respective tissue. Multispecies vertebrate conservation plots (black) were obtained from the UCSC genome browser 50 . Grey boxes correspond to candidate enhancer regions. Numbers at the right indicate overlapping extended reads. b, Representative LacZ-stained embryos with in vivo enhancer activity at E11.5. Reproducible staining in forebrain, midbrain and limb is indicated by arrows. Numbers show the reproducibility of LacZ reporter staining. Additional embryos obtained with each construct and genomic coordinates are available using the enhancer ID in the bottom portion of a at the Vista Enhancer Browser 32 . Figure 4 In all tissues examined, p300 is enriched at highly conserved non-coding regions We used a genome-wide set of 50,000 extremely constrained non-coding sequences identified in human-mouse-rat genome alignments 11 to assess the correlation between p300 enrichment and non-coding sequence conservation. Even though only subsets of the constrained non-coding elements are expected to be active enhancers in any given embryonic tissue, we observe strong enrichment in p300 binding in all three tissues compared to input DNA. * P < 1 × 10?100, Fisher's exact test. Relative p300 coverage near random sites and internal exons is shown for comparison. Brown bars indicate the median sizes of conserved elements or exons (124 bp in both cases). For further details, see Supplementary Table 7 . Figure 5 p300 peaks are enriched near genes that are expressed in the same tissue We compared the genome-wide distribution of p300-enriched regions in forebrain tissue at E11.5 with microarray expression data for forebrain at the same stage. Eight-hundred-and-eighty-five genes were forebrain-specifically overexpressed, and 495 genes were underexpressed relative to whole embryo RNA at the selected thresholds. Promoters (defined as 1 kb upstream and downstream of transcription start sites) were excluded from the analysis. Blue bars denote comparison to 2,435 forebrain-derived peaks, grey bars denote comparison to 2,435 random sites. a, Ten-kilobase bins up to 91 kb away from forebrain-overexpressed genes were significantly enriched in forebrain p300 peaks. b, No peak enrichment was observed for forebrain-underexpressed genes. Error bars indicate the 90% confidence interval on the basis of 1,000 iterations of randomized distribution. * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, both one-tailed.  Discussion In the present study, we have determined the genome-wide distribution of the transcriptional coactivator protein p300 (ref. 23 ) using ChIP-seq 17 directly from developing mouse tissues. Notably, enrichment of p300 in different mouse tissues correctly predicted the spatial enhancer activities of human non-coding sequences in 80% of cases tested in a transgenic mouse assay, whereas absence of p300 enrichment correlated in 93% of cases with absence of enhancer activity in the respective tissue ( Supplementary Table 5 ). The few elements that did not drive reporter gene expression in the tissue predicted by p300 ChIP-seq may represent cases in which the function of regulatory elements has diverged between the mouse sequences identified by ChIP-seq and the human orthologous regions tested in the transgenic mouse assay. In support of this hypothesis, we observed several cases in which the non-coding p300-bound region from mouse, but not the orthologous human sequence, had reproducible enhancer activities as predicted by p300 ChIP-seq from mouse tissues (data not shown). Taken together, the present approach provides a markedly improved specificity for locating enhancers in the human genome compared to conservation-based methods 10 , 11 and also predicts their in vivo activity patterns with higher accuracy than motif-based computational methods available at present (for example, refs 35 , 36 ). Most p300-binding regions identified in developing mouse tissues are under detectable evolutionary constraint. They typically overlap conserved non-coding sequences whose length (median of 113 bp) far exceeds that of an individual transcription factor binding site, suggesting the presence of larger functional modules. In cell culture-based chromatin studies, a sizeable fraction of non-coding regions in the human genome was found to be functional yet not constrained 13 , 14 . This apparent discrepancy might be due to differences in evolutionary constraint between enhancers active in developing tissues compared to those in individual cell types, but highlights the intrinsic challenge of inferring in vivo functionality from studies in cell culture. A generalized picture of the epigenetic marks and proteins associated with different types of functional non-coding elements has started to emerge from genome-wide chromatin studies 13 , 18 , 28 , 37 - 41 . We can now begin to use these signatures to unravel gene regulation on a genomic scale in the context of living organisms. The highly specific approach for identification of developmental enhancers and their activity patterns presented here represents a step in this direction. Complementary in-vivo -derived genomic data sets may be produced in the future, covering additional embryonic stages, anatomical regions and subregions, and perhaps considering extra molecular markers 28 , 42 - 45 . Focused experiments informed by such insights will expedite studies of the genome-wide activity dynamics of enhancers in developmental, physiological and pathological processes.  Discussion In the present study, we have determined the genome-wide distribution of the transcriptional coactivator protein p300 (ref. 23 ) using ChIP-seq 17 directly from developing mouse tissues. Notably, enrichment of p300 in different mouse tissues correctly predicted the spatial enhancer activities of human non-coding sequences in 80% of cases tested in a transgenic mouse assay, whereas absence of p300 enrichment correlated in 93% of cases with absence of enhancer activity in the respective tissue ( Supplementary Table 5 ). The few elements that did not drive reporter gene expression in the tissue predicted by p300 ChIP-seq may represent cases in which the function of regulatory elements has diverged between the mouse sequences identified by ChIP-seq and the human orthologous regions tested in the transgenic mouse assay. In support of this hypothesis, we observed several cases in which the non-coding p300-bound region from mouse, but not the orthologous human sequence, had reproducible enhancer activities as predicted by p300 ChIP-seq from mouse tissues (data not shown). Taken together, the present approach provides a markedly improved specificity for locating enhancers in the human genome compared to conservation-based methods 10 , 11 and also predicts their in vivo activity patterns with higher accuracy than motif-based computational methods available at present (for example, refs 35 , 36 ). Most p300-binding regions identified in developing mouse tissues are under detectable evolutionary constraint. They typically overlap conserved non-coding sequences whose length (median of 113 bp) far exceeds that of an individual transcription factor binding site, suggesting the presence of larger functional modules. In cell culture-based chromatin studies, a sizeable fraction of non-coding regions in the human genome was found to be functional yet not constrained 13 , 14 . This apparent discrepancy might be due to differences in evolutionary constraint between enhancers active in developing tissues compared to those in individual cell types, but highlights the intrinsic challenge of inferring in vivo functionality from studies in cell culture. A generalized picture of the epigenetic marks and proteins associated with different types of functional non-coding elements has started to emerge from genome-wide chromatin studies 13 , 18 , 28 , 37 - 41 . We can now begin to use these signatures to unravel gene regulation on a genomic scale in the context of living organisms. The highly specific approach for identification of developmental enhancers and their activity patterns presented here represents a step in this direction. Complementary in-vivo -derived genomic data sets may be produced in the future, covering additional embryonic stages, anatomical regions and subregions, and perhaps considering extra molecular markers 28 , 42 - 45 . Focused experiments informed by such insights will expedite studies of the genome-wide activity dynamics of enhancers in developmental, physiological and pathological processes. 