Hypoxia, melanocytes and melanoma – survival and tumor development in the permissive microenvironment of the skin Summary The tissue microenvironment plays a critical role in cell survival and growth and can contribute to cell transformation and tumor development. Cellular interactions with the stroma and with other cells provide key signals that control cellular arrest or division, survival or death, and entrance or exit from a quiescent state. Together, these decisions are essential for maintenance of tissue homeostasis. Tissue oxygenation is an important component of the microenvironment that can acutely alter the behavior of a cell through the direct regulation of genes involved in cell survival, apoptosis, glucose metabolism, and angiogenesis. Loss of tissue homeostasis due to, for example, oncogene activation leads to the disruption of these signals and eventually can lead to cell transformation and tumor development. Here we review the role of tissue oxygenation, and in particular physiologic skin hypoxia, on cell survival and senescence and how it contributes to melanocyte transformation and melanoma development.  Introduction Tissues become hypoxic when there is an inadequate supply of oxygen such that normal biologic functions are compromised. This is often a result of pathological conditions such as acute and chronic vascular disease, pulmonary disease and cancer. For the most part hypoxia has been studied in solid tumors, where it has long been known to adversely affect the sensitivity of tumors to radiation therapy. Hypoxia has recently been shown to increase mutation frequency, to exert a selective pressure for survival of those cells with lower apoptotic potential, to alter the expression of genes involved in cell cycle regulation and cytokine production, and to impact treatment outcome and patient survival (for review on this topic see Chan et al., 2007 ). Although hypoxia and its mediators hypoxia-inducible factor-1 and 2 (HIF-1, HIF-2) have been studied more extensively in association with pathological conditions, recently, a role for these factors in the regulation of normal cell functions and tissue homeostasis has emerged. Here we will review the influence of physiologic tissue hypoxia in melanocyte survival and transformation and how tumor hypoxia can effect melanoma progression and metastasis.  Hypoxia and hypoxia inducible factors Cells respond to hypoxia by activating the heterodimeric transcription factors HIF-1 and HIF-2 which are composed of HIF- ? and the constitutively expressed ARNT subunits. Under normoxic or atmospheric O2 levels (21%), prolyl hydroxylase domain proteins (PHD1–3), hydroxylate key proline residues (Pro402 and Pro564 in HIF-1 ? and Pro405 and Pro531 in HIF-2 ? ) within the regulatory oxygen-dependent degradation domain (ODD) of the HIF- ? subunits, thus facilitating von Hippel-Lindau protein (pVHL) binding, which in turn allows ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasome-targeted degradation of HIF- ? ( Ivan et al., 2001 ; Jaakkola et al., 2001 ; Lofstedt et al., 2007 ; Yu et al., 2001 ). Under limiting O2 conditions, PHD function, which requires O2, is inhibited and proline hydroxylation does not occur, thereby HIF- ? subunits are stabilized. Once stable, HIF- ? translocates into the nucleus, binds to the ARNT subunit and to the coactivator p300CBP and starts HIF-1 or HIF-2 dependent gene transcription ( Figure 1 ). HIF-1 regulates most of the hypoxia-responsive genes and is the predominant transcription factor in most tissues ( Figure 2 ); HIF-2, although it shares the regulation of many genes with HIF-1, such as VEGF and EPO , is mainly found in the endothelium, brain, liver, kidney, lung and spleen. Studies suggest that HIF-2 may regulate specific genes independent of HIF-1. Perhaps, the best example found so far of HIF-2 specific genes is Oct4, a transcription factor essential for maintaining the pluripotency of stem cells ( Lofstedt et al., 2007 ) ( Figure 2 ). Although HIF-2 has been extensively studied in renal cell carcinoma where it has been shown to have an essential role in the genesis and maintenance of the disease, studies on HIF-2 function in other malignancies or in cell homeostasis are still in their infancy. HIF-1, on the other hand, has been better characterized in both normal and tumor cells and it has been shown to regulate a number of functions such as survival, apoptosis, glucose metabolism, and angiogenesis. Here, we will review the role of hypoxia in melanocyte survival and melanomagenesis with particular attention to the role of HIF-1.  Physiologic tissue oxygenation and melanocyte growth/survival Normal tissues are not typically exposed to the high levels of oxygen found in the environment (21% atmospheric O2). In vivo oxygen levels range from roughly 2–3% in the brain, liver, and myocardium; 9–10% in the spleen; and up to 13–14% in the alveoli of the lungs ( Vaupel et al., 1989 ). This observation suggest that commonly, cells in culture are exposed to hyperoxic conditions and that a more physiologic culture atmosphere should take into account the real oxygen concentration at which cells in the body are normally exposed. Interestingly, different groups have shown that cells, both of human and mouse origin, grow better in a mildly hypoxic environment (>1% O2) that more closely resembles the physiologic oxygen concentration of tissues. In 1977, Packer and Smith (1977) described the bene- fit of growing human cell lines in oxygen tensions lower than 21%. In more recent years, the effect of oxygen on cell growth has also been studied in primary cultures. For example, Studer et al. (2000) showed that CNS (central nervous system) precursors grown in 3% O2 display a higher growth rate and lower apoptosis. Minamino et al. (2001) have shown that hypoxia (1% O2) extends the lifespan of vascular smooth muscle cells, in part, by activating hTERT. Under atmospheric oxygen tension Alaluf et al. (2000) observed that a significant proportion of human dermal fibroblasts are rapidly induced to switch from a mitotic to a post-mitotic phenotype (aging). In contrast, under more physiological (4%) oxygen conditions, the induction of a post-mitotic phenotype is largely prevented, likely due to reduced oxidative stress. In fact, they also showed that increasing oxidative stress by addition of hydrogen peroxide or depletion of glutathione induced cellular aging, whereas addition of antioxidants under atmospheric oxygen tension potently inhibited this process. From all these studies it clearly emerges that different cell types benefit from low oxygen culture conditions. We and others have shown that both human and mouse skin is mildly hypoxic and that the skin oxygen levels are sufficient to allow HIF-1 ? stabilization and expression of hypoxia markers such as carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) and glucose transporter-1 (Glut-1) ( Bedogni et al., 2005 ; Distler et al., 2004 ; Evans and Naylor, 1967 ; Stewart et al., 1982 ). More recently, Evans et al. (2006) , have elegantly confirmed such observations by providing a quantitative evaluation of skin oxygenation. They showed that the dermis pO2 is 10%, the epidermis goes from 10% to 0.5%, and that in the hair follicles the oxygen tension ranges between 2.5 and 0.1% O2. Melanocytes, which reside in the dermal-epidermal junction in humans and in certain transgenic mouse lines, and in hair follicles in mice, are, therefore, in a hypoxic environment. In agreement with what has been observed for other cells, human melanocytes benefit from growing in a more physiologic environment. Horikoshi et al. (1991) found that optimum melanocyte growth was achieved between 1 and 5% O2, with a population doubling time of 6 days. At 30–40% O2, growth was delayed, with a population doubling time of approximately 9–10 days. Over 40% no growth was observed. We also observed that melanocyte growth is improved at 2% compared to 21% O2, a concentration that resemble the average O2 tension found in skin, and that the enhanced growth effect is HIF-1 ? mediated. In fact, melanocytes expressing a stable form of HIF-1 ? grow faster in atmospheric O2 than cells expressing a control plasmid whereas melanocytes deprived of HIF-1 ? grow slower ( Figure 3 ). These observations suggest that skin hypoxia, by allowing HIF-1 ? stabilization, supports melanocyte survival and proliferation.  Physiologic tissue oxygenation and melanocyte senescence Growth in the high oxygen tension of the atmosphere leads to oxidative stress and consequent DNA damage which can result in cellular senescence ( Colavitti and Finkel, 2005 ). Senescence in primary cells is an irreversible arrest phenotype that is characterized by the activation of the p53 and Rb pathways, as well as extensive chromatin modifications associated with the silencing of S-phase-promoting genes ( Narita and Lowe, 2005 ). Overexpression of oncogenes such as Ras also can induce rapid growth arrest and senescence in primary murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) as a result of an increase in DNA damage due to oxidative stress ( Lee et al., 1999 ; Serrano et al., 1997 ). Interestingly, senescence in vitro can be abrogated by maintaining cells in a more physiological oxygen environment (3% O2) ( Parrinello et al., 2003 ), and oncogene induced senescence can be virtually eliminated if cells are grown in low oxygen or in the presence of antioxidants ( Lee et al., 1999 ). These data suggest that reduction in oxidative damage due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) is sufficient to inhibit premature cell senescence. Hypoxia, by reducing the amount of oxygen radicals may therefore improve longevity by simply and passively reducing DNA damage. However, this simple explanation does not take into account why cells lacking HIF-1 ? grow less efficiently than normal cells in physiologic conditions. This observation suggests that this transcription factor and/or the genes regulated by hypoxia through HIF-1 may be playing an active role. A possible explanation of why HIF-1 ? is necessary to maintain cell lifespan comes from our recent work in which we show that HIF-1 ? is important in the regulation of proliferation and senescence in hypoxia (2% O2) and at 21% O2 respectively ( Welford et al., 2006 ). Lack of HIF-1 ? leads to reduced cell proliferation in 2% O2 and to premature cell senescence in atmospheric oxygen. In MEFs, HIF-1 activity is detectable in normoxia and decreases below basal levels upon excision of HIF- 1 ? . Thus, HIF-1 function is not only important in the adaptation of cells to hypoxia, but it also seems to play a role in normoxia by delaying the onset of senescence. This phenomenon is in part due to lack of expression of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a direct HIF-1 ? target gene. In fact, MEFs lacking MIF undergo premature cell senescence in atmospheric oxygen similarly to the HIF-1 ? knock out (KO) MEFs. On the other hand, overexpression of MIF in HIF-1 ? KO cells partially rescues the senescent phenotype. Interestingly, in the presence of oxidative stress induced by ? -irradiation, HIF-1 ? KO MEFs or MIF knock down cells maintained in 2% O2, showed a significant acceleration of cell senescence, likely due to activation of p53. Together, these data demonstrate the importance of physiologic O2 in regulating senescence through, at least in part, regulation of HIF1 ? . Our observations in MEFs are particularly relevant to melanocytes, since these cells can often experience oxidative stress due to UV exposure. UV light is known to induce p53 up-regulation and to trigger cell cycle arrest ( Kadekaro et al., 2003 ). Melanocytes respond to UV light by activating prosurvival pathways such as PI3K/Akt, CREB and NFkB that ultimately lead to the expression of prosurvival proteins such as Bcl2 and MITF. Recently, MITF was shown to bind directly to the HIF-1 ? promoter, to induce its expression and to lead to a HIFdependent prosurvival effect on melanocytes ( Busca et al., 2005 ). These studies help to explain why melanocytes are the cells of the skin most resistant to oxidative stress. This resistance is important for melanocytes since they possess a low self renewal capacity. The hypoxic microenvironment of the skin, by increasing the threshold of survival to oxidative damage, can represent a protective factor against premature melanocyte senescence and consequent loss. There is increasing evidence that senescence plays a critical role as a tumor suppressor in vivo by blocking tumor development at an early, more benign stage ( Braig et al., 2005 ; Collado et al., 2000 ; Michaloglou et al., 2005 ). Melanocytic nevi are thought to be pigmented lesions that are quite stable and infrequently progress, despite consisting of melanocytes containing activating mutations in the BRAF gene (predominantly V600E, a glutamic acid to valine substitution at position 600). Indeed, nevi contain cells showing hallmarks of senescence, and expression of BRAF V600E in normoxic cultured fibroblasts or melanocytes, induces senescence. Melanocytes have to acquire additional alterations that enable them to evade senescence and to become melanomas. MITF amplification might be one of these alterations. In fact, MITF was found amplified in a large number of melanoma samples in conjunction with BRAF V600E mutation and shown to be able to transform melanocytes when ectopically expressed together with BRAF V600E ( Garraway et al., 2005 ). Interestingly, in a recent study by Wajapeyee et al. (2008) , the secreted protein insulin-like growth factor binding protein-7 (IGFBP-7) was found to be a mediator of BRAF V600E induced senescence in primary melanocytes and of apoptosis in melanoma cells containing BRAF mutations. Some of the IGFBPs are regulated by hypoxia. For example, IGFBP-1 and 3 are induced whereas IGFBP-4 is unaffected under hypoxia ( Kajimura et al., 2005 ; Koga et al., 2008 ; Tazuke et al., 1998 ). One could speculate that, since hypoxia can protect from oncogene induced senescence, IGFBP-7 is reduced in a hypoxic environment, although this remains to be established. But how is melanocyte senescence occurring in vivo in the hypoxic microenvironment of the skin? Is the expression of a mutated BRAF alone enough to cause oncogene-induced senescence in a physiologic oxygen microenvironment? A possible explanation is that high levels of oxidative stress and DNA damage triggered by UV exposure may overcome the protective effects of the low oxygen environment of the skin, allowing some cells to senesce in vivo. At the same time, we and others have shown that certain genetic alterations may also contribute to tumor development possibly by allowing melanocytes to escape senescence and UV-induced damage ( Hacker et al., 2006 ; Kannan et al., 2003 ). For a comprehensive review of UV-induced carcinogenesis and nevi/melanoma see Brozyna et al. (2007) . In summary, while senescence acts as a tumor suppressor it also can have a detrimental effect on the renewal capacity of tissues by depleting stem and stromal cell pools ( Rodier et al., 2007 ). Because physiologic hypoxia, through HIF-1 ? , helps cells to counteract senescence, its effect can contribute to the maintenance of stem cell pools and therefore contribute to tissue renewal, but hypoxia can also represent a permissive environment for cell transformation.  Melanocyte transformation in the permissive microenvironment of the skin We have found that melanocytes are more prone to oncogenic transformation when grown in a hypoxic microenvironment ( Bedogni et al., 2005 ). In fact, while activated Akt is a weak oncogene in Ink4a / ARF KO immortalized melanocytes under normoxia (21% O2), melanocytes overexpressing activated Akt display a significantly stronger transformed phenotype when grown in 2% O2. Both activated Akt and the low oxygen environment of the skin contribute to increased HIF-1 activity. We proposed that cell transformation in hypoxia is in part due to stabilization of HIF-1 ? , because melanocytes deficient of HIF-1 ? grown in hypoxia show a diminished transformation capacity and delayed tumor growth in vivo. On the other hand, the presence of an undegradable HIF-1 ? leads to transformation of cells in normoxia and to the growth of very aggressive melanomas. These observations suggest that the low oxygen microenvironment of the skin, by enabling HIF-1 ? stabilization, provides a permissive environment in which HIF-1 ? acts as tumor promoter in cells that are genetically unstable and have acquired oncogenic mutations. Notably, HIF-1 ? alone is unable to transform Ink4a / ARF KO melanocytes, though it is required for transformation by Akt. Recently, it has been reported that BRAFV600E and Akt3 cooperatively promote melanocyte transformation ( Cheung et al., 2008 ). Interestingly, BRAFV600E has been shown to regulate directly HIF-1 ? expression in melanomas further supporting the involvement of HIF signaling in melanocyte transformation ( Kumar et al., 2007 ) ( Figure 4 ). Both Akt and HIF-1 ? regulate a wide variety of genes involved in tumorigenesis and one of the key questions is which pathways downstream are important for tumor development ( Chang et al., 2003 ; Semenza, 2003 ). We have recently shown that Notch1 lies at the convergence of the Akt and hypoxia/HIF-1 ? pathways. Notch1 is a transmembrane receptor involved in the regulation of many cell functions, including differentiation, growth, survival, apoptosis and angiogenesis ( Dufraine et al., 2008 ; Liu et al., 2006 ; Rangarajan et al., 2001 ; Ronchini and Capobianco, 2001 ; Rosati et al., 2008 ; Sarmento et al., 2005 ); Wang et al., 2006 ). We found that Notch1 signaling is highly expressed in melanomas and Akt and hypoxia additively regulate Notch1 transcriptionally in melanocytes. Significantly, we also demonstrated that Notch1 is necessary for Akt-dependent melanocyte transformation and melanoma growth that occurs in 2% O2 ( Bedogni et al., 2008 ). A cross-talk between Notch1 and HIF-1 has been found in other cell systems highlighting a rather complex reciprocal regulation of the two signaling pathways ( Gustafsson et al., 2005 ; Zheng et al., 2008 ). Overall, our studies and those of others emphasize a role of Notch as a key player in the development of many different cancer types and, importantly, as an effector of both oncogenes and the tissue microenvironment in tumorigenesis. Another key pathway linking oncogenic transformation to the low oxygen of the tissue microenvironment is glucose metabolism. The synthesis of virtually all glycolytic enzymes is increased in hypoxia by HIF-1 so that cells can overcome reduced ATP production due to reduced oxygen by increasing glycolysis. Solid tumors that are hypoxic often show a high glycolytic rate. Several immortalizing genetic alterations, also coincidentally, function to boost glycolysis. For example, ectopic expression of oncogene c-Myc immortalizes human primary fibroblasts ( Wang et al., 1998 ) and epithelial cells ( Gil et al., 2005 ) in vitro and increases glycolysis. Oncogenic Ras, Akt and AMPK can activate glycolytic enzymes as well ( Elstrom et al., 2004 ; Shaw, 2006 ). Furthermore, ectopic expression of glycolytic enzymes themselves, such as phosphoglycerate mutase (PGM) and phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK), can immortalize mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( Kondoh et al., 2005 ). Studies are needed to test whether these or other glycolytic enzymes may act as tumor promoters downstream of HIF-1 ? in melanocyte transformation. Increased glycolysis, together with other tumorigenic effects exerted by hypoxia through the HIF-signaling, such as increased angiogenesis, survival and increased metastatic potential also contributes to tumor progression.  Hypoxia in melanoma progression and metastasis Fifty to sixty percent of locally advanced solid tumors, including melanomas, are characterized by areas of hypoxia/anoxia that result from an imbalance between oxygen supply and consumption in proliferating tumor cells. This imbalance is further exacerbated by a compromised tumor vasculature ( Vaupel and Mayer, 2007 ). Studies have shown that presence of hypoxia within a tumor is an independent marker of a poor prognosis for patients with various cancer types including cutaneous melanomas ( Lartigau et al., 1997 ). Because stringent hypoxia/anoxia (<0.5% O2) is toxic for normal and tumor cells, it can promote tumor progression by selecting cells with mutations that allow them to survive in these extreme conditions ( Graeber et al., 1996 ; Hammond et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, hypoxia activates signaling pathways that trigger neovascularization and that facilitate tumor cell invasion, migration, adhesion, and metastasis. Metastasis is a complex multi-step process in which tumor cells have to acquire an invasive/migratory phenotype, enter the blood and lymphatic flow, survive anoikis and the immune response, and once localized to a distant site, survive in a likely hostile environment and proliferate. This process is relatively inefficient and only few cells within a tumor mass will have all the requirements that will allow them to successfully metastasize. Tumor hypoxia can influence most of the stages of metastasis. Hypoxia, for example has been involved in a epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like process where tumor cells change from an epithelial non-motile phenotype to a mesenchymal migratory phenotype and gain the ability to invade other tissues. EMT is accompanied by specific changes in gene expression, such as down-regulation of E-cadherin . Tumor hypoxia or loss of VHL which lead to HIF stabilization, down-regulate E-cadherin via direct or indirect regulation of snail , twist and SIP1 ( Yang and Wu, 2008 ). Furthermore, hypoxia through HIF-1, increases invasion by regulating genes, such as uPAR and MMP2, that are involved in the degradation and remodelling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) ( Krishnamachary et al., 2003 ). Via induction of pro-angiogenic factors such as VEGF, IL-8 and angiopoietin- 2, tumor hypoxia contribute to tumor angiogenesis providing cancer cells with access to blood vessels which is made easier by the leakiness of the tumor vasculature ( Bar-Eli, 1999 ; Hirota and Semenza, 2006 ; Karashima et al., 2003 ). HIF-1 can also increase resistance to anoikis by down-regulating the expression of & agr;5 integrin which mediates survival signals in the presence of ECM and apoptotic signals when cells lack adhesion to a substrate ( Rohwer et al., 2008 ). Finally, by increasing the expression of lysyl oxidase, hypoxia/HIF- 1 contributes to cancer metastasis in part by facilitating the recruitment of bone marrow derived cells to the metastatic niche, which prepares a receptive environment for cancer cells ( Erler et al., 2009 , 2006 ). A direct role of hypoxia in advanced melanoma is slowly starting to emerge. HIF-1 has been shown to play a critical role in uveal melanoma progression by increasing the expression of a number of target genes involved in invasion ( Victor et al., 2006 ). HIF-1 is regarded as one of the critical biomarkers that most accurately can predict uveal melanoma metastasis ( Chang et al., 2008 ). Furthermore, a recent study by Qi et al. (2008) , supports a role in melanomagenesis and metastasis of Siah2. Siah2, recently found to be regulated by Akt ( Lopez-Bergami et al., 2008 ), is an inhibitor of PHD function and therefore enhances hypoxia dependent HIF-1 ? stabilization by further inhibiting PHD1 and 3 in hypoxia ( Nakayama et al., 2004 ). The authors found that blocking the axis Siah2-Spry2 leads to decreased HIF-1 ? stabilization, and results in a significant reduction of metastasis in a metastatic melanoma mouse model. This observation correlated with findings in human samples where reduced expression of the Siah2 substrates PHD3 and Spry2 and increased HIF-1 ? are characteristic of more advanced melanoma. A role of HIF signaling in melanomagenesis is further supported by the work of Giatromanolaki et al. (2003) . In this study, HIF-1 ? and HIF-2 ? were found to be expressed in 28 and 65% of melanoma samples respectively, and HIF-2 ? , together with VEGF and vascular density, was associated with poor overall disease survival. In summary, these observations strongly support a role of hypoxia and HIF signaling in melanomagenesis and melanoma metastasis, however, although well addressed in other tumor types, the mechanistic aspect of hypoxia/HIF mediated melanoma progression still remains relatively unexplored.  Perspectives The research discussed here supports a role of hypoxia and its mediators in melanocyte survival and in every step of melanomagenesis. Physiologic tissue hypoxia influences cell survival and proliferation, particularly in tissues known to be mildly hypoxic such as the skin, and aids in the propagation of stem cells, in part by counteracting senescence. However, because of these pro-survival effects, tissue hypoxia can, at the same time, promote melanocyte transformation by providing a permissive environment where oncogene induced senescence is abrogated. Finally, tumor hypoxia is a key mediator of tumor progression by promoting the expansion of cells with a more aggressive phenotype. There are many questions that still need to be addressed including what would be the consequences of inhibiting HIF function in cancer therapy. It is well known that hypoxic tumors show higher resistance to chemo- and radiation therapy. The potential of inhibiting HIF offers a new avenue to the treatment of cancers. However, HIF inhibition in normal cells could be potentially deleterious since hypoxia through HIF activity plays an important role in cell survival and renewal.  Figures Figure 1 O2 regulates the rate at which HIF- ? proteins are degraded. In normoxia, O2-dependent hydroxylation of proline (P) residues in HIF- ? subunits by the enzymes PHD1–3 is required for the binding of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour-suppressor protein. HIF- ? /VHL complexes are ubiquitylated and targeted to the proteasome for degradation. O2 also regulates the interaction of HIF- ? with transcriptional co-activators. O2-dependent hydroxylation of asparagine (N) residues by the enzyme FIH-1 (factor inhibiting HIF) blocks the binding of p300 and CBP to HIF- ? and therefore inhibits HIF-mediated gene transcription. Under hypoxic conditions, the rate of asparagine and proline hydroxylation decreases. VHL cannot bind to HIF- ? subunits that are not prolyl-hydroxylated, resulting in a decreased rate of HIF- ? degradation. By contrast, p300 and CBP can bind to HIF- ? that are not asparaginyl-hydroxylated, allowing transcriptional activation of HIF-target genes. Figure 2 HIF-dependent gene regulation. Cells respond to hypoxia by activating HIF transcription factors thereby modulating key target genes which ultimately function to allow survival and to re-establish a normal oxygen supply. In tumors, an imbalanced HIF signaling can contribute to further tumor expansion and progression. Figure 3 Hypoxia and HIF-1 ? influence melanocyte growth. (A) Mouse melanocytes expressing Akt or a control vector show a faster growth when placed in 2% O2. (B) Similarly, melanocytes that express a stable HIF-1 ? (HIF-1 ? -ODD) in atmospheric oxygen (21%) grow faster than controls (pBabe). (C) Melanocytes deficient of HIF-1 ? (KO) grow at a slower rate in mild hypoxia (2% O2) than controls (WT). Figure 4 PI3K/Akt and RAS/BRaf/MEK pathways are frequently altered in melanoma. Akt activation resulting from PTEN loss of function or Akt3 amplification can, to some extent, inhibit the RAS/BRaf/MEK pathway. Ras and BRaf are found mutated in a large number of melanomas and together with Akt they signal to HIF-1. These three signaling pathways can regulate a number of protumorigenic function that can promote melanoma development and progression. Dotted lines indicate normal pathway activation through the interaction of a growth factor (GF) with its receptor. 