Bcl-2 Inhibitors: Targeting Mitochondrial Apoptotic Pathways in Cancer Therapy Defects in apoptotic pathways can promote cancer cell survival and also confer resistance to antineoplastic drugs. One pathway being targeted for antineoplastic therapy is the anti-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) family of proteins (Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1, Bfl1/A-1, and Bcl-B) that bind to and inactivate BH3-domain pro-apoptotic proteins. Signals transmitted by cellular damage (including antineoplastic drugs) or cytokine deprivation can initiate apoptosis via the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. It is controversial whether some BH3-domain proteins (Bim or tBid) directly activate multidomain pro-apoptotic proteins (e.g., Bax and Bak) or act via inhibition of those anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins (Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1, Bfl1/A-1, and Bcl-B) that stabilize pro-apoptotic proteins. Overexpression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members has been associated with chemotherapy resistance in various human cancers, and preclinical studies have shown that agents targeting anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members have preclinical activity as single agents and in combination with other antineoplastic agents. Clinical trials of several investigational drugs targeting the Bcl-2 family (oblimersen sodium, AT-101, ABT-263, GX15-070) are ongoing. Here, we review the role of the Bcl-2 family in apoptotic pathways and those agents that are known and/or designed to inhibit the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family of proteins.  Therapeutic Implications Many agents have been identified or designed to target the Bcl-2 family at the mRNA or protein level. Pharmacologic and cellular aspects of agents targeting the Bcl-2 family should be considered when exploring their potential application as chemotherapy. The binding affinity for inhibiting the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members, a large and redundant family of proteins, should optimally be in the clinically achievable concentrations for each agent. Agents with high specificity provide ready opportunities for cancer cell drug resistance, whereas broader acting agents may introduce unexpected responses to the agents and/or increase systemic toxicities. There have been six anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members identified and several of these seem to contribute to drug resistance in cancer cells ( 8 ), suggesting that inhibition of multiple Bcl-2 family members will be necessary to achieve optimal therapeutic effect. One approach to enhancing the therapeutic effect of the inhibitors of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members would be to use a combination of drugs that target different Bcl-2 family members. To date, one Bcl-2 antisense and three small molecule Bcl-2 protein inhibitors are being tested in clinical trials. Preclinical studies seem promising, especially in combination with additional chemotherapy agents. Ongoing and planned phase II clinical trials to define the activity of single agents and drug combinations will determine the direction of future clinical development of the Bcl-2 inhibitors.  Therapeutic Implications Many agents have been identified or designed to target the Bcl-2 family at the mRNA or protein level. Pharmacologic and cellular aspects of agents targeting the Bcl-2 family should be considered when exploring their potential application as chemotherapy. The binding affinity for inhibiting the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members, a large and redundant family of proteins, should optimally be in the clinically achievable concentrations for each agent. Agents with high specificity provide ready opportunities for cancer cell drug resistance, whereas broader acting agents may introduce unexpected responses to the agents and/or increase systemic toxicities. There have been six anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members identified and several of these seem to contribute to drug resistance in cancer cells ( 8 ), suggesting that inhibition of multiple Bcl-2 family members will be necessary to achieve optimal therapeutic effect. One approach to enhancing the therapeutic effect of the inhibitors of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members would be to use a combination of drugs that target different Bcl-2 family members. To date, one Bcl-2 antisense and three small molecule Bcl-2 protein inhibitors are being tested in clinical trials. Preclinical studies seem promising, especially in combination with additional chemotherapy agents. Ongoing and planned phase II clinical trials to define the activity of single agents and drug combinations will determine the direction of future clinical development of the Bcl-2 inhibitors.  Figure and Tables Fig. 1 The apoptotic pathway to cell death from the perspective of the Bcl-2 family of proteins.1, The intrinsic pathway is initiated by various signals, principally extracellular stimuli. 2, The extrinsic pathway is activated by Fas ligand or TRAIL, subsequently activating caspase-8. Caspase-8 transforms Bid into truncated Bid. In addition, caspase-8 initiates a cascade of caspase activation. 3, BH3-only proteins (Bim, Bid, Bad, Noxa, Puma) engage with anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins to relieve their inhibition of Bax and Bak to activate them. 4, Next, Bax and Bak are oligomerized and activated, leading to mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization. 5, Once mitochondrial membranes are permeabilized, cytochrome c and/or Smac/DIABLO is released into the cytoplasm, wherein they combine with an adaptor molecule, apoptosis protease-activating factor 1, and an inactive initiator caspase, procaspase-9, within a multiprotein complex called the apoptosome. Smac/DIABLO inhibits inhibitors of apoptosis proteins to activate caspase-9. 6, Caspase-9 activates caspase-3, which is the initiation step for the cascade of caspase activation. Intrinsic and extrinsic pathways converge on caspase-3. Bcl-2 family proteins are also found on the endoplasmic reticulum and the perinuclear membrane in hematopoietic cells, but they are predominantly localized to mitochondria. Table 1 Agents targeting anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins Agents Target proteins Sponsor Stage Apogossypol Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Mcl-1 Burnham (NCI) Preclinical HA-14 Bcl-2 Maybridge Chem Preclinical Antimycin A Bcl-2, Bcl-XL U of Washington Preclinical BH3Is Bcl-XL Harvard U Preclinical Oblimersen sodium Bcl-2 Genta Phase III Gossypol (AT-101) Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1 Ascenta (NCI) Phase I/II ABT-737 (ABT-263) Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w Abbott Phase I GX15-070 Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1 Gemin X Phase I Abbreviations: BH3Is, BH3 inhibitors; NCI, National Cancer Institute; Maybridge Chem, Maybridge Chemical Co. Ltd.; U, University. Table 2 Phase II and III clinical trials with oblimersen sodium Disease (group) Phase Regimen n Response/outcome Survival benefit Ref. Melanoma III Dacarbazine ± oblimersen 771 7.5% vs 13.5% overall 9.7 vs 11.4 mos 50 CLL III FC ± oblimersen 241 7% vs 17% CR/nPR At 40 mos ( P = 0.05) 38 , 47 MM III Dexamethasone ± oblimersen Ongoing To be determined NSCLC or SCLC III Docetaxel ± oblimersen Ongoing To be determined AML (CALGB) III Ara-C/daunorubicin + HiDAC + oblimersen 503 No outcome benefit No survival benefit 48 SCLC (CALGB) II Carboplatin/etoposide ± oblimersen 56 61% vs 60% No survival benefit 49 AML II (nR) Gemtuzumab ± oblimersen 48 5 CR, 7 PR nR 87 HRPCa (EORTC) II (nR) Docetaxel ± oblimersen 28 4 of 12 (33%) nR 88 Renal Ca II (nR) IFN-? + oblimersen 23 Objective response 1 PR nR 89 MM II (nR) Dexamethasone/thalidomide + oblimersen 33 2 CR, 4 near CR, 12 PR nR 90 CLL I/II (nR) Oblimersen 40 (26) * 2 of 26 PR nR 46 Hepatocellular I/II (nR) Doxorubicin + oblimersen 27 (19) * 6 of 19 SD nR 91 Abbreviations: MM, multiple myeloma; NSCLC, non–small cell lung cancer; SCLC, small cell lung cancer; HRPCa, hormone-refractory prostate cancer; Renal Ca, renal cell cancer; HiDAC, high-dose cytosine arabinoside; CR, complete response; nPR, nodal partial response; PR, partial response; SD, stable disease; nR, not randomized; CALGB, Cancer and Leukemia Group B; EORTC, European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer; IFN, interferon; FC, fludarabine/cyclophosphamide. * Number of patients whose responses were assessed is marked in parenthesis.  Figure and Tables Fig. 1 The apoptotic pathway to cell death from the perspective of the Bcl-2 family of proteins.1, The intrinsic pathway is initiated by various signals, principally extracellular stimuli. 2, The extrinsic pathway is activated by Fas ligand or TRAIL, subsequently activating caspase-8. Caspase-8 transforms Bid into truncated Bid. In addition, caspase-8 initiates a cascade of caspase activation. 3, BH3-only proteins (Bim, Bid, Bad, Noxa, Puma) engage with anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins to relieve their inhibition of Bax and Bak to activate them. 4, Next, Bax and Bak are oligomerized and activated, leading to mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization. 5, Once mitochondrial membranes are permeabilized, cytochrome c and/or Smac/DIABLO is released into the cytoplasm, wherein they combine with an adaptor molecule, apoptosis protease-activating factor 1, and an inactive initiator caspase, procaspase-9, within a multiprotein complex called the apoptosome. Smac/DIABLO inhibits inhibitors of apoptosis proteins to activate caspase-9. 6, Caspase-9 activates caspase-3, which is the initiation step for the cascade of caspase activation. Intrinsic and extrinsic pathways converge on caspase-3. Bcl-2 family proteins are also found on the endoplasmic reticulum and the perinuclear membrane in hematopoietic cells, but they are predominantly localized to mitochondria. Table 1 Agents targeting anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins Agents Target proteins Sponsor Stage Apogossypol Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Mcl-1 Burnham (NCI) Preclinical HA-14 Bcl-2 Maybridge Chem Preclinical Antimycin A Bcl-2, Bcl-XL U of Washington Preclinical BH3Is Bcl-XL Harvard U Preclinical Oblimersen sodium Bcl-2 Genta Phase III Gossypol (AT-101) Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1 Ascenta (NCI) Phase I/II ABT-737 (ABT-263) Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w Abbott Phase I GX15-070 Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1 Gemin X Phase I Abbreviations: BH3Is, BH3 inhibitors; NCI, National Cancer Institute; Maybridge Chem, Maybridge Chemical Co. Ltd.; U, University. Table 2 Phase II and III clinical trials with oblimersen sodium Disease (group) Phase Regimen n Response/outcome Survival benefit Ref. Melanoma III Dacarbazine ± oblimersen 771 7.5% vs 13.5% overall 9.7 vs 11.4 mos 50 CLL III FC ± oblimersen 241 7% vs 17% CR/nPR At 40 mos ( P = 0.05) 38 , 47 MM III Dexamethasone ± oblimersen Ongoing To be determined NSCLC or SCLC III Docetaxel ± oblimersen Ongoing To be determined AML (CALGB) III Ara-C/daunorubicin + HiDAC + oblimersen 503 No outcome benefit No survival benefit 48 SCLC (CALGB) II Carboplatin/etoposide ± oblimersen 56 61% vs 60% No survival benefit 49 AML II (nR) Gemtuzumab ± oblimersen 48 5 CR, 7 PR nR 87 HRPCa (EORTC) II (nR) Docetaxel ± oblimersen 28 4 of 12 (33%) nR 88 Renal Ca II (nR) IFN-? + oblimersen 23 Objective response 1 PR nR 89 MM II (nR) Dexamethasone/thalidomide + oblimersen 33 2 CR, 4 near CR, 12 PR nR 90 CLL I/II (nR) Oblimersen 40 (26) * 2 of 26 PR nR 46 Hepatocellular I/II (nR) Doxorubicin + oblimersen 27 (19) * 6 of 19 SD nR 91 Abbreviations: MM, multiple myeloma; NSCLC, non–small cell lung cancer; SCLC, small cell lung cancer; HRPCa, hormone-refractory prostate cancer; Renal Ca, renal cell cancer; HiDAC, high-dose cytosine arabinoside; CR, complete response; nPR, nodal partial response; PR, partial response; SD, stable disease; nR, not randomized; CALGB, Cancer and Leukemia Group B; EORTC, European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer; IFN, interferon; FC, fludarabine/cyclophosphamide. * Number of patients whose responses were assessed is marked in parenthesis. 