The emotional experiences of family carers in Huntington disease Aim This paper is a report of a study conducted to examine the emotional experience of caregiving by family carers of people with Huntington disease and to describe strategies they used to deal with that experience. Background Huntington disease, commonly diagnosed in young to middle adulthood, is an inherited single gene disorder involving loss of cognitive, motor and neuropsychiatric function. Many family members become caregivers as well as continuing as parents and wage earners. The emotional aspects of caregiving contribute to mental health risks for family members. Methods Focus groups were conducted with 42 adult carers of people with Huntington disease in four United States and two Canadian Huntington disease centers between 2001 and 2005. Data were analyzed through descriptive coding and thematic analysis. Findings All participants reported multiple aspects of emotional distress. Being a carer was described as experiencing disintegration of one’s life. Carers attempted to cope by seeking comfort from selected family members, anticipating the time when the care recipient had died and/or using prescription medications. Spousal carers were distressed by the loss of their relationship with their spouse and dealt with this by no longer regarding the person as an intimate partner. Carers were concerned about the disease risk for children in their families and hoped for a cure. Conclusion Emotional distress can compromise the well-being of family carers, who attempt to maintain multiple roles. Nurses should monitor carer mental health, identify sources of emotional distress and support effective strategies used by carers to mediate distress.  Study limitations This study represents the views of carers who volunteered to participate in focus groups at medical centers providing care to people with HD. The number of participants and the use of six different focus groups provided a large and varied sample. The findings may not reflect the experiences of those who are not comfortable speaking in such a setting, prefer not to meet with a group or received health care from other providers. We specifically sought information about concerns, and participants were not asked to describe experiences that were positive or fulfilling. Therefore, while participants were given the opportunity to contribute as they wished, these experiences may be under-represented. This report adds to knowledge about the experiences of carers for people with HD, giving insights into the impact of emotional experiences on these carers. Other aspects of caregiving, such as tasks, effects on physical health, finances, childrearing, roles with family and society are not reflected directly in this report. However, what it does offer is awareness of the conflicting emotions and ways in which individual carers cope with these emotions so that they can carry out their multiple responsibilities.  Discussion of findings Our findings confirm those of Lowit and van Teijlingen (2005) , who reported that carers of people with HD adapt to changes as they occur and use an operational rather than a strategic approach to care, meaning that they deal with problems as they arise rather than seeking longer-term solutions. The ways in which carers adapt to different aspects of life as a carer was an important new finding in the present study. Carers experienced a degree of cognitive dissonance ( Festinger 1957 ) with respect to their own roles and the roles of care recipients, as the new needs of care recipients conflicted with the place they had previously held in families. Spousal carers reported the painful process of converting their image of their spouses as people who were available in a reciprocal sense for physical and emotional support, to those who were wholly dependent. Feelings of discomfort persisted and carers tried to adapt to the new situation by taking steps (such as ‘falling out of love’) to resolve the conflict within themselves and allow them to continue to provide care. Our findings add new insights into the emotional aspects of the experience and the many conflicting demands on time and resources that may limit carers’ abilities to look beyond present challenges. However, offering guidance in looking beyond the present is a role that can be undertaken by healthcare professionals working closely with families by developing systems whereby challenges are anticipated and crises averted. Our data give insights into those topics and reactions to caregiver challenges that may limit the amount of energy that carers can devote to day-to-day issues. There are many similarities between our findings and those reported in studies of other illnesses. The emotional distress that comes with dealing with dramatic change is not surprising. However, because HD caregivers are younger, there are additional pressures from fulfilling a complex array of roles and greater financial loss. Role reversal, giving up enjoyed activities, difficulties with personal health, and a need for antidepressants have also been described by other authors ( Farran et al. 2004 ). In some cases, caregivers can find a balance in taking care of themselves. In the case of carers of people with HD, this balance was described in terms of emotion-focused coping, with little description of finding help from others. It may be that the length of time during which people with HD need care influences the nature of the help available. This emphasizes the importance of appropriate, long-term nursing input. Our findings confirm that HD family caregivers resemble not only carers of people with dementia, but also carers for other conditions affecting people in younger adulthood. Families of individuals with severe traumatic brain injury, for example, also report that they used a great deal of energy to learn how to live with the injured family member, and report feelings of loneliness because others do not understand their situation ( Jumisko et al. 2007 ). Carers of people with brain tumours report social isolation due to the withdrawal of friends and lack of understanding of their situations by social agencies ( Janda et al. 2006 ). Overall, our findings indicate a dissonance between the expectations and needs of individuals at a certain life stage and the reality of their situation. The mean age of participants was 52 years – a time when, according to lifestage theory, there is release from the responsibility of dependent children, re-establishment of the ‘couple’ relationship and high productivity in terms of work or career ( Thomas 1990 ). However, for those caring for a partner with HD, the dependence of the spouse increases, and there may also be limited opportunities for a career because of caregiving duties. In addition, concern for the future of ‘at-risk’ children may alter the dynamic between parents and adult children. This contrast between the expected and reality could partially account for the mental health problems experienced by many participants.  Implications for research and clinical practice The use of focus groups provided rich interactional data on personal topics that carers shared in common. However, it is not known if there were topics that individuals were hesitant to share in a group setting. Further examination through individual interviews might yield that information, and might afford an opportunity to use a phenomenological approach to examine deeply carers’ individual experiences. Caregivers of people with dementia are more likely to experience anxiety and burden, and confrontative and escape/avoidance coping are associated with higher anxiety ( Cooper et al. 2007 ). The participants in this study spoke about difficulties in coping with the multiple challenges in their lives, but did not specify anxiety as an issue; rather, they gave the impression of being depressed and careworn. It may be that those who are prepared to be involved in a focus group are using strategies other than avoidance to deal with their situations. We have shown that carers of people with HD can face challenges that differ from those of other carers in some important aspects. Further work is needed to test the utility of interventions and research tools related to carers’ needs. Interventions such as support groups have been developed for carers in the context of other complex disorders involving dementia, and have been shown to reduce carer morbidity ( Thompson et al. 2007 ). However, because of differences in the clinical manifestations of HD and other dementias and the inherited nature of HD, these interventions need to be tested with family carers of people with HD. Measures of caregiver wellbeing ( Deeken et al. 2003 ) should also be examined, so that they are appropriate for this younger population caring for people with known genetic risk.  Discussion Study limitations This study represents the views of carers who volunteered to participate in focus groups at medical centers providing care to people with HD. The number of participants and the use of six different focus groups provided a large and varied sample. The findings may not reflect the experiences of those who are not comfortable speaking in such a setting, prefer not to meet with a group or received health care from other providers. We specifically sought information about concerns, and participants were not asked to describe experiences that were positive or fulfilling. Therefore, while participants were given the opportunity to contribute as they wished, these experiences may be under-represented. This report adds to knowledge about the experiences of carers for people with HD, giving insights into the impact of emotional experiences on these carers. Other aspects of caregiving, such as tasks, effects on physical health, finances, childrearing, roles with family and society are not reflected directly in this report. However, what it does offer is awareness of the conflicting emotions and ways in which individual carers cope with these emotions so that they can carry out their multiple responsibilities. Discussion of findings Our findings confirm those of Lowit and van Teijlingen (2005) , who reported that carers of people with HD adapt to changes as they occur and use an operational rather than a strategic approach to care, meaning that they deal with problems as they arise rather than seeking longer-term solutions. The ways in which carers adapt to different aspects of life as a carer was an important new finding in the present study. Carers experienced a degree of cognitive dissonance ( Festinger 1957 ) with respect to their own roles and the roles of care recipients, as the new needs of care recipients conflicted with the place they had previously held in families. Spousal carers reported the painful process of converting their image of their spouses as people who were available in a reciprocal sense for physical and emotional support, to those who were wholly dependent. Feelings of discomfort persisted and carers tried to adapt to the new situation by taking steps (such as ‘falling out of love’) to resolve the conflict within themselves and allow them to continue to provide care. Our findings add new insights into the emotional aspects of the experience and the many conflicting demands on time and resources that may limit carers’ abilities to look beyond present challenges. However, offering guidance in looking beyond the present is a role that can be undertaken by healthcare professionals working closely with families by developing systems whereby challenges are anticipated and crises averted. Our data give insights into those topics and reactions to caregiver challenges that may limit the amount of energy that carers can devote to day-to-day issues. There are many similarities between our findings and those reported in studies of other illnesses. The emotional distress that comes with dealing with dramatic change is not surprising. However, because HD caregivers are younger, there are additional pressures from fulfilling a complex array of roles and greater financial loss. Role reversal, giving up enjoyed activities, difficulties with personal health, and a need for antidepressants have also been described by other authors ( Farran et al. 2004 ). In some cases, caregivers can find a balance in taking care of themselves. In the case of carers of people with HD, this balance was described in terms of emotion-focused coping, with little description of finding help from others. It may be that the length of time during which people with HD need care influences the nature of the help available. This emphasizes the importance of appropriate, long-term nursing input. Our findings confirm that HD family caregivers resemble not only carers of people with dementia, but also carers for other conditions affecting people in younger adulthood. Families of individuals with severe traumatic brain injury, for example, also report that they used a great deal of energy to learn how to live with the injured family member, and report feelings of loneliness because others do not understand their situation ( Jumisko et al. 2007 ). Carers of people with brain tumours report social isolation due to the withdrawal of friends and lack of understanding of their situations by social agencies ( Janda et al. 2006 ). Overall, our findings indicate a dissonance between the expectations and needs of individuals at a certain life stage and the reality of their situation. The mean age of participants was 52 years – a time when, according to lifestage theory, there is release from the responsibility of dependent children, re-establishment of the ‘couple’ relationship and high productivity in terms of work or career ( Thomas 1990 ). However, for those caring for a partner with HD, the dependence of the spouse increases, and there may also be limited opportunities for a career because of caregiving duties. In addition, concern for the future of ‘at-risk’ children may alter the dynamic between parents and adult children. This contrast between the expected and reality could partially account for the mental health problems experienced by many participants. Implications for research and clinical practice The use of focus groups provided rich interactional data on personal topics that carers shared in common. However, it is not known if there were topics that individuals were hesitant to share in a group setting. Further examination through individual interviews might yield that information, and might afford an opportunity to use a phenomenological approach to examine deeply carers’ individual experiences. Caregivers of people with dementia are more likely to experience anxiety and burden, and confrontative and escape/avoidance coping are associated with higher anxiety ( Cooper et al. 2007 ). The participants in this study spoke about difficulties in coping with the multiple challenges in their lives, but did not specify anxiety as an issue; rather, they gave the impression of being depressed and careworn. It may be that those who are prepared to be involved in a focus group are using strategies other than avoidance to deal with their situations. We have shown that carers of people with HD can face challenges that differ from those of other carers in some important aspects. Further work is needed to test the utility of interventions and research tools related to carers’ needs. Interventions such as support groups have been developed for carers in the context of other complex disorders involving dementia, and have been shown to reduce carer morbidity ( Thompson et al. 2007 ). However, because of differences in the clinical manifestations of HD and other dementias and the inherited nature of HD, these interventions need to be tested with family carers of people with HD. Measures of caregiver wellbeing ( Deeken et al. 2003 ) should also be examined, so that they are appropriate for this younger population caring for people with known genetic risk.  Discussion Study limitations This study represents the views of carers who volunteered to participate in focus groups at medical centers providing care to people with HD. The number of participants and the use of six different focus groups provided a large and varied sample. The findings may not reflect the experiences of those who are not comfortable speaking in such a setting, prefer not to meet with a group or received health care from other providers. We specifically sought information about concerns, and participants were not asked to describe experiences that were positive or fulfilling. Therefore, while participants were given the opportunity to contribute as they wished, these experiences may be under-represented. This report adds to knowledge about the experiences of carers for people with HD, giving insights into the impact of emotional experiences on these carers. Other aspects of caregiving, such as tasks, effects on physical health, finances, childrearing, roles with family and society are not reflected directly in this report. However, what it does offer is awareness of the conflicting emotions and ways in which individual carers cope with these emotions so that they can carry out their multiple responsibilities. Discussion of findings Our findings confirm those of Lowit and van Teijlingen (2005) , who reported that carers of people with HD adapt to changes as they occur and use an operational rather than a strategic approach to care, meaning that they deal with problems as they arise rather than seeking longer-term solutions. The ways in which carers adapt to different aspects of life as a carer was an important new finding in the present study. Carers experienced a degree of cognitive dissonance ( Festinger 1957 ) with respect to their own roles and the roles of care recipients, as the new needs of care recipients conflicted with the place they had previously held in families. Spousal carers reported the painful process of converting their image of their spouses as people who were available in a reciprocal sense for physical and emotional support, to those who were wholly dependent. Feelings of discomfort persisted and carers tried to adapt to the new situation by taking steps (such as ‘falling out of love’) to resolve the conflict within themselves and allow them to continue to provide care. Our findings add new insights into the emotional aspects of the experience and the many conflicting demands on time and resources that may limit carers’ abilities to look beyond present challenges. However, offering guidance in looking beyond the present is a role that can be undertaken by healthcare professionals working closely with families by developing systems whereby challenges are anticipated and crises averted. Our data give insights into those topics and reactions to caregiver challenges that may limit the amount of energy that carers can devote to day-to-day issues. There are many similarities between our findings and those reported in studies of other illnesses. The emotional distress that comes with dealing with dramatic change is not surprising. However, because HD caregivers are younger, there are additional pressures from fulfilling a complex array of roles and greater financial loss. Role reversal, giving up enjoyed activities, difficulties with personal health, and a need for antidepressants have also been described by other authors ( Farran et al. 2004 ). In some cases, caregivers can find a balance in taking care of themselves. In the case of carers of people with HD, this balance was described in terms of emotion-focused coping, with little description of finding help from others. It may be that the length of time during which people with HD need care influences the nature of the help available. This emphasizes the importance of appropriate, long-term nursing input. Our findings confirm that HD family caregivers resemble not only carers of people with dementia, but also carers for other conditions affecting people in younger adulthood. Families of individuals with severe traumatic brain injury, for example, also report that they used a great deal of energy to learn how to live with the injured family member, and report feelings of loneliness because others do not understand their situation ( Jumisko et al. 2007 ). Carers of people with brain tumours report social isolation due to the withdrawal of friends and lack of understanding of their situations by social agencies ( Janda et al. 2006 ). Overall, our findings indicate a dissonance between the expectations and needs of individuals at a certain life stage and the reality of their situation. The mean age of participants was 52 years – a time when, according to lifestage theory, there is release from the responsibility of dependent children, re-establishment of the ‘couple’ relationship and high productivity in terms of work or career ( Thomas 1990 ). However, for those caring for a partner with HD, the dependence of the spouse increases, and there may also be limited opportunities for a career because of caregiving duties. In addition, concern for the future of ‘at-risk’ children may alter the dynamic between parents and adult children. This contrast between the expected and reality could partially account for the mental health problems experienced by many participants. Implications for research and clinical practice The use of focus groups provided rich interactional data on personal topics that carers shared in common. However, it is not known if there were topics that individuals were hesitant to share in a group setting. Further examination through individual interviews might yield that information, and might afford an opportunity to use a phenomenological approach to examine deeply carers’ individual experiences. Caregivers of people with dementia are more likely to experience anxiety and burden, and confrontative and escape/avoidance coping are associated with higher anxiety ( Cooper et al. 2007 ). The participants in this study spoke about difficulties in coping with the multiple challenges in their lives, but did not specify anxiety as an issue; rather, they gave the impression of being depressed and careworn. It may be that those who are prepared to be involved in a focus group are using strategies other than avoidance to deal with their situations. We have shown that carers of people with HD can face challenges that differ from those of other carers in some important aspects. Further work is needed to test the utility of interventions and research tools related to carers’ needs. Interventions such as support groups have been developed for carers in the context of other complex disorders involving dementia, and have been shown to reduce carer morbidity ( Thompson et al. 2007 ). However, because of differences in the clinical manifestations of HD and other dementias and the inherited nature of HD, these interventions need to be tested with family carers of people with HD. Measures of caregiver wellbeing ( Deeken et al. 2003 ) should also be examined, so that they are appropriate for this younger population caring for people with known genetic risk.  Conclusion The experience of being a carer for a family member with HD encompasses the emotions of not fulfilling one’s own dreams for life, witnessing and being responsible for the care of a loved one who is increasingly unable to fill their desired roles and being aware that the children also are at risk to develop this disease. Nurses and other healthcare professionals can support carers through this long-term commitment by actively addressing mental health issues with carers, regularly discussing and endorsing appropriate strategies for dealing with the pressures of caring, and facilitating planning to avoid the need for crisis management. This research would be enhanced by further quantitative studies, using validated psychometric tools, to investigate the mental health impact of caring on a long-term basis for people with HD. Carers contribute to the healthcare of their family members in countless ways, and health service providers have a duty to ensure that their wellbeing is protected and that they are supported as they undertake this role.  What is already known about this topic Huntington disease is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease with onset in the young to middle adult years and with increasing symptom severity. Carers of people with dementia are at risk for increased burden and compromised quality of life. Much of the existing knowledge of caregiving for people with neurodegenerative disorders is derived research on dementia presenting in late adulthood.  What this paper adds Stressors for carers of people with Huntington disease encompass ongoing loss and anticipation of disease occurrence in their children. Carers’ adaptations to stressors reflect personal resources available to them, with little inclusion of healthcare support. There is a need for examination of fit and usefulness of supportive resources for carers of people with Huntington disease.  Implications for practice and/or policy Discussion of carers’ mental health should be a routine component of their health care. Supportive services are necessary for carers of people with Huntington disea Planning for potential future care needs may help carers to use effective coping strategies when their responsibilities change in response to symptom deterioration. 