Psychometric Properties of Commonly Used Low Back Disability Questionnaires: Are They Useful for Older Adults with Low Back Pain? Objectives To evaluate the psychometric properties of two commonly used low back pain (LBP) disability questionnaires in a sample solely comprising community-dwelling older adults. Design Single-group repeated measures design. Setting Four continuing care retirement communities in Maryland and in Virginia. Participants Convenience sample of 107 community-dwelling men and women (71.9%) aged 62 years or older with current LBP. Outcome Measures All participants completed modified Oswestry Disability (mOSW) and Quebec Back Pain Disability (QUE) questionnaires, as well as the Medical Outcomes Survey Short-Form 36 questionnaire at baseline. At follow-up, 56 participants completed the mOSW and the QUE for reliability assessment. Results Test–retest reliability of the mOSW and QUE were excellent with intraclass correlation coefficients of 0.92 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.86, 0.95) and 0.94 (95% CI: 0.90, 0.97), respectively. Participants with high pain severity and high levels of functional limitation had higher scores on the mOSW ( P < 0.0001) and QUE ( P < 0.001) scales than other participants, which represents good construct validity for both scales. The threshold for minimum detectable change is 10.66 points for the mOSW and 11.04 points for the QUE. Both questionnaires had sufficient scale width to accurately measure changes in patient status. Conclusions It appears that both questionnaires have excellent test–retest reliability and good construct validity when used to evaluate LBP-related disability for older adults with varying degrees of LBP. Neither questionnaire appears to have superior psychometric properties; therefore, both the Oswestry and Quebec can be recommended for use among geriatric patients with LBP.  Methods Data included in this study were derived from the Retirement Community Back Pain Study [ 4 ], which is a population-based survey study of adults aged 62 years or older living in one of four continuing care retirement communities (CCRCs) in Maryland and in Northern Virginia owned by the same corporate group. Eligible participants for the parent study comprised anyone 62 years and older living independently in the CCRC. A random sample of 1,000 older adults living in the four retirement communities was surveyed. To generate the random sample, a staff member from one of the CCRCs entered all residents of the four communities into a database and assigned them a number. Within each community, 250 numbers were randomly generated using a computer program and the surveys were sent to residents assigned to the randomly generated number. Only the staff member had access to the residents’ number assignment key to ensure that investigators were masked to the respondents’ identities. Surveys were delivered through the internal mail systems for each community to the selected sample. Potential respondents were given 4 weeks to complete and to return anonymously the survey to a centralized drop box in each CCRC. Further description of the recruitment and sampling procedure has been provided in detail previously [ 4 ]. Within the survey, the participants were shown a homunculus depicting the low back region as extending from the bottom of the ribs down to the top of the legs. They were then asked to identify whether they had pain in this region. Inclusion criteria for this analysis were 1) being at least 62 years of age, 2) reporting current LBP that required activity modification, and 3) being able to read and understand English so that they could complete the survey instruments. We included participants with LBP requiring activity modification so that the sample would be most similar to the target population in which the instrument would be used clinically. All participants in this analysis completed the initial survey designed for the parent study, including the self-report measures under investigation. In the initial survey, all participants who endorsed having current LBP were asked if they would be willing to participate in a follow-up survey. If there was an affirmative response to this question in the initial survey, then the investigators who were masked to respondents’ identities would ask the staff member from the CCRC to send a follow-up survey to the participant with the matching identification number approximately 1 week later. Once again, the respondents completed and anonymously returned the survey to a centralized drop box in each CCRC. Study procedures were exempt from institutional review as the survey results could not be linked to the respondents by the investigative team; however, the study was approved by the National Institute on Aging Intramural Program (via a clinical investigator meeting) and the Research Advisory Board for the CCRCs. Measurements Modified Version of the Oswestry Low Back Pain Disability Questionnaire The original Oswestry questionnaire [ 26 ] is a disease-specific measure of disability among patients with LBP originally described by Fairbank et al. The 10 following areas of function comprise the original questionnaire: pain severity, lifting, sitting, standing, walking, sleeping, personal hygiene, social life, traveling and sex life. As the sex life question is often left blank by patients of varying age groups, researchers have developed modified versions of this questionnaire with a replacement for the sex question [ 27 , 28 ]. In order to minimize missing data issues in this study, we opted to use the modified version by Fritz and Irrgang that includes a question on employment/homemaking ability in place of the sex life question [ 28 ]. This modified version of the Oswestry (mOSW) questionnaire demonstrated excellent reliability and good construct validity in comparison to other pain and disability measures in younger populations [ 28 ]. In terms of scoring this questionnaire, scores range from 0 to 5 (higher scores represent greater disability) for each question. Then, adding the individual scores for each question and multiplying the total by two generates the final score, which is given as a percentage. The modified version of this questionnaire has been used extensively in randomized trials of patients with LBP [ 18 – 20 ]. Quebec Back Pain Disability Scale The Quebec scale is a disease-specific measure of disability associated with LBP that has demonstrated good to excellent reliability and validity among younger age groups [ 29 , 30 ] in two studies and fair reliability in another study [ 28 ]. The scale asks patients to rate their level of difficulty in performing each of 20 daily activities. Scores range from 0 to 5 with lower scores depicting no difficulty at all and higher scores representing inability to perform the activities. The scores on each of the 20 questions are added together for a summary score ranging from 0 to 100. This scale has also been widely used in randomized trials of LBP [ 21 – 23 ]. Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) The NPRS is a self-report instrument used to assess current pain status in this study. Participants were asked to rate their current LBP on a scale from 0 to 10. The scale was shown with numbers from 0 to10 on a line with the following anchors at respective ends of the scale: “no pain” and “extremely intense pain.” Medical Outcomes Short Form-36 (SF-36) Health-related quality of life was measured using the SF-36, a generic self-administered questionnaire used to examine health in the following eight domains: bodily pain, physical function, role limitations due to physical problems, general health, vitality, social function, role limitations due to social problems, and mental health. Scores on each scale were transformed into 0–100 scales with higher scores representing better health status. Two subscale scores representing overall physical health (Physical Component Summary Scale) and overall mental health (Mental Component Summary Scale) were also examined. These two scales use norm-based scoring with each scale scored to have the same average of 50 and a standard deviation (SD) of 10 points [ 31 ]. Therefore, any score below 50 would represent health status that is below average compared with the rest of the population. The psychometric properties of this instrument are well-established for use in multiple populations, including survey studies [ 31 , 32 ]. Global Rating of Change Scale In the follow-up survey, the participants are asked to rate their overall change in LBP status since completion of the initial survey using the 15-point scale described by Jaeschke et al, which has been validated for research purposes [ 33 ]. The rating scale ranges from ?7 (a very great deal worse) to 0 (about the same) to +7 (a very great deal better). Participants with ratings between ?3 and +3 were considered to have remained stable in their pain status. Health Status Limitations Using a specific question from the SF-36, social interference was considered present if participants reported “quite a bit” or “extreme” interference due to physical problems. Additionally, the participants were asked about their use of assistive devices for walking (yes/no) and whether they rated their health as fair to poor (yes/no). Data Analysis Test–retest reliability of the mOSW and Quebec questionnaires was investigated using the intraclass correlation coefficient, model 2,1 [ICC (2,1)] in participants who remained stable in LBP status between the initial and follow-up surveys based upon the global rating of change scale. ICC (2,1) is based on the two-way random effects model and is the appropriate ICC model to measure agreement between ratings [ 34 ]. Measurement of validity is essential to understand whether a specific instrument is representing what it is proposed to represent. As there is no gold standard instrument that can be used to represent the concept or construct of LBP-related disability, we have chosen to evaluate convergent and construct validity in the following ways based upon the approach used by Smith et al. [ 35 ]. Convergent validity was assessed by evaluating the correlation between the questionnaires of interest and a questionnaire that is thought to measure a similar construct. Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated between the questionnaires of interest and all eight domains of the SF-36. As a demonstration of convergent validity, we expected that the mOSW and Quebec scales would be most strongly correlated with the bodily pain and physical function domains of the SF-36 (large negative correlations) and most weakly correlated with the mental health and role limitations due to social problem domains (small negative correlations) as mental and emotional problems do not represent the construct of LBP-related disability. Construct validity can be assessed by evaluating the relationship between the questionnaire of interest and an operational definition designed to represent the construct of interest, which is the case in LBP-related disability [ 36 ]. Essentially, the questionnaires under investigation should be able to discriminate between those with and without LBP-related disability. LBP was represented by assessments of current severity and chronicity of LBP, whereas functional limitation was represented by scores on the physical function domain of the SF-36. Therefore, we operationalized LBP-related disability as follows: 1) high LBP severity (>4 on the 0–10 NPRS) with high levels of functional limitation (lowest quartile of physical function scores [<45 on 0–100 scale] on the SF-36) and 2) presence of chronic LBP (>12 weeks in duration) with high levels of functional limitation as described previously. We hypothesized that participants with high pain severity and greater functional limitations would have higher scores on the mOSW and Quebec scales than other participants as would participants with chronic LBP and greater functional limitations. Analysis of covariance was used to assess between group differences with adjustment for age, sex and comorbidities (cancer, diabetes mellitus, stroke, heart disease, pulmonary disease, osteoarthritis and osteoporosis). To further investigate construct validity, odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using logistic regression to determine associations between LBP-related disability and specific health status limitations (use of assistive device for walking, social interference due to physical problems and fair/poor self-rated health). A high level of LBP-related disability was classified as the upper quartile of scores for the mOSW (?44%) and the Quebec (?49%). Two separate models were fitted for each of the mOSW and the Quebec instruments. A strong association between LBP-related disability on the scales under investigation and specific limitations would demonstrate good construct validity. Given the high correlation between LBP and comorbidity in older adults, the odds ratios were adjusted for age, sex and comorbidities, including cancer, diabetes mellitus, stroke, heart disease, pulmonary disease, osteoarthritis and osteoporosis. Statistically meaningful change was established by determining the standard error of measurement (SEM) for the mOSW and Quebec using data from the participants classified as stable. The SEM was calculated as follows using the methodology proposed by Fritz and Irrgang [ 28 ]: SD × (1 ? r )1/2, where SD is the square root of the total variance and r is the test–retest reliability coefficient. Then, the SEM was multiplied by 1.65 to calculate the 90% CI [ 28 ]. Then, to account for errors associated with repeated measurements, the 90% CI value was multiplied by the square root of 2, which gave us the MDC [ 37 ]. As values within a subject should be random around that subject’s long-term mean, one can treat the observations at the two times as if they were uncorrelated for purposes of within-individual change. The variance of the difference would thus be the sum of the variances at each time. This translates into multiplying the SEM by the square root of 2 to get error estimates for the difference. Once the MDC was determined for each of the self-report measures, we were able to evaluate whether the measurement scales were sufficiently wide to distinguish status change over time. To do so, we determined the proportion of participants whose score on each instrument at initial assessment would not have allowed them to improve or worsen according to the predetermined MDC at the follow-up assessment. According to the methodology proposed by Davidson and Keating [ 30 ], “questionnaires with more than 15% of respondents scoring within the MDC at the upper or lower end of the available range of scores should not be used.”  Measurements Modified Version of the Oswestry Low Back Pain Disability Questionnaire The original Oswestry questionnaire [ 26 ] is a disease-specific measure of disability among patients with LBP originally described by Fairbank et al. The 10 following areas of function comprise the original questionnaire: pain severity, lifting, sitting, standing, walking, sleeping, personal hygiene, social life, traveling and sex life. As the sex life question is often left blank by patients of varying age groups, researchers have developed modified versions of this questionnaire with a replacement for the sex question [ 27 , 28 ]. In order to minimize missing data issues in this study, we opted to use the modified version by Fritz and Irrgang that includes a question on employment/homemaking ability in place of the sex life question [ 28 ]. This modified version of the Oswestry (mOSW) questionnaire demonstrated excellent reliability and good construct validity in comparison to other pain and disability measures in younger populations [ 28 ]. In terms of scoring this questionnaire, scores range from 0 to 5 (higher scores represent greater disability) for each question. Then, adding the individual scores for each question and multiplying the total by two generates the final score, which is given as a percentage. The modified version of this questionnaire has been used extensively in randomized trials of patients with LBP [ 18 – 20 ]. Quebec Back Pain Disability Scale The Quebec scale is a disease-specific measure of disability associated with LBP that has demonstrated good to excellent reliability and validity among younger age groups [ 29 , 30 ] in two studies and fair reliability in another study [ 28 ]. The scale asks patients to rate their level of difficulty in performing each of 20 daily activities. Scores range from 0 to 5 with lower scores depicting no difficulty at all and higher scores representing inability to perform the activities. The scores on each of the 20 questions are added together for a summary score ranging from 0 to 100. This scale has also been widely used in randomized trials of LBP [ 21 – 23 ]. Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) The NPRS is a self-report instrument used to assess current pain status in this study. Participants were asked to rate their current LBP on a scale from 0 to 10. The scale was shown with numbers from 0 to10 on a line with the following anchors at respective ends of the scale: “no pain” and “extremely intense pain.” Medical Outcomes Short Form-36 (SF-36) Health-related quality of life was measured using the SF-36, a generic self-administered questionnaire used to examine health in the following eight domains: bodily pain, physical function, role limitations due to physical problems, general health, vitality, social function, role limitations due to social problems, and mental health. Scores on each scale were transformed into 0–100 scales with higher scores representing better health status. Two subscale scores representing overall physical health (Physical Component Summary Scale) and overall mental health (Mental Component Summary Scale) were also examined. These two scales use norm-based scoring with each scale scored to have the same average of 50 and a standard deviation (SD) of 10 points [ 31 ]. Therefore, any score below 50 would represent health status that is below average compared with the rest of the population. The psychometric properties of this instrument are well-established for use in multiple populations, including survey studies [ 31 , 32 ]. Global Rating of Change Scale In the follow-up survey, the participants are asked to rate their overall change in LBP status since completion of the initial survey using the 15-point scale described by Jaeschke et al, which has been validated for research purposes [ 33 ]. The rating scale ranges from ?7 (a very great deal worse) to 0 (about the same) to +7 (a very great deal better). Participants with ratings between ?3 and +3 were considered to have remained stable in their pain status. Health Status Limitations Using a specific question from the SF-36, social interference was considered present if participants reported “quite a bit” or “extreme” interference due to physical problems. Additionally, the participants were asked about their use of assistive devices for walking (yes/no) and whether they rated their health as fair to poor (yes/no).  Modified Version of the Oswestry Low Back Pain Disability Questionnaire The original Oswestry questionnaire [ 26 ] is a disease-specific measure of disability among patients with LBP originally described by Fairbank et al. The 10 following areas of function comprise the original questionnaire: pain severity, lifting, sitting, standing, walking, sleeping, personal hygiene, social life, traveling and sex life. As the sex life question is often left blank by patients of varying age groups, researchers have developed modified versions of this questionnaire with a replacement for the sex question [ 27 , 28 ]. In order to minimize missing data issues in this study, we opted to use the modified version by Fritz and Irrgang that includes a question on employment/homemaking ability in place of the sex life question [ 28 ]. This modified version of the Oswestry (mOSW) questionnaire demonstrated excellent reliability and good construct validity in comparison to other pain and disability measures in younger populations [ 28 ]. In terms of scoring this questionnaire, scores range from 0 to 5 (higher scores represent greater disability) for each question. Then, adding the individual scores for each question and multiplying the total by two generates the final score, which is given as a percentage. The modified version of this questionnaire has been used extensively in randomized trials of patients with LBP [ 18 – 20 ].  Quebec Back Pain Disability Scale The Quebec scale is a disease-specific measure of disability associated with LBP that has demonstrated good to excellent reliability and validity among younger age groups [ 29 , 30 ] in two studies and fair reliability in another study [ 28 ]. The scale asks patients to rate their level of difficulty in performing each of 20 daily activities. Scores range from 0 to 5 with lower scores depicting no difficulty at all and higher scores representing inability to perform the activities. The scores on each of the 20 questions are added together for a summary score ranging from 0 to 100. This scale has also been widely used in randomized trials of LBP [ 21 – 23 ].  Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) The NPRS is a self-report instrument used to assess current pain status in this study. Participants were asked to rate their current LBP on a scale from 0 to 10. The scale was shown with numbers from 0 to10 on a line with the following anchors at respective ends of the scale: “no pain” and “extremely intense pain.”  Medical Outcomes Short Form-36 (SF-36) Health-related quality of life was measured using the SF-36, a generic self-administered questionnaire used to examine health in the following eight domains: bodily pain, physical function, role limitations due to physical problems, general health, vitality, social function, role limitations due to social problems, and mental health. Scores on each scale were transformed into 0–100 scales with higher scores representing better health status. Two subscale scores representing overall physical health (Physical Component Summary Scale) and overall mental health (Mental Component Summary Scale) were also examined. These two scales use norm-based scoring with each scale scored to have the same average of 50 and a standard deviation (SD) of 10 points [ 31 ]. Therefore, any score below 50 would represent health status that is below average compared with the rest of the population. The psychometric properties of this instrument are well-established for use in multiple populations, including survey studies [ 31 , 32 ].  Global Rating of Change Scale In the follow-up survey, the participants are asked to rate their overall change in LBP status since completion of the initial survey using the 15-point scale described by Jaeschke et al, which has been validated for research purposes [ 33 ]. The rating scale ranges from ?7 (a very great deal worse) to 0 (about the same) to +7 (a very great deal better). Participants with ratings between ?3 and +3 were considered to have remained stable in their pain status.  Health Status Limitations Using a specific question from the SF-36, social interference was considered present if participants reported “quite a bit” or “extreme” interference due to physical problems. Additionally, the participants were asked about their use of assistive devices for walking (yes/no) and whether they rated their health as fair to poor (yes/no).  Data Analysis Test–retest reliability of the mOSW and Quebec questionnaires was investigated using the intraclass correlation coefficient, model 2,1 [ICC (2,1)] in participants who remained stable in LBP status between the initial and follow-up surveys based upon the global rating of change scale. ICC (2,1) is based on the two-way random effects model and is the appropriate ICC model to measure agreement between ratings [ 34 ]. Measurement of validity is essential to understand whether a specific instrument is representing what it is proposed to represent. As there is no gold standard instrument that can be used to represent the concept or construct of LBP-related disability, we have chosen to evaluate convergent and construct validity in the following ways based upon the approach used by Smith et al. [ 35 ]. Convergent validity was assessed by evaluating the correlation between the questionnaires of interest and a questionnaire that is thought to measure a similar construct. Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated between the questionnaires of interest and all eight domains of the SF-36. As a demonstration of convergent validity, we expected that the mOSW and Quebec scales would be most strongly correlated with the bodily pain and physical function domains of the SF-36 (large negative correlations) and most weakly correlated with the mental health and role limitations due to social problem domains (small negative correlations) as mental and emotional problems do not represent the construct of LBP-related disability. Construct validity can be assessed by evaluating the relationship between the questionnaire of interest and an operational definition designed to represent the construct of interest, which is the case in LBP-related disability [ 36 ]. Essentially, the questionnaires under investigation should be able to discriminate between those with and without LBP-related disability. LBP was represented by assessments of current severity and chronicity of LBP, whereas functional limitation was represented by scores on the physical function domain of the SF-36. Therefore, we operationalized LBP-related disability as follows: 1) high LBP severity (>4 on the 0–10 NPRS) with high levels of functional limitation (lowest quartile of physical function scores [<45 on 0–100 scale] on the SF-36) and 2) presence of chronic LBP (>12 weeks in duration) with high levels of functional limitation as described previously. We hypothesized that participants with high pain severity and greater functional limitations would have higher scores on the mOSW and Quebec scales than other participants as would participants with chronic LBP and greater functional limitations. Analysis of covariance was used to assess between group differences with adjustment for age, sex and comorbidities (cancer, diabetes mellitus, stroke, heart disease, pulmonary disease, osteoarthritis and osteoporosis). To further investigate construct validity, odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using logistic regression to determine associations between LBP-related disability and specific health status limitations (use of assistive device for walking, social interference due to physical problems and fair/poor self-rated health). A high level of LBP-related disability was classified as the upper quartile of scores for the mOSW (?44%) and the Quebec (?49%). Two separate models were fitted for each of the mOSW and the Quebec instruments. A strong association between LBP-related disability on the scales under investigation and specific limitations would demonstrate good construct validity. Given the high correlation between LBP and comorbidity in older adults, the odds ratios were adjusted for age, sex and comorbidities, including cancer, diabetes mellitus, stroke, heart disease, pulmonary disease, osteoarthritis and osteoporosis. Statistically meaningful change was established by determining the standard error of measurement (SEM) for the mOSW and Quebec using data from the participants classified as stable. The SEM was calculated as follows using the methodology proposed by Fritz and Irrgang [ 28 ]: SD × (1 ? r )1/2, where SD is the square root of the total variance and r is the test–retest reliability coefficient. Then, the SEM was multiplied by 1.65 to calculate the 90% CI [ 28 ]. Then, to account for errors associated with repeated measurements, the 90% CI value was multiplied by the square root of 2, which gave us the MDC [ 37 ]. As values within a subject should be random around that subject’s long-term mean, one can treat the observations at the two times as if they were uncorrelated for purposes of within-individual change. The variance of the difference would thus be the sum of the variances at each time. This translates into multiplying the SEM by the square root of 2 to get error estimates for the difference. Once the MDC was determined for each of the self-report measures, we were able to evaluate whether the measurement scales were sufficiently wide to distinguish status change over time. To do so, we determined the proportion of participants whose score on each instrument at initial assessment would not have allowed them to improve or worsen according to the predetermined MDC at the follow-up assessment. According to the methodology proposed by Davidson and Keating [ 30 ], “questionnaires with more than 15% of respondents scoring within the MDC at the upper or lower end of the available range of scores should not be used.”  Results Of the 522 respondents to the initial survey, 107 reported having current LBP that was associated with activity limitation, thus meeting the inclusion criteria for this analysis. Eleven subjects endorsed having current LBP but did not endorse activity limitation; thus, they were not included in this analysis. Of the 107 with current LBP, 84 agreed to complete and return the follow-up survey; 56 returned the follow-up survey and had complete data. The mean number of days between the surveys was 11 days. In terms of demographics, the participants who returned only the initial survey were no different than those who participated in both the initial assessment and the reliability component of the study ( P > 0.05). On the global rating of change scale, all participants who returned the follow-up survey were classified as stable; therefore, all were included in the reliability analyses (N = 56). Descriptive characteristics for the entire sample with current LBP are presented in Table 1 . Test–retest reliability of the modified Oswestry was excellent with an ICC of 0.92 (95% CI: 0.86, 0.95) ( Table 2 ). The reliability of the Quebec was also excellent, with an ICC of 0.94 (95% CI: 0.90, 0.97). Convergent validity of the mOSW and Quebec was assessed using Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients, which is presented in Table 3 . As expected, both instruments had moderately strong, negative correlations with the physical function and bodily pain domains of the SF-36, as well as the weakest negative correlations with the mental health and role-emotional domains of the SF-36. Participants with high pain severity and high levels of functional limitation had higher scores on the mOSW ( P < 0.0001) and Quebec ( P < 0.001) scales than other participants. ( Table 4 ) Further, participants with chronic LBP and high levels of functional limitation also had higher scores on the mOSW ( P < 0.0001) and Quebec ( P < 0.0001) scales compared with other participants. As seen in Table 5 , participants with high levels of LBP-related disability as measured by the mOSW (?44%) and the Quebec (?49%) were much more likely to use an assistive device for walking and were more likely to report fair/poor self-rated health. Interestingly, as compared with the Quebec, a high score on the mOSW was much more strongly associated with social interference related to physical problems and lower self-rated health. In terms of statistically meaningful change, the SEM values for the mOSW and Quebec are 4.57 and 4.73, respectively. Therefore, the values required to represent an MDC in the self-report measures are 10.66 for the mOSW and 11.04 for the Quebec. Using the MDC of 10.66 for the mOSW, our scale width evaluation revealed that 14.5% of the participants scored below 10.66 and 0% scored above 89.34 on the Oswestry at the initial assessment. For the Quebec instrument, 14.5% scored below 11 and 0.66% scored above 89 at the initial assessment.  Results Of the 522 respondents to the initial survey, 107 reported having current LBP that was associated with activity limitation, thus meeting the inclusion criteria for this analysis. Eleven subjects endorsed having current LBP but did not endorse activity limitation; thus, they were not included in this analysis. Of the 107 with current LBP, 84 agreed to complete and return the follow-up survey; 56 returned the follow-up survey and had complete data. The mean number of days between the surveys was 11 days. In terms of demographics, the participants who returned only the initial survey were no different than those who participated in both the initial assessment and the reliability component of the study ( P > 0.05). On the global rating of change scale, all participants who returned the follow-up survey were classified as stable; therefore, all were included in the reliability analyses (N = 56). Descriptive characteristics for the entire sample with current LBP are presented in Table 1 . Test–retest reliability of the modified Oswestry was excellent with an ICC of 0.92 (95% CI: 0.86, 0.95) ( Table 2 ). The reliability of the Quebec was also excellent, with an ICC of 0.94 (95% CI: 0.90, 0.97). Convergent validity of the mOSW and Quebec was assessed using Pearson product-moment correlation coefficients, which is presented in Table 3 . As expected, both instruments had moderately strong, negative correlations with the physical function and bodily pain domains of the SF-36, as well as the weakest negative correlations with the mental health and role-emotional domains of the SF-36. Participants with high pain severity and high levels of functional limitation had higher scores on the mOSW ( P < 0.0001) and Quebec ( P < 0.001) scales than other participants. ( Table 4 ) Further, participants with chronic LBP and high levels of functional limitation also had higher scores on the mOSW ( P < 0.0001) and Quebec ( P < 0.0001) scales compared with other participants. As seen in Table 5 , participants with high levels of LBP-related disability as measured by the mOSW (?44%) and the Quebec (?49%) were much more likely to use an assistive device for walking and were more likely to report fair/poor self-rated health. Interestingly, as compared with the Quebec, a high score on the mOSW was much more strongly associated with social interference related to physical problems and lower self-rated health. In terms of statistically meaningful change, the SEM values for the mOSW and Quebec are 4.57 and 4.73, respectively. Therefore, the values required to represent an MDC in the self-report measures are 10.66 for the mOSW and 11.04 for the Quebec. Using the MDC of 10.66 for the mOSW, our scale width evaluation revealed that 14.5% of the participants scored below 10.66 and 0% scored above 89.34 on the Oswestry at the initial assessment. For the Quebec instrument, 14.5% scored below 11 and 0.66% scored above 89 at the initial assessment.  Discussion LBP is a common problem in the geriatric population that contributes to poor physical and psychosocial outcomes; however, there is little research available to guide clinicians in the management of this problem. In order to effectively capture the level of functional limitation and perceived disability in this population in both the clinical and research settings, the psychometric properties of commonly used self-report instruments must be specifically established among older adults with LBP. Based on the results of this study, it appears that both the mOSW and Quebec scales have excellent test–retest reliability and good construct validity when used to evaluate LBP-related disability for older adults with varying degrees of LBP. In this study, test–retest reliability provides an estimate of how stable one can expect self-reports of LBP-related disability to remain over time in a group of older adults for whom there has been no change in functional status. We assessed the test–retest reliability of two commonly used LBP disability questionnaires in a sample of older adults and found excellent reliability for both the modified Oswestry and the Quebec scales. It should be noted that the narrow CIs seen for each instrument suggest that our reliability estimates are relatively precise. For the modified Oswestry, the ICC value was similarly high in comparison to estimates from younger, working samples with LBP [ 28 ]. In terms of the Quebec scale, the ICC of 0.94 was in line with the findings of Kopec et al. (ICC = 0.94) who originally developed the scale [ 29 ]. Other studies have demonstrated lower levels of reliability for the Quebec scale. Davidson and Keating found an ICC of 0.84 (95% CI: 0.73, 0.91) [ 30 ], while Fritz and Irrgang found an ICC of 0.55 (95% CI: 0.20, 0.78) [ 28 ]. In terms of sample characteristics, we would like to note that the participants in the Fritz and Davidson studies were actively seeking physical therapy treatment for their LBP and thus tended to have higher disability scores on the mOSW and the Quebec scales as compared with our participants, although the variability in the scores was very similar to our sample [ 28 , 30 ]. Additionally, it is important to note that the sample in the Fritz study included patients with acute LBP and an average age of 37.2 (SD: 9.6), while the sample from the Davidson study was more similar to our study in that there was no exclusion criteria based on acuity of symptoms and the average age was 55 (SD: 17). It is possible that the Quebec scale is more well-suited for use in older vs young populations. In addition to testing reliability, we assessed convergent and construct validity by comparing the instruments under examination to external measures that were similar to the theoretical construct of interest—LBP-related disability. As no gold standard measure of LBP-related disability has been established in the geriatric population, we used specific domain measures from the SF-36, as well as measures of pain severity and chronicity to assess validity. In order to demonstrate convergent validity between the instrument under investigation and the external standard, correlation coefficients should at least be in the range of 0.4–0.6, according to Streiner [ 36 ]. The modified Oswestry scale was most strongly correlated with the physical function and bodily pain domains of the SF-36 and clearly had coefficients above the 0.4–0.6 range, which was expected as it proposes to measure pain-related disability. The Quebec scale also had some of its strongest correlations with the function and pain domains of the SF-36, but the associations were not as strong as with the mOSW. We also expected that the two scales would be most weakly correlated with the mental health and role-emotional domains of the SF-36 as these domains are unrelated to the construct of pain-related disability and this hypothesis was affirmed. These findings lend credence to the validity of using the mOSW and Quebec scales in the geriatric population. To assess the construct validity of these measures, we defined LBP-related disability using a combination of high pain severity, longer pain duration and greater functional limitations. We believe that our definitions clearly identified a group of people with significant LBP and functional limitations who are most likely to seek care for their problems, thus providing an appropriate standard against which to measure performance of the two questionnaires of interest. Even after adjustment for comorbidities, the participants who were classified as having LBP-related disability had significantly higher scores on both the mOSW and the Quebec scales, which is in accordance with our hypotheses. To examine construct validity from a different perspective, we examined associations between high levels of LBP-related disability (as measured by the modified Oswestry and Quebec scales) and specific health status limitations, after adjustment for comorbidity status. For both scales, having a high level of disability was associated with significantly greater odds of using an assistive device, having fair/poor self-rated health, and reporting social interference due to physical problems. A major difference between the two scales was that the modified Oswestry was much more strongly associated with reports of social interference due to physical problems. This is likely due to the fact that the Oswestry specifically queries the respondent about his or her social life, unlike the Quebec scale, which focuses on functional tasks. Altogether, the findings of this study support the concept that the modified Oswestry and the Quebec instruments are valid tools for use in the geriatric population with LBP. To evaluate statistically meaningful change, we calculated the MDC, which tells us the minimal amount of change that would indicate a true change had occurred. The MDC of 10.66 points calculated for the modified Oswestry in this sample of older adults is lower than previous reports of 15.0 [ 30 ] and 12.68 points [ 28 ]. The MDC of 11.04 for the Quebec scale is substantially lower than the MDC of 19.0 points reported by Davidson and Keating and the MDC of 30.52 reported by Fritz and Irrgang [ 28 ]. The higher MDC values reflect the lower levels of reliability seen for the Quebec in both of these studies. Based on our results, one would need to minimally see a change of approximately 11 points for both scales to believe that real change had occurred in an older adults’ functional status. Using the MDC values for both instruments, we were able to determine that both have a scale width sufficient enough to detect both worsening and improvement of status. A major advantage of this study is the use of a community-dwelling sample of older adults with varying degrees of LBP severity and chronicity. However, several limitations must be considered in interpreting the findings. First, although the SF-36 has been well validated in multiple populations, it must be acknowledged that some studies have documented difficulties in postal administration among older adults [ 38 , 39 ] due to low completion rates for the SF-36. In our sample, completion rates for the entire survey and the SF-36 were high, thus bolstering our confidence in the use of the SF-36 as an overall measure of health status. Additionally, although we evaluated statistically important change in both instruments, we were not able to evaluate clinically meaningful change as our entire sample remained stable over the course of the study. Future studies of older adults with LBP that have longer follow-up times and/or studies that involve interventions should evaluate the minimum clinically important difference for both scales. Another limitation of this study is that we were unable to completely assess cognitive status as all data collection was carried out via mail. A final limitation is the racial and relative economic homogeneity of the sample, which limits the generalizability to older white adults living in a CCRC setting. Given that older adults living in these CCRCs come from a higher income bracket and have higher educational status, the psychometric properties of these self-report measures need to be evaluated in a more racially and economically diverse sample of older adults.  Discussion LBP is a common problem in the geriatric population that contributes to poor physical and psychosocial outcomes; however, there is little research available to guide clinicians in the management of this problem. In order to effectively capture the level of functional limitation and perceived disability in this population in both the clinical and research settings, the psychometric properties of commonly used self-report instruments must be specifically established among older adults with LBP. Based on the results of this study, it appears that both the mOSW and Quebec scales have excellent test–retest reliability and good construct validity when used to evaluate LBP-related disability for older adults with varying degrees of LBP. In this study, test–retest reliability provides an estimate of how stable one can expect self-reports of LBP-related disability to remain over time in a group of older adults for whom there has been no change in functional status. We assessed the test–retest reliability of two commonly used LBP disability questionnaires in a sample of older adults and found excellent reliability for both the modified Oswestry and the Quebec scales. It should be noted that the narrow CIs seen for each instrument suggest that our reliability estimates are relatively precise. For the modified Oswestry, the ICC value was similarly high in comparison to estimates from younger, working samples with LBP [ 28 ]. In terms of the Quebec scale, the ICC of 0.94 was in line with the findings of Kopec et al. (ICC = 0.94) who originally developed the scale [ 29 ]. Other studies have demonstrated lower levels of reliability for the Quebec scale. Davidson and Keating found an ICC of 0.84 (95% CI: 0.73, 0.91) [ 30 ], while Fritz and Irrgang found an ICC of 0.55 (95% CI: 0.20, 0.78) [ 28 ]. In terms of sample characteristics, we would like to note that the participants in the Fritz and Davidson studies were actively seeking physical therapy treatment for their LBP and thus tended to have higher disability scores on the mOSW and the Quebec scales as compared with our participants, although the variability in the scores was very similar to our sample [ 28 , 30 ]. Additionally, it is important to note that the sample in the Fritz study included patients with acute LBP and an average age of 37.2 (SD: 9.6), while the sample from the Davidson study was more similar to our study in that there was no exclusion criteria based on acuity of symptoms and the average age was 55 (SD: 17). It is possible that the Quebec scale is more well-suited for use in older vs young populations. In addition to testing reliability, we assessed convergent and construct validity by comparing the instruments under examination to external measures that were similar to the theoretical construct of interest—LBP-related disability. As no gold standard measure of LBP-related disability has been established in the geriatric population, we used specific domain measures from the SF-36, as well as measures of pain severity and chronicity to assess validity. In order to demonstrate convergent validity between the instrument under investigation and the external standard, correlation coefficients should at least be in the range of 0.4–0.6, according to Streiner [ 36 ]. The modified Oswestry scale was most strongly correlated with the physical function and bodily pain domains of the SF-36 and clearly had coefficients above the 0.4–0.6 range, which was expected as it proposes to measure pain-related disability. The Quebec scale also had some of its strongest correlations with the function and pain domains of the SF-36, but the associations were not as strong as with the mOSW. We also expected that the two scales would be most weakly correlated with the mental health and role-emotional domains of the SF-36 as these domains are unrelated to the construct of pain-related disability and this hypothesis was affirmed. These findings lend credence to the validity of using the mOSW and Quebec scales in the geriatric population. To assess the construct validity of these measures, we defined LBP-related disability using a combination of high pain severity, longer pain duration and greater functional limitations. We believe that our definitions clearly identified a group of people with significant LBP and functional limitations who are most likely to seek care for their problems, thus providing an appropriate standard against which to measure performance of the two questionnaires of interest. Even after adjustment for comorbidities, the participants who were classified as having LBP-related disability had significantly higher scores on both the mOSW and the Quebec scales, which is in accordance with our hypotheses. To examine construct validity from a different perspective, we examined associations between high levels of LBP-related disability (as measured by the modified Oswestry and Quebec scales) and specific health status limitations, after adjustment for comorbidity status. For both scales, having a high level of disability was associated with significantly greater odds of using an assistive device, having fair/poor self-rated health, and reporting social interference due to physical problems. A major difference between the two scales was that the modified Oswestry was much more strongly associated with reports of social interference due to physical problems. This is likely due to the fact that the Oswestry specifically queries the respondent about his or her social life, unlike the Quebec scale, which focuses on functional tasks. Altogether, the findings of this study support the concept that the modified Oswestry and the Quebec instruments are valid tools for use in the geriatric population with LBP. To evaluate statistically meaningful change, we calculated the MDC, which tells us the minimal amount of change that would indicate a true change had occurred. The MDC of 10.66 points calculated for the modified Oswestry in this sample of older adults is lower than previous reports of 15.0 [ 30 ] and 12.68 points [ 28 ]. The MDC of 11.04 for the Quebec scale is substantially lower than the MDC of 19.0 points reported by Davidson and Keating and the MDC of 30.52 reported by Fritz and Irrgang [ 28 ]. The higher MDC values reflect the lower levels of reliability seen for the Quebec in both of these studies. Based on our results, one would need to minimally see a change of approximately 11 points for both scales to believe that real change had occurred in an older adults’ functional status. Using the MDC values for both instruments, we were able to determine that both have a scale width sufficient enough to detect both worsening and improvement of status. A major advantage of this study is the use of a community-dwelling sample of older adults with varying degrees of LBP severity and chronicity. However, several limitations must be considered in interpreting the findings. First, although the SF-36 has been well validated in multiple populations, it must be acknowledged that some studies have documented difficulties in postal administration among older adults [ 38 , 39 ] due to low completion rates for the SF-36. In our sample, completion rates for the entire survey and the SF-36 were high, thus bolstering our confidence in the use of the SF-36 as an overall measure of health status. Additionally, although we evaluated statistically important change in both instruments, we were not able to evaluate clinically meaningful change as our entire sample remained stable over the course of the study. Future studies of older adults with LBP that have longer follow-up times and/or studies that involve interventions should evaluate the minimum clinically important difference for both scales. Another limitation of this study is that we were unable to completely assess cognitive status as all data collection was carried out via mail. A final limitation is the racial and relative economic homogeneity of the sample, which limits the generalizability to older white adults living in a CCRC setting. Given that older adults living in these CCRCs come from a higher income bracket and have higher educational status, the psychometric properties of these self-report measures need to be evaluated in a more racially and economically diverse sample of older adults.  Conclusions To our knowledge, this is the first investigation of the psychometric properties of two commonly used LBP-related disability questionnaires in an entirely geriatric population. It appears that both instruments demonstrate excellent reliability and good construct validity with neither instrument appearing to have superior psychometric properties. Future work should evaluate the responsiveness to change for each of these instruments in the geriatric population. 