Silencing of TMS1/ASC promotes resistance to anoikis in breast epithelial cells D uctal c arcinoma i n s itu (DCIS) is characterized by ductal epithelial cells that have filled the luminal space of the breast duct and survive despite loss of extracellular matrix contact. In normal epithelial cells, the loss of such contact triggers a form of apoptosis known as detachment-induced apoptosis or “anoikis.” TMS1/ASC is a bipartite adaptor molecule that participates in inflammatory and apoptotic signaling pathways. Epigenetic silencing of TMS1 has been observed in a significant proportion of human breast and other cancers, but the mechanism by which TMS1 silencing contributes to carcinogenesis is unknown. Here we examined the role of TMS1 in anoikis. We found that TMS1 expression is induced in response to loss of substratum interactions in breast epithelial cells. siRNA-mediated knockdown of TMS1 leads to anoikis resistance, due in part to the persistent activation of ERK and an impaired ability to upregulate the BH3-only protein Bim. We further show that the detachment-induced cleavage of procaspase-8, a newly described mediator of cellular adhesion, is significantly inhibited in the absence of TMS1. These data demonstrate a novel upstream role for TMS1 in the promotion of anoikis, and suggest that silencing of TMS1 may contribute to the pathogenesis of breast cancer by allowing epithelial cells to bypass cell death in the early stages of breast cancer development. This conclusion is supported by in vivo data showing that TMS1 is selectively downregulated in the aberrant epithelial cells filling the lumen of the breast duct in a subset of primary DCIS lesions.  Introduction Epithelial cells require adhesion to the e xtra c ellular m atrix (ECM) for survival. Adhesion maintains proper tissue architecture by dictating cellular properties such as shape, polarity and proliferation. Molecularly, these properties are mediated by integrins, which bind components of the ECM and induce downstream signaling through cytosolic adaptor molecules. Detachment from the substratum and loss of integrin-mediated survival signals induces a form of programmed cell death termed “anoikis” ( 1 ). Anoikis is important for organogenesis and tissue homeostasis, and for ensuring that cells remain in their proper cellular context. One of the hallmarks of cancer is the acquired ability to invade basement membranes and neighboring tissues, which requires that cells survive in an anchorage independent state and develop the means to resist anoikis. Thus, understanding how epithelial cells avoid anoikis is a critical task in understanding, preventing, and treating human cancer. The molecular events that mediate anoikis are incompletely understood and can be cell-type dependent. Both the intrinsic/mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, which is governed by the initiator caspase-9, and the extrinsic/death receptor-mediated pathway of apoptosis, which is governed by the initiator caspase-8, have been implicated. The involvement of the mitochondrial pathway is supported by studies showing that overexpression of the antiapoptotic molecules Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL inhibit anoikis ( 2 ). In addition, the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members, Bax, Bid and Bim, translocate to the mitochondrion during anoikis, where they may function to promote cytochrome c release and cell death ( 3 , 4 ). There is also evidence supporting a role for caspase-8 in anoikis. Extracellular death ligands (e.g. Fas, TRAIL, TNF?), promote caspase-8 activation through a multimeric complex referred to as the DISC ( d eath i nducing s ignaling c omplex) ( 5 ). However, recent evidence indicates that anoikis is dependent on caspase-8 independent of death receptor ligation, although the mechanism for its activation remains unknown ( 2 , 6 ). Upregulation of the caspase-8 inhibitor c-Flip has been observed in many transformed cell lines that are resistant to anoikis ( 6 ) and inhibition of c-Flip in these cells restores sensitivity to anoikis ( 6 ). Furthermore, several studies have proposed a non-apoptotic role for caspase-8 as a mediator of cellular adhesion and motility ( 7 - 10 ). TMS1 (also known as ASC and PYCARD) is a bipartite signaling molecule that participates in apoptosis and inflammation. Although the precise function of TMS1 in apoptosis is unclear, overexpression or forced oligomerization of TMS1 in epithelial cells is sufficient to induce apoptosis via a mechanism that is dependent on caspase-8 ( 11 - 13 ). There is also evidence to suggest that TMS1-induced apoptosis is dependent on the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway in some cell types ( 11 , 14 , 15 ). Importantly, TMS1 is subject to aberrant DNA methylation and epigenetic silencing in a number of different tumor types ( 16 - 20 ), suggesting that loss of TMS1 confers a survival advantage to tumor cells. However, the mechanism by which silencing of TMS1 contributes to carcinogenesis remains unclear. Here we examined the impact of TMS1 expression on anoikis in breast epithelial cells, and discovered a novel role for TMS1 in detachment-induced cell death and breast cancer progression.  Materials and Methods Cell Culture and Anoikis Assays MCF10A cells were obtained from the Karmanos Cancer Institute (Detroit, MI) and cultured as described ( 13 ). MCF10A/pBabe and MCF10A/Bcl-2 cells were a kind gift from Dr. Joan Brugge ( 21 ). For anoikis assays, cell culture dishes were coated twice with 20 mg/ml poly-HEMA (Sigma) in 95% ethanol and dried overnight. poly-HEMA-coated dishes were washed twice with 1× PBS and seeded with 2.5 × 106 MCF10A cells per 10 cm dish in complete medium. Immunohistochemistry Archived specimens of paraffin-embedded normal breast tissue (n=4) and infiltrating ductal carcinoma (n=20) with associated ductal carcinoma in situ were obtained from the Avon/Grady Memorial Hospital Breast Tumor Bank (Atlanta, GA). Sections were deparaffinized, subjected to antigen retrieval, and incubated with primary antibody. The TMS1 antibody was an affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antibody (EU107) raised against a peptide encompassing amino acids 182–195 of human TMS1, and has been described ( 19 ). The E-cadherin antibody is from Invitrogen (#15068). Immunocomplexes were detected by the avidin-biotin complex method, using diaminobenzidine as the chromogen (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. Immunoblotting Protein lysates were harvested and analyzed as described ( 13 ). The antibodies used were: anti-ASC/TMS1 (MBL or Protein Tech), ?-tubulin (Sigma), Bim (Stressgen), caspase-8, Erk1/2, Phospho-Erk1/2 (pThr202/pTyr204), I?B? (Cell Signaling Technologies), GAPDH (Abcam), NF-?B p65, Bcl2 (Santa Cruz), PARP (Alexis Biochemicals), and PARP p85 (Promega). siRNA Transfection MCF10A cells (5.5 × 105) were seeded in 10 cm dishes and transfected the following day with 200 nM of the indicated siRNA using Oligofectamine (Invitrogen). siRNA duplexes were from Dharmacon (Lafeyette, CO) and had the following sequences: TMS1 siRNA#1, 5?-CGAGGGUCACAAACGUUGAdTdT-3? (sense); TMS1 siRNA#2, 5?GCAAGAUGCGGAAGCUCUUdTdT-3?; p65 siRNA, 5?-GCCCUAUCCCUUUACGUCAdTdT-3?. siControl Non-Targeting siRNA#1 (Dharmacon) was used as a control. Cell Death ELISA Apoptosis was quantified using the Cell Death Detection ELISA (Roche). Cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 500 ?l incubation buffer at room temperature for 30 min. Clarified lysates (100 ?l aliquots) containing 2.5 × 104 cell equivalents were used in the ELISA assay.  Cell Culture and Anoikis Assays MCF10A cells were obtained from the Karmanos Cancer Institute (Detroit, MI) and cultured as described ( 13 ). MCF10A/pBabe and MCF10A/Bcl-2 cells were a kind gift from Dr. Joan Brugge ( 21 ). For anoikis assays, cell culture dishes were coated twice with 20 mg/ml poly-HEMA (Sigma) in 95% ethanol and dried overnight. poly-HEMA-coated dishes were washed twice with 1× PBS and seeded with 2.5 × 106 MCF10A cells per 10 cm dish in complete medium.  Immunohistochemistry Archived specimens of paraffin-embedded normal breast tissue (n=4) and infiltrating ductal carcinoma (n=20) with associated ductal carcinoma in situ were obtained from the Avon/Grady Memorial Hospital Breast Tumor Bank (Atlanta, GA). Sections were deparaffinized, subjected to antigen retrieval, and incubated with primary antibody. The TMS1 antibody was an affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antibody (EU107) raised against a peptide encompassing amino acids 182–195 of human TMS1, and has been described ( 19 ). The E-cadherin antibody is from Invitrogen (#15068). Immunocomplexes were detected by the avidin-biotin complex method, using diaminobenzidine as the chromogen (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin.  Immunoblotting Protein lysates were harvested and analyzed as described ( 13 ). The antibodies used were: anti-ASC/TMS1 (MBL or Protein Tech), ?-tubulin (Sigma), Bim (Stressgen), caspase-8, Erk1/2, Phospho-Erk1/2 (pThr202/pTyr204), I?B? (Cell Signaling Technologies), GAPDH (Abcam), NF-?B p65, Bcl2 (Santa Cruz), PARP (Alexis Biochemicals), and PARP p85 (Promega).  siRNA Transfection MCF10A cells (5.5 × 105) were seeded in 10 cm dishes and transfected the following day with 200 nM of the indicated siRNA using Oligofectamine (Invitrogen). siRNA duplexes were from Dharmacon (Lafeyette, CO) and had the following sequences: TMS1 siRNA#1, 5?-CGAGGGUCACAAACGUUGAdTdT-3? (sense); TMS1 siRNA#2, 5?GCAAGAUGCGGAAGCUCUUdTdT-3?; p65 siRNA, 5?-GCCCUAUCCCUUUACGUCAdTdT-3?. siControl Non-Targeting siRNA#1 (Dharmacon) was used as a control.  Cell Death ELISA Apoptosis was quantified using the Cell Death Detection ELISA (Roche). Cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 500 ?l incubation buffer at room temperature for 30 min. Clarified lysates (100 ?l aliquots) containing 2.5 × 104 cell equivalents were used in the ELISA assay.  Results and Discussion TMS1 is a proapoptotic protein that is subject to epigenetic silencing in a significant proportion of breast and other cancers ( 16 - 20 ). We have previously shown that in normal breast tissue, TMS1 is selectively expressed in the ductal and lobular epithelium, while its expression is absent from the underlying myoepithelial and stromal cell compartments ( 18 ). We extended these findings to examine the expression of TMS1 in d uctal c arcinoma i n s itu (DCIS) lesions and invasive breast carcinomas. In DCIS lesions occurring adjacent to areas of invasive ductal carcinoma, we found that while the ductal epithelial cells in direct contact with the stroma retained TMS1 expression, a subset of the DCIS lesions examined showed reduced TMS1 expression in the majority of the epithelial cells that had filled the breast duct ( Figure 1A ,i-iii). Furthermore, it appeared that the cells closest to the basement membrane retained TMS1 expression, while those in the center of the duct lacked TMS1 expression. This pattern was noted in both solid-form ( Figure 1A , panels i,ii) and cribriform ( Figure 1A , panel iii) DCIS. This did not appear to be a reflection of a generalized loss of epithelial cell characteristics, as the central cells that selectively lose TMS1 expression retain E-cadherin expression ( Figure 1B , Supplemental Figure 1 ). In addition, although the majority of invasive breast carcinomas examined demonstrated varying degrees of TMS1 expression ( Figure 1A , panels iv,v), approximately 16% (3/19) of invasive ductal carcinomas had completely lost TMS1 expression ( Figure 1A , panel vi). Note that even in invasive breast carcinomas that lose TMS1 expression ( Figure 1A , panel vi, “Ca”), infiltrating “normal” inflammatory cells retain TMS1 expression ( Figure 1A , panels iv,vi, “Inf”). These data suggest that TMS1 expression is selectively lost in the aberrant epithelial cells filling the breast duct in some DCIS lesions and invasive breast carcinomas. Considering the limited data set, we cannot determine the relationship between TMS1 expression in DCIS and invasive carcinomas (ie. whether loss of TMS1 in certain DCIS lesions ultimately gives rise to invasive ductal carcinomas lacking TMS1 expression). Nevertheless, the data are suggestive that loss of TMS1 accompanies the transition from DCIS to invasive carcinoma during the progression of breast cancer. Considering the proapoptotic nature of TMS1 ( 13 , 14 ) and the unusual expression pattern observed in DCIS lesions, we hypothesized that downregulation of TMS1 might play a role in the resistance of breast epithelial cells to anoikis. To test this idea, we examined the impact of detachment on TMS1 expression in the nontransformed breast epithelial cell line MCF10A. Forced suspension of MCF10A cells led to a significant induction of TMS1 expression ( Figure 2 ). This upregulation occurred with similar kinetics to that of Bim, a proapoptotic BH3-only protein known to be upregulated during anoikis ( Figure 2 ). Previous work from our lab has demonstrated that TMS1 is upregulated in breast epithelial cells in response to TNF? stimulation in an NF-?B and JNK-dependent manner ( 13 ). In contrast, neither expression of a dominant-negative I?B, siRNA-mediated knockdown of NF-?B nor chemical inhibition of JNK had any impact on suspension-induced upregulation of TMS1 ( Figure 2C, D and data not shown), indicating that upregulation of TMS1 occurs independently of these pathways. We next determined the impact of TMS1 silencing on the apoptotic response to detachment in MCF10A cells. Cells transfected with scrambled (control) siRNA or siRNA directed against TMS1 were seeded onto poly-HEMA-coated tissue culture plates and analyzed over 48 hours. The forced suspension of control MCF10A cells induced a time-dependent cleavage of procaspase-8 and the downstream caspase target PARP ( Figure 3A ), indicating that the cells are undergoing apoptosis. Strikingly, knockdown of TMS1 led to a significant delay in the apoptotic events associated with anoikis. Neither cleavage of procaspase-8 nor PARP cleavage were observed in TMS1 knockdown cells until 48 hours post-detachment ( Figure 3A ). Consistent with the observed delay in PARP cleavage, knockdown of TMS1 in MCF10A cells conferred a ?2-fold protection from cell death after 24 hours in suspension ( Figure 3B ). This degree of protection is similar to previous reports describing the impact of Bim knockdown on detachment-induced apoptosis in breast epithelial cells ( 3 ). In this regard, we also examined the impact of TMS1 on the regulation of Bim. Induction of Bim was evident by 8 hours post-detachment in control cells ( Figure 3A ). Strikingly, both the magnitude and timing of Bim protein accumulation were significantly inhibited in TMS1 knockdown cells ( Figure 3A ). The impact of TMS1 knockdown was specific, as a similar delay in apoptotic events (caspase-8 cleavage, PARP cleavage) and inhibition of Bim upregulation were observed when MCF10A cells were transfected with a second independent siRNA targeting TMS1 ( Supplemental Figure 2 ), but not when transfected with siRNAs targeting lamin a/c or caspase-1 (data not shown). Taken together, these data illustrate that caspase-8 cleavage, PARP cleavage and Bim upregulation are severely inhibited in cells lacking TMS1 expression, and that loss of TMS1 confers resistance to anoikis. Bim is regulated by both transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms. In the latter case, integrin-mediated survival signaling through the MAPK pathway leads to ERK-mediated phosphorlyation of serine 69 on BimEL, the largest isoform of Bim ( 22 ). This phosphorylation stimulates BimEL ubiquitylation and subsequent degradation by the proteasome ( 22 ). The cessation of ERK signaling following detachment from the ECM induces both an increase in Bim transcription ( 3 ), and the dephosphorylation of BimEL, allowing for stabilization and accumulation of Bim protein ( 22 ). To examine in more detail the impact of TMS1 downregulation on detachment-induced upregulation of Bim, we performed extensive time course experiments. Suspension of MCF10A cells caused a time-dependent increase in TMS1 protein expression, which preceded that of BimEL ( Figure 4A ). Again, knockdown of TMS1 severely inhibited the induction of BimEL expression ( Figure 4A ). The effect of TMS1 loss on Bim expression occurred primarily at the level of protein accumulation, as there was little impact of TMS1 knockdown on the detachment-induced upregulation of Bim mRNA ( Figure 4A ). We further examined the impact of TMS1 knockdown on ERK activation. Interestingly, even under attached, unstimulated conditions, there were increased levels of phospho-ERK in cells lacking TMS1 relative to controls (eg. 48h monolayer cultures, time =0hr, Figure 4B ). Detachment and a shift to fresh serum-containing medium led to a stimulation of ERK phosphorylation that was both greater in magnitude and persisted longer in TMS1 knockdown cells compared to control cells ( Figure 4B ). These data indicate that there is a pool of ERK that is constitutively active in the absence of TMS1 and that the delay in detachment-induced Bim upregulation occurring in the absence of TMS1 may be due to misregulation of ERK signaling. Taken together these data suggest that TMS1 acts upstream of Bim and that the resistance to anoikis observed in TMS1 knockdown cells may be, in part, due to the inhibition of Bim induction. To determine whether the inhibition of detachment-induced Bim upregulation in TMS1 knockdown cells is due directly to TMS1 loss or rather is a consequence of the observed delay in anoikis, we compared the effects of TMS1 knockdown on the induction of anoikis in the presence of the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK. As shown above, knockdown of TMS1 inhibited both the upregulation of BimEL protein and apoptosis after 24 hours in suspension ( Figure 4C ). Treatment with Z-VAD-FMK had no effect on detachment-induced increase in BimEL or TMS1 expression in control cells, nor did it affect the delayed kinetics of Bim accumulation in TMS1 knockdown cells ( Figure 4C ). It did, however, prevent detachment-induced apoptosis, as indicated by the reduced cleavage of PARP ( Figure 4C ). We also examined the impact of detachment on TMS1 in MCF10A cells constitutively overexpressing Bcl2 ( 21 ). As expected, overexpression of Bcl2 blocked detachment-induced apoptosis (as indicated by the reduction in PARP cleavage), but again had no impact on detachment induced upregulation of TMS1 or Bim, nor on the delayed upregulation of Bim and inhibition of PARP cleavage afforded by TMS1 knockdown ( Figure 4D ). Taken together, these data indicate that the detachment-induced increase in TMS1 protein expression is caspase-independent and not a downstream consequence of anoikis, as has been observed for BimEL induction ( 22 ). These data further indicate that the effect of TMS1 loss on detachment-induced upregulation of BimEL protein expression is direct, and not due to an overall inhibition of anoikis. In summary, we find that TMS1 plays an important role in breast epithelial cell anoikis. We provide evidence that loss of TMS1 expression promotes resistance to anoikis, which may be mediated at least in part by the inhibition of detachment-induced upregulation of BimEL. Previous work has shown that anoikis in breast epithelial cells is dependent on Bim, in that factors that inhibit Bim upregulation, such as siRNA against Bim itself, or constitutive activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway, also prevent detachment-induced cell death ( 3 , 22 ). Our data indicate that apoptosis induced by detachment of MCF10A cells is similarly dependent on the induction of TMS1, and furthermore, that TMS1 is necessary for detachment-induced accumulation of BimEL. TMS1 appears to play a role in the suppression of ERK signaling, as its downregulation leads to ERK activation. These data suggest that TMS1 acts upstream of Bim, and may act as a link between loss of integrin signaling and the onset of anoikis, such that in the absence of TMS1, survival signaling through the MAPK/ERK pathway persists even in the absence of matrix attachments. In previous work, we and others have shown that TMS1 overexpression or forced oligomerization induces apoptosis, and that TMS1-induced apoptosis is dependent on caspase-8 ( 11 - 13 ). TMS1 induces the cleavage of procaspase-8 independent of death receptor-ligand interactions, and is necessary for TNF?–induced activation of caspase-8 and apoptosis in some cell types (( 13 ), Parsons and Vertino, unpublished observations). Others have shown that TMS1 directly interacts with caspase-8 in cotransfection experiments ( 12 ). Anoikis may be another context in which TMS1 regulates caspase-8 activity. First described by Helfer et. al. ( 7 ), several recent studies have demonstrated a novel, non-apoptotic role for caspase-8 in cell adhesion and migration ( 8 - 10 ). Collectively, these studies have shown that caspase-8 is required for adhesion to the ECM and src-dependent activation of the MAPK/ERK pathway. This scaffolding function is independent of caspase-8 catalytic activity, and appears to be mediated by an adhesion-stimulated recruitment of procaspase-8 and src to a complex at the lamella and src-mediated phosphorylation of procaspase-8 ( 8 - 10 )( 23 ). Our data suggest that TMS1 is necessary for the efficient cleavage of procapase-8 at the onset of anoikis, which would both limit the pool of procaspase-8 available for adhesion and promote downstream apoptotic signaling. In conclusion, we report a novel role for TMS1 in anoikis. TMS1 is upregulated following detachment of the breast epithelial cells, and siRNA-mediated knockdown of TMS1 causes these cells to be resistant to anoikis. This resistance correlates with a delay in Bim protein upregulation and procaspase-8 cleavage, providing two mechanisms by which TMS1 may contribute to anoikis. Significantly, our results demonstrating the deleterious effects of TMS1 loss on sensitivity to anoikis are supported by in vivo data from DCIS lesions, where we see that aberrant epithelial cells persisting in the lumen of the breast duct in DCIS lesions no longer express TMS1. Together, our data illustrate that the epigenetic silencing of TMS1 observed in breast cancer and other tumor types might contribute to the progression of carcinomas by allowing epithelial cells to bypass anoikis.  Supplementary Material Supplemental Figure 1 Supplemental Figure 2 Supplemental Figure Legend  Figures Figure 1 A , TMS1 expression in primary ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and invasive ductal carcinomas. Immunohistochemistry was performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast tumor tissue samples. The TMS1 antibody was an affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antibody (EU107) raised against a peptide corresponding to amino acids 182–195 of human TMS1, and was used at a dilution of 1:400. as described ( 18 , 19 ). Immunocomplexes were detected by the avidin-biotin complex method, using diaminobenzidine as the chromogen. Slides were counterstained with hematoxylin (blue). Panels i-iii , TMS1 expression in DCIS. Note the unusual staining pattern in DCIS lesions with retention of TMS1 expression in the cells closest to the myoepithelium and basement membrane and loss of expression in the more dysplastic cells filling the luminal space. This pattern was most often observed in solid-form DCIS (i, ii) and cribriform DCIS (iii) lesions. Panels iv-vi , TMS1 expression in invasive ductal carcinomas. Whereas some infiltrating glands retain TMS1 expression (iv, v), 3 of 19 invasive carcinomas showed complete loss of TMS1 expression (vi). Note that even in ductal carcinoma cases that lose TMS1 expression (vi, Ca), surrounding normal inflammatory cells (iv, vi, inf) retain TMS1 expression. B , Relationship between TMS1 and E-cadherin expression in primary ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Parallel sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (i) or analyzed for the expression of TMS1 (ii) or E-cadherin (iii). The TMS1 antibody (EU107) was was used at a dilution of 1:400, and the E-cadherin antibody (Invitrogen #15068) was used at a dilution of 1:50. Note the unusual TMS1 staining pattern in DCIS lesions with retention of TMS1 expression in the outermost cells and loss of expression in the more dysplastic cells filling the luminal space. The same cells that lose TMS1 expression retain E-cadherin expression. Panels iv-vi represent higher power (600×) magnifications of the same lesion shown in panels i-iii (100×). Shown is a representative DCIS lesions from a single individual. An independent example from a second individual is shown in Supplemental Figure 1 . Figure 2 TMS1 protein and mRNA are induced during anoikis. Panels A and B , Expression of TMS1 following detachment. MCF10A cells were suspended in growth medium containing 0.5% methylcellulose and plated onto poly-HEMA coated plates, and harvested at the indicated timepoints. A , Protein lysates were subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies against TMS1, Bim, and GAPDH. B , Total cellular RNA was isolated and TMS1 mRNA expression levels were quantified by reverse transcription and real-time PCR analysis as previously described ( 13 ). Relative starting quantities were determined by comparison to MCF7 cDNA standard curve included in each run. Shown is the relative increase in TMS1 mRNA compared to time zero after normalization to an 18s rRNA internal control. Data represent the mean +/-standard deviation of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. C and D , Detachment-induced upregulation of TMS1 is not dependent on NF-?B signaling. C , MCF10A cells were infected with 20 m.o.i. of a dominant-negative I?B? adenoviral construct the night before plating onto poly-HEMA plates. Cells were left attached (A) or plated on poly-HEMA coated dishes (S) for 24 hours. Protein lysates were harvested and subjected to western blot analysis with the indicated antibodies. D , top panel , MCF10A cells were transfected with either 200 nM scrambled siRNA (control) or siRNA targeting the p65 subunit of NF-?B (p65). After 48 hours, cells were suspended in growth medium containing 0.5% methylcellulose and plated onto poly-HEMA coated 10 cm plates. Lysates were collected and analyzed by western blot with antibodies to TMS1, the p65 subunit of NF-?B, and GAPDH. D, bottom panel , Total cellular RNA was isolated and TMS1 mRNA expression levels were determined and analyzed by real-time PCR as described in B . Shown is the relative expression of TMS1 mRNA compared to time zero after normalization to an 18s rRNA internal control. Data represent the mean +/- standard deviation of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. Figure 3 Knockdown of TMS1 expression inhibits anoikis. A , MCF10A cells were transfected with 200 nM of scrambled siRNA (control) or siRNA#1 targeting TMS1 (TMS1). After 36 hours, cells were plated on poly-HEMA coated dishes, and protein was isolated at timed intervals and subjected to western analysis with the indicated antibodies. B , MCF10A cells were transfected as in Panel A . After 36 hours, cells were plated on poly-HEMA coated dishes. The following day, the cells were harvested and analyzed for apoptosis using the DNA fragmentation cell death detection ELISA. A portion of the cell sample was retained, harvested for protein, and subjected to western blot analysis for TMS1 and ?-tubulin ( inset ). Figure 4 Impact of TMS1 knockdown on ERK signaling and Bim upregulation during anoikis. A , Detachment-induced upregulation of Bim requires TMS1. MCF10A cells were transfected with 50nM of scrambled siRNA (control) or siRNA#1 targeting TMS1 (TMS1). Left, After 48 hours, cells were suspended in growth medium containing 0.5% methylcellulose and plated onto poly-HEMA coated plates. Left , Lysates were collected at the indicated timepoints and subjected to western blot analysis using the indicated antibodies. Right , Bim mRNA expression levels were quantified by real-time PCR analysis. Relative starting quantities were determined by comparison to MCF7 cDNA standard curve included in each run. Shown is the increase in Bim mRNA relative to time zero after normalization to an 18s rRNA control. Data represent the mean +/- standard deviation of three independent experiments assayed in triplicate. B , TMS1 loss promotes persistent ERK activation. MCF10A cells were transfected with 50nM scrambled siRNA (control) or siRNA#1 targeting TMS1 (TMS1). After 48 hours, cells were suspended in growth medium containing 0.5% methylcellulose and plated onto poly-HEMA coated plates. Lysates were collected at the indicated timepoints and subjected to Western blot analysis using the indicated antibodies. C and D , The requirement for TMS1 in detachment-induced Bim accumulation is apoptosis-independent. C , MCF10A cells were transfected with 200nM of scrambled siRNA or TMS1#1 siRNA. After 48 hours, the cells were plated onto poly-HEMA coated plates in the absence or presence of 250nM Z-VAD-FMK. Protein was harvested at the indicated timepoints and analyzed by western blot analysis with the indicated antibodies. D , MCF10A-pBABE and MCF10A-Bcl-2 cells were transfected with 200nM scrambled or TMS1#1 siRNA. After 48 hours, cells were suspended in growth medium containing 0.5% methylcellulose and plated onto poly-HEMA coated plates. Lysates were collected at the indicated timepoints and subjected to western blot analysis with the indicated antibodies. 