Hemodynamic Energy Dissipation in the Cardiovascular System: Generalized Theoretical Analysis on Disease States Background We present a fundamental theoretical framework for analysis of energy dissipation in any component of the circulatory system and formulate the full energy budget for both venous and arterial circulations. New indices allowing disease-specific subject-to-subject comparisons and disease-to-disease hemodynamic evaluation (quantifying the hemodynamic severity of one vascular disease type to the other) are presented based on this formalism. Methods and Results Dimensional analysis of energy dissipation rate with respect to the human circulation shows that the rate of energy dissipation is inversely proportional to the square of the patient body surface area and directly proportional to the cube of cardiac output. This result verified the established formulae for energy loss in aortic stenosis that was solely derived through empirical clinical experience. Three new indices are introduced to evaluate more complex disease states: (1) circulation energy dissipation index ( CEDI ), (2) aortic valve energy dissipation index ( AV-EDI ), and (3) total cavopulmonary connection energy dissipation index ( TCPCEDI ). CEDI is based on the full energy budget of the circulation and is the proper measure of the work performed by the ventricle relative to the net energy spent in overcoming frictional forces. It is shown to be 4.01 ± 0.16 for healthy individuals and above 7.0 for patients with severe aortic stenosis. Application of CEDI index on single-ventricle venous physiology reveals that the surgically created Fontan circulation, which is indeed palliative, progressively degrades in hemodynamic efficiency with growth ( p <0.001), with the net dissipation in a typical Fontan patient (Body surface area = 1.0 m2) being equivalent to that of an average case of severe aortic stenosis. AV-EDI is shown to be the proper index to gauge the hemodynamic severity of stenosed aortic valves as it accurately reflects energy loss. It is about 0.28 ± 0.12 for healthy human valves. Moderate aortic stenosis has an AV-EDI one order of magnitude higher while clinically severe aortic stenosis cases always had magnitudes above 3.0. TCPC-EDI represents the efficiency of the TCPC connection and is shown to be negatively correlated to the size of a typical “bottle-neck” region (pulmonary artery) in the surgical TCPC pathway ( p <0.05). Conclusions Energy dissipation in the human circulation has been analyzed theoretically to derive the proper scaling (indexing) factor. CEDI , AV-EDI , and TCPC-EDI are proper measures of the dissipative characteristics of the circulatory system, aortic valve, and the Fontan connection, respectively.  Dimensional Analysis Re-writing Eq. (1) in the general form: (1) ? ( ? , Q , ? , v , BSA , S ) = 0 With each of the variable with the following dimensions: (A1) [ ? ] = M L 2 T ? 3 [ Q ] = M 0 L 3 T ? 1 [ ? ] = M L ? 3 T 0 [ v ] = M 0 L 2 T ? 1 [ BSA ] = M 0 L 2 T 0 [ S ] = M 0 L 0 T 0 According to the Buckingham ? theorem, 3 any relationship between n variables spanning d dimensions may be reduced to an equivalent relationship between k = n ? d dimensionless groups ?1, ?2,…, ? k . Equation (1) has six variables spanning three dimensions (i.e. mass, [ M ], length, [ L ], and time, [ T ], dimensions). Therefore, it can be expressed as a relationship between 6 ? 3 = 3 dimensionless variables given as: (A2) ? ( ? 1 , ? 2 , ? 3 ) = 0 Choosing Q , ? , and BSA as our fundamental variables that span M , L , and T , we can obtain a specific form for Eq. (A2) by solving the following equations: (A3) [ Q a 1 ? b 1 BSA c 1 v ] = [ M 0 L 0 T 0 ] (A4) [ Q a 2 ? b 2 BSA c 2 ? ] = [ M 0 L 0 T 0 ] (A5) [ Q a 3 ? b 3 BSA c 3 S ] = [ M 0 L 0 T 0 ] Solving for Eq. (A3) for a 1, b 1, c 1: (A6) 3 a 1 ? 3 b 1 + 2 c 1 + 2 = 0 (A7) ? a 1 ? 1 = 0 (A8) b 1 = 0 Gives: a 1 = ?1, b 1 = 0, c 1 = 1 2 Solving for Eq. (A4) for a 2, b 2, c 2 (A9) 3 a 2 ? 3 b 2 + 2 c 2 + 2 = 0 (A10) ? a 2 ? 3 = 0 (A11) b 2 + 1 = 0 Gives: a 2 = ?3, b 2 = ?1, c 2 = 2 And finally solving Eq. (A5) for a 3, b 3, c 3 gives a 3 = 0, b 3 = 0, c 3 = 0, as S by definition is dimensionless. Therefore the specific forms of the three dimensionless groups are:: (A12) ? 1 = v QBSA ? 1 / 2 (A13) ? 2 = ? ? Q 3 BSA 2 (A14) ? 3 = S Examination of ?1 indicates that it is a form of a special Reynolds number, R e = Q × BSA ? 1 / 2 ? , where the characteristic velocity scale is Q/BSA ; and the characteristic length scale is BSA . Reynolds number is always an important dimensionless group for any fluid flow problem dictating the dependence on the fluid flow regime (i.e. laminar, to turbulence). Examination of ?2 indicates that the energy dissipation rate has been non-dimensionalized by a “bodylevel” kinetic energy scale given by ? Q 3 BSA 2 . The shape variable, S , is by definition dimensionless and thus is directly third dimensionless group without need for non-dimensionalization. Solving for ?2 in Eq. (A2) and using results (A12) – (A14) finally gives: (A3) ? ? Q 3 BSA 2 = f ( R e , S )  DISCUSSION In this section we discuss the relevance of the three new indices CEDI , AV-EDI , and TCPC-EDI based on their calculations from published data in the previous section. Specific emphasis is laid on the clinical relevance and new insights on the diseases. CEDI in Bi-Ventricular Physiology It is interesting to note that CEDI significantly differs for all the patient groups when compared to healthy individuals with the exception of cardiomyopathy ( Fig. 2 ). The most severe being for the case of severe aortic stenosis with low flow whose mean CEDI indicates an effective energy load on the ventricle was the highest. This class of aortic stenosis may represent the end stage of the disease where clearly the high CEDI value indicates a highly dissipative circulation. For the case of cardiomyopathy, CEDI is comparable to normal levels, which is expected since CEDI is by definition independent of the condition of the ventricle and only characterizes the energy dissipation in the systemic circuit. Note that CEDI is also significantly elevated in the patient group with a history of myocardial infarction suggesting sustained energy dissipation in the systemic circulation. This is not surprising as most patients who suffer from myocardial infarction often have an underlying condition such as hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and coronary artery disease, all of which indicate a high-friction dissipative systemic circulation. In summary, CEDI as presented above ( Fig. 2 ) is a clear and sensitive indicator of energy efficiency of the circulatory system (minus the ventricle) with a value of about 4.01 ± 0.16 for healthy individuals, enabling disease-to-disease comparisons. Elevated CEDI indicates severe dissipative forces in the circulatory system as evident for the cases of aortic stenosis. CEDI is also seen to be insensitive to inefficiencies with the pump itself as depicted by the normal CEDI values of patients with cardiomyopathy. CEDI in Single Ventricular Physiology From Fig. 3 , the averaged CEDI for normal children aged about 3.8 years is lower than the averaged CEDI for normal adults. This implies that the effective energetic load on the ventricle in children is lower and therefore lesser mechanical “effort” for the ventricle. It may therefore be inferred that the relative dissipation in the healthy circulation increases with age and/or BSA . Also from Fig. 3 , notice that the BT shunt group has a prominently lesser dissipative circulation than that of a normal child. This is attributed to the net reduction in overall resistance offered to the pumping ventricle due to the systemic to pulmonary shunt which reduces the volume overload of the single-ventricle. As an analogy, it is equivalent to a “short-circuit” that would result in high flow output from the ventricle. Although beneficial to the ventricle due to drastically reduced mechanical effort, this does not necessarily ensure a normal/appropriate balance of systemic-pulmonary flow ratio ( Q p/ Q s) and adequate oxygenation. Comparison of CEDI between the younger Fontan patient group presented in Senzaki et al. 33 with that of normal children of about the same age shows that the average circulation for the Fontan groups was over 100% more dissipative ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 3 ). This directly implies that the Fontan single ventricle needs to work twice as hard to achieve a desired cardiac output. However, when comparing this CEDI to that of normal adults, the mechanical effort in these Fontan ventricles is significantly lesser than that experienced by an adult ventricle. CEDI comparison between the older Fontan patient group in Sundareswaran et al. 37 with that from Senzaki et al. 33 shows a stark difference ( Fig. 3 ). The older Fontan patients have a CEDI three times that of younger Fontan patients in Senzaki et al. 33 ( p <0.001) and over twice that of healthy adult CEDI . Given that CEDI is not dependent on the condition of the ventricle, clearly there exist remarkable differences in the dissipative characteristics of the circulation in Fontan patients with age. The reason behind the observed significant difference in CEDI magnitudes between the younger Fontan group and the older Fontan group, is further examined in Fig. 4 . From Fig. 4 , it is clear that as with the normal circulation, the Fontan circulation also becomes more dissipative with age or BSA . However, the extent of increase in CEDI is clearly beyond 2 units. Now if one assumes that these patients received comparable care and treatment, it may be a valid hypothesis that the Fontan circulation gradually degrades with time. This fact provides the hemodynamic founding of the “palliative” (i.e. not curative) nature of the single-ventricle disease and can explain a number of the so-called “failed-Fontan” cases during third and forth decades of life. 20 A seminal study by Fontan and Kirklin, 12 based on clinical observations, demonstrate that the single ventricle circulation gradually degrades even after a perfect surgical operation and remain a hazard. As demonstrated here the prediction of this trend, independently, based solely on the new energetic indices deserves further attention. This finding together with our recent study that quantified the decrease in cardiac output 38 once again highlights the importance of venous surgical resistance in the single-ventricle energy cascade and physiology. Based on the mean CEDI value computed for the aortic stenosis group, it is important to note that at about a typical patient BSA of 1.0 m2 the condition of the Fontan circulation system may be considered as severe as that of a severe aortic stenosis group. While severe aortic stenosis patients have treatment options such as valve replacement, it is quite discomforting that the average Fontan patient of BSA 1.0 m2 (i.e. child less than 10 years age) is not considered for immediate intervention as there aren’t many treatment options other than cardiac transplantation, and a re-operation of the TCPC for optimization is still debated. Nevertheless, the data in Fig. 4 strongly suggests a need for improvements and bold innovation in single ventricle patient care. AV-EDI AV-EDI as defined (mathematically simply inverse squared of ELI ), has the same positive predictive value as that of ELI . Nevertheless, through this new definition and linear association to energy, it has been demonstrated that moderate aortic stenosis has energy dissipation one order of magnitude higher than that for a normal aortic valve. Furthermore, the data ( Fig. 5 ) also demonstrates that severe aortic stenosis has energy dissipation roughly twice that of moderate cases. It is clear that although AV-EDI completely characterizes the severity of aortic stenosis, it does not predict the outcome of aortic valve replacement especially in certain low cardiac output patients who have a concomitant ventricular disease. To be able to assess the outcome of aortic valve replacement, AV-EDI needs to be compared with an independent and proper index characterizing the ventricular function. TCPC-EDI From Fig. 6 it is evident that there exists a clear and strong correlation between the LPA minimum size and energy dissipation in the TCPC irrespective of all other possible shape factors that varied between these six patients ( R 2 = 0.88, p <0.05). This observation is consistent with our earlier local CFD studies. 31 Furthermore, note that the energy dissipation for the same patient (data points for constant cross-sectional area), which correspond to the variation of energy dissipation for the different flow conditions (resting and exercise conditions) do not exactly collapse to a single point. Given that influence of cardiac output is already taken into consideration by the non-dimensionalization, this lack of exact collapse implies that there exists a significant dependence with Reynolds number and other possible shape dependent parameters such as extra cardiac vs. intra atrial geometries. The overall scatter to either side of the power law fit depicts the dependence from all other shape factors and any measurement errors which will be improved by extending this analysis to more patients in future communications. As illustrated again in Fig. 6 , the exercise of applying the theoretical concepts developed in section Theoretical Analysis on a complex data set shows that it is extremely important to normalize physical data based on sound physical justification. As illustrated here a fundamental engineering concept, dimensional analysis, allows for establishing relationships between several variables associated with a complex dataset. Such cases are frequently observed in medical and clinical data, and performing statistical analysis alone may not provide the necessary correlations. The process of non-dimensionalization implicitly handles non-linear dependence between variables (e.g. energy dissipation was found to be proportional to the cube of cardiac output), and thus greatly lowers experimental “scatter” which is often mistaken for patient variability. The present example shows that even with a small data set, it is possible to achieve good statistical correlations provided the data is organized through a dimensionless formulation ( Eq. 2 ).  DISCUSSION In this section we discuss the relevance of the three new indices CEDI , AV-EDI , and TCPC-EDI based on their calculations from published data in the previous section. Specific emphasis is laid on the clinical relevance and new insights on the diseases. CEDI in Bi-Ventricular Physiology It is interesting to note that CEDI significantly differs for all the patient groups when compared to healthy individuals with the exception of cardiomyopathy ( Fig. 2 ). The most severe being for the case of severe aortic stenosis with low flow whose mean CEDI indicates an effective energy load on the ventricle was the highest. This class of aortic stenosis may represent the end stage of the disease where clearly the high CEDI value indicates a highly dissipative circulation. For the case of cardiomyopathy, CEDI is comparable to normal levels, which is expected since CEDI is by definition independent of the condition of the ventricle and only characterizes the energy dissipation in the systemic circuit. Note that CEDI is also significantly elevated in the patient group with a history of myocardial infarction suggesting sustained energy dissipation in the systemic circulation. This is not surprising as most patients who suffer from myocardial infarction often have an underlying condition such as hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and coronary artery disease, all of which indicate a high-friction dissipative systemic circulation. In summary, CEDI as presented above ( Fig. 2 ) is a clear and sensitive indicator of energy efficiency of the circulatory system (minus the ventricle) with a value of about 4.01 ± 0.16 for healthy individuals, enabling disease-to-disease comparisons. Elevated CEDI indicates severe dissipative forces in the circulatory system as evident for the cases of aortic stenosis. CEDI is also seen to be insensitive to inefficiencies with the pump itself as depicted by the normal CEDI values of patients with cardiomyopathy. CEDI in Single Ventricular Physiology From Fig. 3 , the averaged CEDI for normal children aged about 3.8 years is lower than the averaged CEDI for normal adults. This implies that the effective energetic load on the ventricle in children is lower and therefore lesser mechanical “effort” for the ventricle. It may therefore be inferred that the relative dissipation in the healthy circulation increases with age and/or BSA . Also from Fig. 3 , notice that the BT shunt group has a prominently lesser dissipative circulation than that of a normal child. This is attributed to the net reduction in overall resistance offered to the pumping ventricle due to the systemic to pulmonary shunt which reduces the volume overload of the single-ventricle. As an analogy, it is equivalent to a “short-circuit” that would result in high flow output from the ventricle. Although beneficial to the ventricle due to drastically reduced mechanical effort, this does not necessarily ensure a normal/appropriate balance of systemic-pulmonary flow ratio ( Q p/ Q s) and adequate oxygenation. Comparison of CEDI between the younger Fontan patient group presented in Senzaki et al. 33 with that of normal children of about the same age shows that the average circulation for the Fontan groups was over 100% more dissipative ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 3 ). This directly implies that the Fontan single ventricle needs to work twice as hard to achieve a desired cardiac output. However, when comparing this CEDI to that of normal adults, the mechanical effort in these Fontan ventricles is significantly lesser than that experienced by an adult ventricle. CEDI comparison between the older Fontan patient group in Sundareswaran et al. 37 with that from Senzaki et al. 33 shows a stark difference ( Fig. 3 ). The older Fontan patients have a CEDI three times that of younger Fontan patients in Senzaki et al. 33 ( p <0.001) and over twice that of healthy adult CEDI . Given that CEDI is not dependent on the condition of the ventricle, clearly there exist remarkable differences in the dissipative characteristics of the circulation in Fontan patients with age. The reason behind the observed significant difference in CEDI magnitudes between the younger Fontan group and the older Fontan group, is further examined in Fig. 4 . From Fig. 4 , it is clear that as with the normal circulation, the Fontan circulation also becomes more dissipative with age or BSA . However, the extent of increase in CEDI is clearly beyond 2 units. Now if one assumes that these patients received comparable care and treatment, it may be a valid hypothesis that the Fontan circulation gradually degrades with time. This fact provides the hemodynamic founding of the “palliative” (i.e. not curative) nature of the single-ventricle disease and can explain a number of the so-called “failed-Fontan” cases during third and forth decades of life. 20 A seminal study by Fontan and Kirklin, 12 based on clinical observations, demonstrate that the single ventricle circulation gradually degrades even after a perfect surgical operation and remain a hazard. As demonstrated here the prediction of this trend, independently, based solely on the new energetic indices deserves further attention. This finding together with our recent study that quantified the decrease in cardiac output 38 once again highlights the importance of venous surgical resistance in the single-ventricle energy cascade and physiology. Based on the mean CEDI value computed for the aortic stenosis group, it is important to note that at about a typical patient BSA of 1.0 m2 the condition of the Fontan circulation system may be considered as severe as that of a severe aortic stenosis group. While severe aortic stenosis patients have treatment options such as valve replacement, it is quite discomforting that the average Fontan patient of BSA 1.0 m2 (i.e. child less than 10 years age) is not considered for immediate intervention as there aren’t many treatment options other than cardiac transplantation, and a re-operation of the TCPC for optimization is still debated. Nevertheless, the data in Fig. 4 strongly suggests a need for improvements and bold innovation in single ventricle patient care. AV-EDI AV-EDI as defined (mathematically simply inverse squared of ELI ), has the same positive predictive value as that of ELI . Nevertheless, through this new definition and linear association to energy, it has been demonstrated that moderate aortic stenosis has energy dissipation one order of magnitude higher than that for a normal aortic valve. Furthermore, the data ( Fig. 5 ) also demonstrates that severe aortic stenosis has energy dissipation roughly twice that of moderate cases. It is clear that although AV-EDI completely characterizes the severity of aortic stenosis, it does not predict the outcome of aortic valve replacement especially in certain low cardiac output patients who have a concomitant ventricular disease. To be able to assess the outcome of aortic valve replacement, AV-EDI needs to be compared with an independent and proper index characterizing the ventricular function. TCPC-EDI From Fig. 6 it is evident that there exists a clear and strong correlation between the LPA minimum size and energy dissipation in the TCPC irrespective of all other possible shape factors that varied between these six patients ( R 2 = 0.88, p <0.05). This observation is consistent with our earlier local CFD studies. 31 Furthermore, note that the energy dissipation for the same patient (data points for constant cross-sectional area), which correspond to the variation of energy dissipation for the different flow conditions (resting and exercise conditions) do not exactly collapse to a single point. Given that influence of cardiac output is already taken into consideration by the non-dimensionalization, this lack of exact collapse implies that there exists a significant dependence with Reynolds number and other possible shape dependent parameters such as extra cardiac vs. intra atrial geometries. The overall scatter to either side of the power law fit depicts the dependence from all other shape factors and any measurement errors which will be improved by extending this analysis to more patients in future communications. As illustrated again in Fig. 6 , the exercise of applying the theoretical concepts developed in section Theoretical Analysis on a complex data set shows that it is extremely important to normalize physical data based on sound physical justification. As illustrated here a fundamental engineering concept, dimensional analysis, allows for establishing relationships between several variables associated with a complex dataset. Such cases are frequently observed in medical and clinical data, and performing statistical analysis alone may not provide the necessary correlations. The process of non-dimensionalization implicitly handles non-linear dependence between variables (e.g. energy dissipation was found to be proportional to the cube of cardiac output), and thus greatly lowers experimental “scatter” which is often mistaken for patient variability. The present example shows that even with a small data set, it is possible to achieve good statistical correlations provided the data is organized through a dimensionless formulation ( Eq. 2 ).  CEDI in Bi-Ventricular Physiology It is interesting to note that CEDI significantly differs for all the patient groups when compared to healthy individuals with the exception of cardiomyopathy ( Fig. 2 ). The most severe being for the case of severe aortic stenosis with low flow whose mean CEDI indicates an effective energy load on the ventricle was the highest. This class of aortic stenosis may represent the end stage of the disease where clearly the high CEDI value indicates a highly dissipative circulation. For the case of cardiomyopathy, CEDI is comparable to normal levels, which is expected since CEDI is by definition independent of the condition of the ventricle and only characterizes the energy dissipation in the systemic circuit. Note that CEDI is also significantly elevated in the patient group with a history of myocardial infarction suggesting sustained energy dissipation in the systemic circulation. This is not surprising as most patients who suffer from myocardial infarction often have an underlying condition such as hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and coronary artery disease, all of which indicate a high-friction dissipative systemic circulation. In summary, CEDI as presented above ( Fig. 2 ) is a clear and sensitive indicator of energy efficiency of the circulatory system (minus the ventricle) with a value of about 4.01 ± 0.16 for healthy individuals, enabling disease-to-disease comparisons. Elevated CEDI indicates severe dissipative forces in the circulatory system as evident for the cases of aortic stenosis. CEDI is also seen to be insensitive to inefficiencies with the pump itself as depicted by the normal CEDI values of patients with cardiomyopathy.  CEDI in Bi-Ventricular Physiology It is interesting to note that CEDI significantly differs for all the patient groups when compared to healthy individuals with the exception of cardiomyopathy ( Fig. 2 ). The most severe being for the case of severe aortic stenosis with low flow whose mean CEDI indicates an effective energy load on the ventricle was the highest. This class of aortic stenosis may represent the end stage of the disease where clearly the high CEDI value indicates a highly dissipative circulation. For the case of cardiomyopathy, CEDI is comparable to normal levels, which is expected since CEDI is by definition independent of the condition of the ventricle and only characterizes the energy dissipation in the systemic circuit. Note that CEDI is also significantly elevated in the patient group with a history of myocardial infarction suggesting sustained energy dissipation in the systemic circulation. This is not surprising as most patients who suffer from myocardial infarction often have an underlying condition such as hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and coronary artery disease, all of which indicate a high-friction dissipative systemic circulation. In summary, CEDI as presented above ( Fig. 2 ) is a clear and sensitive indicator of energy efficiency of the circulatory system (minus the ventricle) with a value of about 4.01 ± 0.16 for healthy individuals, enabling disease-to-disease comparisons. Elevated CEDI indicates severe dissipative forces in the circulatory system as evident for the cases of aortic stenosis. CEDI is also seen to be insensitive to inefficiencies with the pump itself as depicted by the normal CEDI values of patients with cardiomyopathy.  CEDI in Single Ventricular Physiology From Fig. 3 , the averaged CEDI for normal children aged about 3.8 years is lower than the averaged CEDI for normal adults. This implies that the effective energetic load on the ventricle in children is lower and therefore lesser mechanical “effort” for the ventricle. It may therefore be inferred that the relative dissipation in the healthy circulation increases with age and/or BSA . Also from Fig. 3 , notice that the BT shunt group has a prominently lesser dissipative circulation than that of a normal child. This is attributed to the net reduction in overall resistance offered to the pumping ventricle due to the systemic to pulmonary shunt which reduces the volume overload of the single-ventricle. As an analogy, it is equivalent to a “short-circuit” that would result in high flow output from the ventricle. Although beneficial to the ventricle due to drastically reduced mechanical effort, this does not necessarily ensure a normal/appropriate balance of systemic-pulmonary flow ratio ( Q p/ Q s) and adequate oxygenation. Comparison of CEDI between the younger Fontan patient group presented in Senzaki et al. 33 with that of normal children of about the same age shows that the average circulation for the Fontan groups was over 100% more dissipative ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 3 ). This directly implies that the Fontan single ventricle needs to work twice as hard to achieve a desired cardiac output. However, when comparing this CEDI to that of normal adults, the mechanical effort in these Fontan ventricles is significantly lesser than that experienced by an adult ventricle. CEDI comparison between the older Fontan patient group in Sundareswaran et al. 37 with that from Senzaki et al. 33 shows a stark difference ( Fig. 3 ). The older Fontan patients have a CEDI three times that of younger Fontan patients in Senzaki et al. 33 ( p <0.001) and over twice that of healthy adult CEDI . Given that CEDI is not dependent on the condition of the ventricle, clearly there exist remarkable differences in the dissipative characteristics of the circulation in Fontan patients with age. The reason behind the observed significant difference in CEDI magnitudes between the younger Fontan group and the older Fontan group, is further examined in Fig. 4 . From Fig. 4 , it is clear that as with the normal circulation, the Fontan circulation also becomes more dissipative with age or BSA . However, the extent of increase in CEDI is clearly beyond 2 units. Now if one assumes that these patients received comparable care and treatment, it may be a valid hypothesis that the Fontan circulation gradually degrades with time. This fact provides the hemodynamic founding of the “palliative” (i.e. not curative) nature of the single-ventricle disease and can explain a number of the so-called “failed-Fontan” cases during third and forth decades of life. 20 A seminal study by Fontan and Kirklin, 12 based on clinical observations, demonstrate that the single ventricle circulation gradually degrades even after a perfect surgical operation and remain a hazard. As demonstrated here the prediction of this trend, independently, based solely on the new energetic indices deserves further attention. This finding together with our recent study that quantified the decrease in cardiac output 38 once again highlights the importance of venous surgical resistance in the single-ventricle energy cascade and physiology. Based on the mean CEDI value computed for the aortic stenosis group, it is important to note that at about a typical patient BSA of 1.0 m2 the condition of the Fontan circulation system may be considered as severe as that of a severe aortic stenosis group. While severe aortic stenosis patients have treatment options such as valve replacement, it is quite discomforting that the average Fontan patient of BSA 1.0 m2 (i.e. child less than 10 years age) is not considered for immediate intervention as there aren’t many treatment options other than cardiac transplantation, and a re-operation of the TCPC for optimization is still debated. Nevertheless, the data in Fig. 4 strongly suggests a need for improvements and bold innovation in single ventricle patient care.  CEDI in Single Ventricular Physiology From Fig. 3 , the averaged CEDI for normal children aged about 3.8 years is lower than the averaged CEDI for normal adults. This implies that the effective energetic load on the ventricle in children is lower and therefore lesser mechanical “effort” for the ventricle. It may therefore be inferred that the relative dissipation in the healthy circulation increases with age and/or BSA . Also from Fig. 3 , notice that the BT shunt group has a prominently lesser dissipative circulation than that of a normal child. This is attributed to the net reduction in overall resistance offered to the pumping ventricle due to the systemic to pulmonary shunt which reduces the volume overload of the single-ventricle. As an analogy, it is equivalent to a “short-circuit” that would result in high flow output from the ventricle. Although beneficial to the ventricle due to drastically reduced mechanical effort, this does not necessarily ensure a normal/appropriate balance of systemic-pulmonary flow ratio ( Q p/ Q s) and adequate oxygenation. Comparison of CEDI between the younger Fontan patient group presented in Senzaki et al. 33 with that of normal children of about the same age shows that the average circulation for the Fontan groups was over 100% more dissipative ( p <0.001) ( Fig. 3 ). This directly implies that the Fontan single ventricle needs to work twice as hard to achieve a desired cardiac output. However, when comparing this CEDI to that of normal adults, the mechanical effort in these Fontan ventricles is significantly lesser than that experienced by an adult ventricle. CEDI comparison between the older Fontan patient group in Sundareswaran et al. 37 with that from Senzaki et al. 33 shows a stark difference ( Fig. 3 ). The older Fontan patients have a CEDI three times that of younger Fontan patients in Senzaki et al. 33 ( p <0.001) and over twice that of healthy adult CEDI . Given that CEDI is not dependent on the condition of the ventricle, clearly there exist remarkable differences in the dissipative characteristics of the circulation in Fontan patients with age. The reason behind the observed significant difference in CEDI magnitudes between the younger Fontan group and the older Fontan group, is further examined in Fig. 4 . From Fig. 4 , it is clear that as with the normal circulation, the Fontan circulation also becomes more dissipative with age or BSA . However, the extent of increase in CEDI is clearly beyond 2 units. Now if one assumes that these patients received comparable care and treatment, it may be a valid hypothesis that the Fontan circulation gradually degrades with time. This fact provides the hemodynamic founding of the “palliative” (i.e. not curative) nature of the single-ventricle disease and can explain a number of the so-called “failed-Fontan” cases during third and forth decades of life. 20 A seminal study by Fontan and Kirklin, 12 based on clinical observations, demonstrate that the single ventricle circulation gradually degrades even after a perfect surgical operation and remain a hazard. As demonstrated here the prediction of this trend, independently, based solely on the new energetic indices deserves further attention. This finding together with our recent study that quantified the decrease in cardiac output 38 once again highlights the importance of venous surgical resistance in the single-ventricle energy cascade and physiology. Based on the mean CEDI value computed for the aortic stenosis group, it is important to note that at about a typical patient BSA of 1.0 m2 the condition of the Fontan circulation system may be considered as severe as that of a severe aortic stenosis group. While severe aortic stenosis patients have treatment options such as valve replacement, it is quite discomforting that the average Fontan patient of BSA 1.0 m2 (i.e. child less than 10 years age) is not considered for immediate intervention as there aren’t many treatment options other than cardiac transplantation, and a re-operation of the TCPC for optimization is still debated. Nevertheless, the data in Fig. 4 strongly suggests a need for improvements and bold innovation in single ventricle patient care.  AV-EDI AV-EDI as defined (mathematically simply inverse squared of ELI ), has the same positive predictive value as that of ELI . Nevertheless, through this new definition and linear association to energy, it has been demonstrated that moderate aortic stenosis has energy dissipation one order of magnitude higher than that for a normal aortic valve. Furthermore, the data ( Fig. 5 ) also demonstrates that severe aortic stenosis has energy dissipation roughly twice that of moderate cases. It is clear that although AV-EDI completely characterizes the severity of aortic stenosis, it does not predict the outcome of aortic valve replacement especially in certain low cardiac output patients who have a concomitant ventricular disease. To be able to assess the outcome of aortic valve replacement, AV-EDI needs to be compared with an independent and proper index characterizing the ventricular function.  AV-EDI AV-EDI as defined (mathematically simply inverse squared of ELI ), has the same positive predictive value as that of ELI . Nevertheless, through this new definition and linear association to energy, it has been demonstrated that moderate aortic stenosis has energy dissipation one order of magnitude higher than that for a normal aortic valve. Furthermore, the data ( Fig. 5 ) also demonstrates that severe aortic stenosis has energy dissipation roughly twice that of moderate cases. It is clear that although AV-EDI completely characterizes the severity of aortic stenosis, it does not predict the outcome of aortic valve replacement especially in certain low cardiac output patients who have a concomitant ventricular disease. To be able to assess the outcome of aortic valve replacement, AV-EDI needs to be compared with an independent and proper index characterizing the ventricular function.  TCPC-EDI From Fig. 6 it is evident that there exists a clear and strong correlation between the LPA minimum size and energy dissipation in the TCPC irrespective of all other possible shape factors that varied between these six patients ( R 2 = 0.88, p <0.05). This observation is consistent with our earlier local CFD studies. 31 Furthermore, note that the energy dissipation for the same patient (data points for constant cross-sectional area), which correspond to the variation of energy dissipation for the different flow conditions (resting and exercise conditions) do not exactly collapse to a single point. Given that influence of cardiac output is already taken into consideration by the non-dimensionalization, this lack of exact collapse implies that there exists a significant dependence with Reynolds number and other possible shape dependent parameters such as extra cardiac vs. intra atrial geometries. The overall scatter to either side of the power law fit depicts the dependence from all other shape factors and any measurement errors which will be improved by extending this analysis to more patients in future communications. As illustrated again in Fig. 6 , the exercise of applying the theoretical concepts developed in section Theoretical Analysis on a complex data set shows that it is extremely important to normalize physical data based on sound physical justification. As illustrated here a fundamental engineering concept, dimensional analysis, allows for establishing relationships between several variables associated with a complex dataset. Such cases are frequently observed in medical and clinical data, and performing statistical analysis alone may not provide the necessary correlations. The process of non-dimensionalization implicitly handles non-linear dependence between variables (e.g. energy dissipation was found to be proportional to the cube of cardiac output), and thus greatly lowers experimental “scatter” which is often mistaken for patient variability. The present example shows that even with a small data set, it is possible to achieve good statistical correlations provided the data is organized through a dimensionless formulation ( Eq. 2 ).  TCPC-EDI From Fig. 6 it is evident that there exists a clear and strong correlation between the LPA minimum size and energy dissipation in the TCPC irrespective of all other possible shape factors that varied between these six patients ( R 2 = 0.88, p <0.05). This observation is consistent with our earlier local CFD studies. 31 Furthermore, note that the energy dissipation for the same patient (data points for constant cross-sectional area), which correspond to the variation of energy dissipation for the different flow conditions (resting and exercise conditions) do not exactly collapse to a single point. Given that influence of cardiac output is already taken into consideration by the non-dimensionalization, this lack of exact collapse implies that there exists a significant dependence with Reynolds number and other possible shape dependent parameters such as extra cardiac vs. intra atrial geometries. The overall scatter to either side of the power law fit depicts the dependence from all other shape factors and any measurement errors which will be improved by extending this analysis to more patients in future communications. As illustrated again in Fig. 6 , the exercise of applying the theoretical concepts developed in section Theoretical Analysis on a complex data set shows that it is extremely important to normalize physical data based on sound physical justification. As illustrated here a fundamental engineering concept, dimensional analysis, allows for establishing relationships between several variables associated with a complex dataset. Such cases are frequently observed in medical and clinical data, and performing statistical analysis alone may not provide the necessary correlations. The process of non-dimensionalization implicitly handles non-linear dependence between variables (e.g. energy dissipation was found to be proportional to the cube of cardiac output), and thus greatly lowers experimental “scatter” which is often mistaken for patient variability. The present example shows that even with a small data set, it is possible to achieve good statistical correlations provided the data is organized through a dimensionless formulation ( Eq. 2 ).  CONCLUSION The above theoretical analysis shows that the formulation of energy dissipation given in Eq. (2) indeed simplifies the complex physics of energy dissipation in human circulation that could be applied to various pathologies. This analysis allowed the formulation of the full circulation energy budget and the definition of new clinical indices: (1) circulation energy dissipation index ( CEDI ), (2) aortic valve energy dissipation index ( AV-EDI ) and (3), total cavopulmonary energy dissipation index ( TCPC-EDI ). The introduction of CEDI and its application to previously published datasets on patients with varying circulatory pathologies and physiologies shows that the new index is an extremely powerful measure to quantify the overall “condition” of the systemic circulation. CEDI is a direct measure of energy efficiency and is insensitive to complex circuit arrangements where the ventricle itself could be the inefficient component. Figures 2 – 4 demonstrate how CEDI can be used to compare energy efficiencies between various diseases, including the complex single-ventricle physiologies all in a unified manner. For single ventricle patients, CEDI for the first time reveals a hemodynamic insight to the palliative nature of the Fontan procedure at the system level ( Fig. 4 ). The AV-EDI index was shown to be directly proportional to the energy dissipation across the aortic valve, and closely related to existing energy loss index ( ELI ). By definition the AV-EDI index has an equally positive predictive value as the traditional ELI in diagnosing the severity of aortic valve stenosis and directly gauges the level of energy dissipation in a stenosed aortic valve. TCPC-EDI is introduced here as the index to quantify the efficiency of the TCPC connection. It is shown to be strongly correlated to one of the narrowest regions of the connection. Studies investigating the influence of secondary shape factors are in progress and planed for future communications. 