Social Determinants: Taking the Social Context of Asthma Seriously While asthma has emerged as a major contributor to disease and disability in American children, the burden of this disease is unevenly distributed within the population. This paper provides a brief overview of social status variables that predict variation in asthma risks and social exposures such as stress and violence that are emerging as important risk factors. However, the central focus of the paper is on the distal social variables that have given rise to unhealthy residential environments in which the risk factors for asthma and other diseases are clustered. Effective initiatives for the prevention and treatment of childhood asthma need to address these non-medical determinants of the prevalence of asthma.  Research Implications They are also important research implications related to the distinctive residential environments in which socially disadvantaged children live. A research approach that focuses on the relationship of individual risk factors related to asthma is unlikely to capture the complex and multidimensional factors that contribute to the variation in asthma prevalence and morbidity. Research is needed that incorporates a life course, cumulative risk perspective and that seeks to integrate how multiple risks and resources linked to the individual, family, housing, neighborhood, and societal level relate to each other and combine to affect childhood asthma. Researchers also need to seriously grapple with the extent to which distinctive residential environments can affect normal physiological processes. Biological adaptations to these residential environments could lead to biological profiles that are different for persons residing in deprived residential areas and possibly to distinctive patterns of interactions between biological and psychosocial factors for African Americans. Importantly, this suggests that the observation of distinctive biological profiles is not necessarily reflective of inherent genetic differences, but could in part reflect adaptations to unique residential environments. Research on the role of residential conditions clearly suggests that a strategy for improving asthma outcomes on a long-term basis requires policies and interventions that focus on improving the quality of housing and neighborhood conditions for poor children in general and minority children in particular. That is, policies to reduce social disparities in asthma, and in other health outcomes, need to address those factors that coincide with segregation: the concentration of economic disadvantage and the lack of an infrastructure that promotes opportunity. Thus, eliminating the negative effects of segregation on SES, neighborhood conditions, and asthma is likely to require a major infusion of economic resources to improve the social, physical, and economic infrastructure of disadvantaged communities. It is important to recognize that nothing is inherently negative about living in close proximity to persons of one’s own race. The issue is not a problem of segregation per se, but the accumulation of social problems that coincide with the concentration of poverty in high segregation areas in the US. Conclusions The research reviewed suggests that the distribution of asthma by race and SES is created by larger inequalities in society of which residential segregation (an institutional legacy of racism) is one determinant. Future research must seek to understand how innate and acquired biological factors interact with conditions in the psychological, social, and physical environment to affect asthma risks and the patterns of asthma distribution. At the same time, eliminating disparities in asthma and asthma care requires acknowledging and documenting the health consequences of social policies, and developing the political will and commitment to implement new strategies to ameliorate the negative effects of these policies by dismantling the structures of racism that created them and establishing programs and strategies that can counteract the pervasive negative effects of institutional discrimination on health. The care of children with asthma can play an important role in this regard by addressing the social determinants of their health as a part of the delivery of medical care.  Conclusions The research reviewed suggests that the distribution of asthma by race and SES is created by larger inequalities in society of which residential segregation (an institutional legacy of racism) is one determinant. Future research must seek to understand how innate and acquired biological factors interact with conditions in the psychological, social, and physical environment to affect asthma risks and the patterns of asthma distribution. At the same time, eliminating disparities in asthma and asthma care requires acknowledging and documenting the health consequences of social policies, and developing the political will and commitment to implement new strategies to ameliorate the negative effects of these policies by dismantling the structures of racism that created them and establishing programs and strategies that can counteract the pervasive negative effects of institutional discrimination on health. The care of children with asthma can play an important role in this regard by addressing the social determinants of their health as a part of the delivery of medical care. 