Characterization of White Matter Degeneration in Elderly Subjects by Magnetic Resonance Diffusion and FLAIR Imaging Correlation Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) techniques have been widely used to evaluate white matter (WM) alterations associated with aging, dementia and cerebral vascular disease. The relationship between FLAIR detected WM lesions (WML) and DTI detected WM integrity changes, however, remains unclear. To investigate this association, voxelwise correlations between 4 Tesla DTI and FLAIR images from elderly subjects were performed by relating WML volume and intensity in FLAIR to fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) in DTI. Significant DTI-FLAIR correlations were found in regions overlapping with the WML of moderate intensities in FLAIR. No significant correlations were detected in periventricular regions where the FLAIR intensities are particularly high. The findings are consistent with a transitional model for WM degeneration from normal WM to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The results show that the correlation between DTI and FLAIR disappears when the FLAIR intensity of WML reaches its maximum at a certain lesion severity, and that the correlations may remerge with reversed signs when the lesion severity is further increased. These results suggest that the different stages of WM degeneration in elderly subjects can be better characterized by regional DTI-FLAIR correlations than single modality alone.  Introduction Abnormalities in brain white matter (WM) have been detected and characterized using preferentially T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequences, which generally detect a prolongation of T2 relaxation as the proportion of unbound water in WM lesions (WML) increases ( Schmidt et al., 2002 ). Furthermore, T2-weighting has been combined with fluid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) to better separate the signal of tissue from that of free water such as in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ( Woo et al., 2006 ). Previous studies have indicated that incidental hyperintensities of deep and subcortical WM in FLAIR images are associated with, for example, aging ( Pekala et al., 2003 ), multiple sclerosis ( Bakshi et al., 2005 ), cardiovascular disease ( Taoka et al., 2001 ), diabetes ( Novak et al., 2006 ), cognitive impairment ( Hirono et al., 2000 ), stroke ( Gauvrit et al., 2006 ), AIDS ( Thurnher et al., 2001 ), schizophrenia ( Miyaoka et al., 2005 ), bipolar disorder ( Ahn et al., 2004 ), and brain injury ( Marquez de la Plata et al., 2007 ). Likewise, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) has increasingly been employed for the assessment of white matter integrity ( Basser et al., 1996 ). DTI measures the directionality of random water movement in tissue, which can be constrained by the anisotropic organization of fiber tracts, by applying a set of direction-encoded diffusion-sensitive gradients. Similar to FLAIR, DTI studies have revealed WM alterations through measurements of fractional anisotropy (FA) and/or increased mean diffusivity (MD) in a variety of conditions, including aging ( Minati et al., 2007 ), multiple sclerosis ( Patel et al., 2007 ), cognitive impairment ( Hampel et al., 2008 ), stroke ( Luby et al. 2006 ), AIDS ( Pfefferbaum et al., 2007 ), schizophrenia ( Carpenter et al., 2008 ), bipolar disorder ( Yurgelun-Todd et al., 2007 ), and brain injury ( Rutgers et al., 2008 ). This overlap of in vivo applications highlights the necessity for determining the inter-modal relationship of FLAIR and DTI in assessing WM changes. It is important to clarify whether the information of DTI and FLAIR is simply redundant or complementary. Specifically, no clear common biological mechanism exists for observed changes of these two MR modalities, although pathological studies generally assume a vascular origin of FLAIR hyperintensities in WML while attribute the FA decline to myelin/axonal loss beside the ischemic changes ( Luby et al., 2006 ). Clarifying the relationship between the two modalities may help to better characterize the pathology of WM diseases, and to detect the changes which may visually appear normal in a single modality. The value of using FLAIR and DTI together to characterize WM degeneration has not been thoroughly investigated. We present a study to address, theoretically and experimentally, the cross-modality relationship between FLAIR changes governed by T2 and DTI changes governed by diffusion for the characterization of WML in normal elderly subjects. Furthermore, we aim to determine correlations between DTI and FLAIR variations on a voxel-by-voxel level in the elderly human brain. Since the volumes of WML are often used in clinical practice to express WM damage, we also investigate the correlation between DTI and WML volumes, in addition to the signal intensity of FLAIR. To provide an explanation for our in vivo correlation findings, we use a model of bound (normal condition) and free (abnormal) tissue water pools to estimate the changes of DTI and FLAIR as a function of WML severity, which is determined by the volume fraction of the free water pools in the proposed WM degeneration model. The term “white matter lesions” (WML) in this study include the T2/FLAIR hyperintensities of both periventricular and deep WM regions. Our results suggest that the WM degeneration in normal elderly subjects may be better characterized by using the regional cross-modality correlations than using single modality alone.  Theory Assume that the MR signal from WML is a mixture of signals from two pools of water, bound and free, as represented by normal WM and pure cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), respectively. In this context, we approximate WM degeneration as a continuous increase of the partial volume fraction of the free water pool at the expense of bound water. Thus, FLAIR and DTI modalities as well as the correlations between them can be simulated based on this dual water pool model with parameters as used in the realistic in vivo experiments. In following analysis, a fast rate of water exchange between the pools is assumed based on previous investigations on WM relaxation properties suggesting that the water mixing time among the compartments is relatively short compared to the relaxation times, as evidenced by monoexponential relaxation ( Bottomly et al., 1984 ; Lancaster et al., 2003 ). This is particularly true for WML as transverse relaxations in WML are prolonged compared to normal WM tissue. Relaxations Times Let T 1 W M and T 2 W M be the longitudinal (T1) and transverse (T2) relaxation time of the normal WM, respectively, and T 1 CSF and T 2 CSF be the T1 and T2 for CSF accordingly. Under the condition of fast water exchange, the effective relaxation times of the mixed WML signal can be estimated ( Kamman et al., 1988 ) as 1 / T 1 WML = ( 1 ? f ) / T 1 W M + f / T 1 CSF and 1 / T 2 WML = ( 1 ? f ) / T 2 W M + f / T 2 CSF , where the coefficient f = [0,1] is the partial volume fraction of the CSF pool, representing the severity of WML degeneration on the continuum from normal WM ( f =0) to pure CSF ( f =1). Fig. 1(a) shows the simulated T1 and T2 curves with respect to the WML severity f using experimental tissue relaxation parameters of normal WM and CSF at 4T ( Rooney et al., 2007 ). In Fig. 1(b) the joint relaxation times (T1, T2) are illustrated to better capture the change of T2, which is generally much smaller than T1 in magnitude. A slightly curved (T1, T2) trajectory represents discordance of T1 and T2 prolongations in the lesion progression, i.e. the increasing partial volume fraction of free water pool. FLAIR Measurements The signal intensity of white matter lesions (WML) in a T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) experiment can be expressed ( Rydberg et al., 1995 ) by M FLAIR = [ 1 ? 2 exp ( ? T I / T 1 WML ) + exp ( ? T R / T 1 WML ) ] exp ( ? T E / T 2 WML ) • ? 1 H where TI, TR and TE are the parameters of inversion time, repetition time and echo time used in the FLAIR experiment, respectively. The parameter ? 1 H represents the effective WML proton density, which is used to correct the signal intensity as a function of the volume fraction, f such that ? 1 H = ( 1 ? f ) · ? 1 H W M + f · ? 1 H CSF , where ? 1 H W M and ? 1 H CSF are the proton densities in WM and CSF water pools, respectively. In Fig. 2(a) , the surface of FLAIR signal intensities are plotted as a function of T1 and T2, defined in the rectangular area spanned by diagonal vertexes ( T 1 W M , T 2 W M ) and ( T 1 CSF , T 2 CSF ). The surface-embed curve connecting the WM and CSF vertexes is determined by the (T1, T2) trajectory of WM degeneration shown in Fig. 1(b) . The estimated FLAIR intensities of the WML with respect to the lesion severity (as represented by the free water-pool volume fraction f ) are plotted in Fig. 2(b) . A non-monotonic FLAIR intensity curve is plotted against the WML severity, where the effects of changing proton densities in WML are corrected by considering the proton density differences in WM and CSF pools. Maximum FLAIR intensity is reached when f is approximately equal to 0.7 for the given experimental imaging parameters described in Methods. Imaging noise, if considered, is added onto M FLAIR regardless of the lesion severities. DTI Measurements Let D WM and D CSF be the diffusion tensors of the normal WM and pure CSF compartment, respectively, in the static dual water pool model for WML. Under the fast-exchange condition again, the overall effective diffusion-weighted signal of the WML in a diffusion-weighted spin-echo experiment can be estimated ( Hsu and Mori, 1995 ; Alexander, 2000 ) as S WML = S 0 WML exp [ ? b ( ( 1 ? f ) · V T • D W M • V + f · V T • D CSF • V ) ] in which V is the vector of diffusion gradient of a b value, and the reference signal of WML is given by S 0 WML = ( 1 ? f ) · S 0 W M + f · S 0 CSF . Thus, a set of diffusion-weighted signals S i WML , ( i = 1, 2, … n), (n>=6) can be obtained based on a set of non-coplanar vectors V i , ( i = 1, 2, … n), and the corresponding diffusion tensor and indices can then be estimated ( Le Bihan et al., 2001 ). Imaging noise, if considered, is added onto S WML and S 0 WML independently. For both noise free and noisy conditions, Fig. 3 shows the curves of fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) indices ( Le Bihan et al., 2001 ) of the effective WML diffusion tensor as the function of the lesion severity as represented by the free water-pool volume fraction f when using realistic diffusion imaging parameters as described in Methods. In the noise-free condition ( Fig. 3a and b ), monotonic changes of FA and MD are observed with respect to increasing WML severity, and FA curves show an insensitivity to the b value. In the condition with simulated additive noises ( Fig. 3c and d ), stronger fluctuations appear in FA curves and higher WML severities. DTI-FLAIR Correlations Assume that the variability of DTI and FLAIR signals of WML is caused by the lesion severity and additive random noise, thus the correlations between DTI and FLAIR measurements would vary at different lesion severities due to the mismatched patterns of the two modalities. As illustrated in Fig. 4 , a total of 20 independent trials are repeated to obtain the mean value and standard deviation of the DTI-FLAIR correlation in 10 successive severity intervals of f = [0 0.1], [0.1, 0.2], … [0.9, 1.0]. The noise levels of DTI and FLAIR signals are specified according to our experimental data, namely a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 60:1 and 80:1 for the FLAIR and DTI reference images ( b =0), respectively. Other simulation parameters (e.g. b value, encoding directions, relaxation times, etc.) are also set as the same as the in vivo experiments (see Methods). As shown in Fig. 4 the correlation between FLAIR and DTI measures disappear for lesions as the lesion severity reaches 0.7, i.e. the water pool in WML is 70% free, and 30% bound water. For MD, an inverse correlation emerges as WML severity further increases. In contrast, the correlation between FA and FLAIR remains small as WML severity increases continues to grow because noise dominates FA more than FLAIR, especially for higher WML severities (See Fig. 3 ). The higher vulnerability of FA to image noises than MD ( Papadakis et al., 2000 ) is also indicated by the larger error bars for the FA-FLAIR correlation coefficients in Fig. 4 .  Relaxations Times Let T 1 W M and T 2 W M be the longitudinal (T1) and transverse (T2) relaxation time of the normal WM, respectively, and T 1 CSF and T 2 CSF be the T1 and T2 for CSF accordingly. Under the condition of fast water exchange, the effective relaxation times of the mixed WML signal can be estimated ( Kamman et al., 1988 ) as 1 / T 1 WML = ( 1 ? f ) / T 1 W M + f / T 1 CSF and 1 / T 2 WML = ( 1 ? f ) / T 2 W M + f / T 2 CSF , where the coefficient f = [0,1] is the partial volume fraction of the CSF pool, representing the severity of WML degeneration on the continuum from normal WM ( f =0) to pure CSF ( f =1). Fig. 1(a) shows the simulated T1 and T2 curves with respect to the WML severity f using experimental tissue relaxation parameters of normal WM and CSF at 4T ( Rooney et al., 2007 ). In Fig. 1(b) the joint relaxation times (T1, T2) are illustrated to better capture the change of T2, which is generally much smaller than T1 in magnitude. A slightly curved (T1, T2) trajectory represents discordance of T1 and T2 prolongations in the lesion progression, i.e. the increasing partial volume fraction of free water pool.  FLAIR Measurements The signal intensity of white matter lesions (WML) in a T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) experiment can be expressed ( Rydberg et al., 1995 ) by M FLAIR = [ 1 ? 2 exp ( ? T I / T 1 WML ) + exp ( ? T R / T 1 WML ) ] exp ( ? T E / T 2 WML ) • ? 1 H where TI, TR and TE are the parameters of inversion time, repetition time and echo time used in the FLAIR experiment, respectively. The parameter ? 1 H represents the effective WML proton density, which is used to correct the signal intensity as a function of the volume fraction, f such that ? 1 H = ( 1 ? f ) · ? 1 H W M + f · ? 1 H CSF , where ? 1 H W M and ? 1 H CSF are the proton densities in WM and CSF water pools, respectively. In Fig. 2(a) , the surface of FLAIR signal intensities are plotted as a function of T1 and T2, defined in the rectangular area spanned by diagonal vertexes ( T 1 W M , T 2 W M ) and ( T 1 CSF , T 2 CSF ). The surface-embed curve connecting the WM and CSF vertexes is determined by the (T1, T2) trajectory of WM degeneration shown in Fig. 1(b) . The estimated FLAIR intensities of the WML with respect to the lesion severity (as represented by the free water-pool volume fraction f ) are plotted in Fig. 2(b) . A non-monotonic FLAIR intensity curve is plotted against the WML severity, where the effects of changing proton densities in WML are corrected by considering the proton density differences in WM and CSF pools. Maximum FLAIR intensity is reached when f is approximately equal to 0.7 for the given experimental imaging parameters described in Methods. Imaging noise, if considered, is added onto M FLAIR regardless of the lesion severities.  DTI Measurements Let D WM and D CSF be the diffusion tensors of the normal WM and pure CSF compartment, respectively, in the static dual water pool model for WML. Under the fast-exchange condition again, the overall effective diffusion-weighted signal of the WML in a diffusion-weighted spin-echo experiment can be estimated ( Hsu and Mori, 1995 ; Alexander, 2000 ) as S WML = S 0 WML exp [ ? b ( ( 1 ? f ) · V T • D W M • V + f · V T • D CSF • V ) ] in which V is the vector of diffusion gradient of a b value, and the reference signal of WML is given by S 0 WML = ( 1 ? f ) · S 0 W M + f · S 0 CSF . Thus, a set of diffusion-weighted signals S i WML , ( i = 1, 2, … n), (n>=6) can be obtained based on a set of non-coplanar vectors V i , ( i = 1, 2, … n), and the corresponding diffusion tensor and indices can then be estimated ( Le Bihan et al., 2001 ). Imaging noise, if considered, is added onto S WML and S 0 WML independently. For both noise free and noisy conditions, Fig. 3 shows the curves of fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) indices ( Le Bihan et al., 2001 ) of the effective WML diffusion tensor as the function of the lesion severity as represented by the free water-pool volume fraction f when using realistic diffusion imaging parameters as described in Methods. In the noise-free condition ( Fig. 3a and b ), monotonic changes of FA and MD are observed with respect to increasing WML severity, and FA curves show an insensitivity to the b value. In the condition with simulated additive noises ( Fig. 3c and d ), stronger fluctuations appear in FA curves and higher WML severities.  DTI-FLAIR Correlations Assume that the variability of DTI and FLAIR signals of WML is caused by the lesion severity and additive random noise, thus the correlations between DTI and FLAIR measurements would vary at different lesion severities due to the mismatched patterns of the two modalities. As illustrated in Fig. 4 , a total of 20 independent trials are repeated to obtain the mean value and standard deviation of the DTI-FLAIR correlation in 10 successive severity intervals of f = [0 0.1], [0.1, 0.2], … [0.9, 1.0]. The noise levels of DTI and FLAIR signals are specified according to our experimental data, namely a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 60:1 and 80:1 for the FLAIR and DTI reference images ( b =0), respectively. Other simulation parameters (e.g. b value, encoding directions, relaxation times, etc.) are also set as the same as the in vivo experiments (see Methods). As shown in Fig. 4 the correlation between FLAIR and DTI measures disappear for lesions as the lesion severity reaches 0.7, i.e. the water pool in WML is 70% free, and 30% bound water. For MD, an inverse correlation emerges as WML severity further increases. In contrast, the correlation between FA and FLAIR remains small as WML severity increases continues to grow because noise dominates FA more than FLAIR, especially for higher WML severities (See Fig. 3 ). The higher vulnerability of FA to image noises than MD ( Papadakis et al., 2000 ) is also indicated by the larger error bars for the FA-FLAIR correlation coefficients in Fig. 4 .  Methods Image Acquisition Thirty-three cognitively normal elder volunteers (Female=19), with mean age of 71±10 years and mean Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) ( Folstein et al., 1975 ) scores of 27.6±3.3 recieved MRI scans at 4 Tesla (Siemens). The MRI scanner was equipped with a birdcage transmit and an 8-channel receiver coil in a single housing. DTI, FLAIR, and T1-weighted imaging (MPRAGE) data were acquired in a single session on each subject. EPI-based DTI data were acquired using parallel imaging (GRAPPA) ( Griswold et al., 2002 ) with two fold acceleration. Other parameters were: TR/TE = 6s/77ms, matrix size = 128×128×40 yielding 2×2×3 mm nominal resolution, and 6 diffusion encoding directions with b=800 s/mm2. DTI acquisitions were repeated 4 times to boost the signal to noise ratio (SNR). The FLAIR parameters were: TR/TI/TE = 5s/1.9s/355ms, echoes=209 per segmented k-space sampling, flip angle =180 degrees, and matrix size=256×192×60 yielding 1.1×1.1×2 mm spatial resolution. T1-weighted anatomical images were also acquired for image normalization as described below. Experiments were performed according to the guidelines of institutional research board (IRB) of University of California San Francisco, and Veterans Affair Medical Center of San Francisco. Normal cognitive functioning of subjects was assessed by a short battery of neuropsychological tests: MMSE, California Verbal Learning Test (short form), Rey–Osterrieth complex figure, Verbal Fluency, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Score (digit symbol, digit span), as described in recent publication of our lab ( Mueller et al., 2008 ). Subjects, who received ? 1.5 standardized score or less in more than two of these tests, were excluded from the study. DTI Processing After eddy current correction ( Bodammer et al., 2004 ), the diffusion tensor and the spatially invariant summary measures fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) were calculated offline for each voxel with the FMRIB Software Library (FSL) ( www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/ ). DTI processing tools for tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) ( Smith et al., 2006 ) were used for the spatial normalization procedure of the DTI data in following steps: (i) A representative subject (female, 70 yrs) was selected as the co-registration “target” to which the 3D FA maps of all subjects were aligned by the nonlinear registration procedure in TBSS; (ii) The aligned FA maps were interpolated to 1×1×1 mm resolution, and spatially normalized by the same nonlinear coregistration program with respect to a T1-weighted template in Talairach space ( Chau and McIntosh, 2005 ); and (iii) For each subject, the MD map was spatially normalized to the Talairach space by the same transformation pipeline as that was estimated in the FA map normalization in Steps (i) and (ii). In order to retain a full voxelwise mapping for WM, no WM skeletonlization procedure was applied in this study. FLAIR Processing The effects of B1-field inhomogeneities on the FLAIR intensities were adjusted using a non-parametric high order co-occurrences technique ( Hadjidemetriou et al., 2007 ). WML regions with abnormal hyperintensity (defined as 25% higher than the average intensity of surrounding WM tissue in FLAIR) were extracted from the intensity corrected FLAIR images using the graph cuts algorithm ( Boykov et al., 2001 ). The FLAIR and T1 weighted MPRAGE images of each subject were first registered to each other using a rigid transformation, and then spatially normalized to a T1 template as used in DTI using a fluid-based nonlinear registration technique (Christensen et al., 1997). Spatial normalized WML maps were obtained by following the T1 image transformation pipeline as described in ( Joshi et al., 2003 ). Both WML intensity (i.e. the FLAIR hyperintensity compared with normal WM) and total WML volume (i.e. the number of voxels of extracted WML regions) were interchangeably used as measure of WML severity. Due to the susceptibility-induced geometrical distortions in EPI-based DTI images, as well as the lack of WM tract contrast in the T1 images, misalignments between DTI and FLAIR images may remain (empirically less than 4 mm). To improve alignment, we manually adjusted the T1 template for FLAIR registrations using affine adjustments (< 1%), which generally reduced discrepancy to < 2 mm, as assessed by the discrepancy between mean FA map and the T1-template in major WM regions like corpus callosum (See Fig. 5 and results for justification). Correlation Analysis For spatially normalized images, the DTI-FLAIR correlation analysis was performed across subjects in two ways: (1) Total WML volume (measured in the segmented WML map in the normalized space) was correlated to the FA or MD value at each image voxel for all subjects; and (2) WML intensity (measured in the segmented WML map) was correlated to the FA or MD value at each voxel for all subjects. The Pearson product moment correlation ( Neter et al., 1990 ) was used to test for significant associations between FLAIR and DTI. Before the correlation coefficient was estimated, age and gender were used as independent variables in a multivariate linear regression program ( Kamman et al., 1988 ) to adjust for their effects to the DTI data on a voxelwise basis. The correlation clusters were picked up at p<0.001 for all normalized DTI image voxels at 1 mm3 resolution. Computer Simulations The dual water pool model described in the Theory section was used to simulate the progression of WM degeneration by increasing the volume fraction of unbound water, as is found in CSF. Relaxation times at 4T of normal WM (T1/T2=1043/65ms) and pure CSF (T1/T2=4500/120ms) were assumed for the 2 water pools ( Kamman et al., 1988 ; Rooney et al., 2007 ). The proton density differences between the dual water pools were assumed to be governed by the mass fractions of water content of 71% and 100%, for normal WM and pure CSF, respectively ( Curry et al, 1990 ). For DTI, axially symmetrical diffusion tensors in each compartment were assumed having eigenvalues (0.95, 0.35, 0.35)×10?3 and (2.3, 2.3, 2.3)×10?3 mm2/s, respectively ( Le Bihan et al., 2001 ). A fast water exchange was assumed in signal estimation for both FLAIR and DTI based on the in vivo imaging parameters listed above. Gaussian distributed noise was added to simulate an SNR of 60:1 for FLAIR and an SNR of 80:1 for DTI reference images (corrected after repetitions). These SNR values were based on experimental in vivo raw data. The b value of 1000 s/mm2 was used to calculate the FA and MD measurements. Ten successive WML severity intervals of f = [0, 0.1], [0.1, 0.2], … [0.9, 1.0] were used to estimate the DTI-FLAIR correlations for different severities. A total of 20 independent trials were repeated to obtain the mean and standard deviation of the correlation coefficients between the two modalities in each severity interval.  Image Acquisition Thirty-three cognitively normal elder volunteers (Female=19), with mean age of 71±10 years and mean Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) ( Folstein et al., 1975 ) scores of 27.6±3.3 recieved MRI scans at 4 Tesla (Siemens). The MRI scanner was equipped with a birdcage transmit and an 8-channel receiver coil in a single housing. DTI, FLAIR, and T1-weighted imaging (MPRAGE) data were acquired in a single session on each subject. EPI-based DTI data were acquired using parallel imaging (GRAPPA) ( Griswold et al., 2002 ) with two fold acceleration. Other parameters were: TR/TE = 6s/77ms, matrix size = 128×128×40 yielding 2×2×3 mm nominal resolution, and 6 diffusion encoding directions with b=800 s/mm2. DTI acquisitions were repeated 4 times to boost the signal to noise ratio (SNR). The FLAIR parameters were: TR/TI/TE = 5s/1.9s/355ms, echoes=209 per segmented k-space sampling, flip angle =180 degrees, and matrix size=256×192×60 yielding 1.1×1.1×2 mm spatial resolution. T1-weighted anatomical images were also acquired for image normalization as described below. Experiments were performed according to the guidelines of institutional research board (IRB) of University of California San Francisco, and Veterans Affair Medical Center of San Francisco. Normal cognitive functioning of subjects was assessed by a short battery of neuropsychological tests: MMSE, California Verbal Learning Test (short form), Rey–Osterrieth complex figure, Verbal Fluency, Wechsler Adult Intelligence Score (digit symbol, digit span), as described in recent publication of our lab ( Mueller et al., 2008 ). Subjects, who received ? 1.5 standardized score or less in more than two of these tests, were excluded from the study.  DTI Processing After eddy current correction ( Bodammer et al., 2004 ), the diffusion tensor and the spatially invariant summary measures fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) were calculated offline for each voxel with the FMRIB Software Library (FSL) ( www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/ ). DTI processing tools for tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) ( Smith et al., 2006 ) were used for the spatial normalization procedure of the DTI data in following steps: (i) A representative subject (female, 70 yrs) was selected as the co-registration “target” to which the 3D FA maps of all subjects were aligned by the nonlinear registration procedure in TBSS; (ii) The aligned FA maps were interpolated to 1×1×1 mm resolution, and spatially normalized by the same nonlinear coregistration program with respect to a T1-weighted template in Talairach space ( Chau and McIntosh, 2005 ); and (iii) For each subject, the MD map was spatially normalized to the Talairach space by the same transformation pipeline as that was estimated in the FA map normalization in Steps (i) and (ii). In order to retain a full voxelwise mapping for WM, no WM skeletonlization procedure was applied in this study.  FLAIR Processing The effects of B1-field inhomogeneities on the FLAIR intensities were adjusted using a non-parametric high order co-occurrences technique ( Hadjidemetriou et al., 2007 ). WML regions with abnormal hyperintensity (defined as 25% higher than the average intensity of surrounding WM tissue in FLAIR) were extracted from the intensity corrected FLAIR images using the graph cuts algorithm ( Boykov et al., 2001 ). The FLAIR and T1 weighted MPRAGE images of each subject were first registered to each other using a rigid transformation, and then spatially normalized to a T1 template as used in DTI using a fluid-based nonlinear registration technique (Christensen et al., 1997). Spatial normalized WML maps were obtained by following the T1 image transformation pipeline as described in ( Joshi et al., 2003 ). Both WML intensity (i.e. the FLAIR hyperintensity compared with normal WM) and total WML volume (i.e. the number of voxels of extracted WML regions) were interchangeably used as measure of WML severity. Due to the susceptibility-induced geometrical distortions in EPI-based DTI images, as well as the lack of WM tract contrast in the T1 images, misalignments between DTI and FLAIR images may remain (empirically less than 4 mm). To improve alignment, we manually adjusted the T1 template for FLAIR registrations using affine adjustments (< 1%), which generally reduced discrepancy to < 2 mm, as assessed by the discrepancy between mean FA map and the T1-template in major WM regions like corpus callosum (See Fig. 5 and results for justification).  Correlation Analysis For spatially normalized images, the DTI-FLAIR correlation analysis was performed across subjects in two ways: (1) Total WML volume (measured in the segmented WML map in the normalized space) was correlated to the FA or MD value at each image voxel for all subjects; and (2) WML intensity (measured in the segmented WML map) was correlated to the FA or MD value at each voxel for all subjects. The Pearson product moment correlation ( Neter et al., 1990 ) was used to test for significant associations between FLAIR and DTI. Before the correlation coefficient was estimated, age and gender were used as independent variables in a multivariate linear regression program ( Kamman et al., 1988 ) to adjust for their effects to the DTI data on a voxelwise basis. The correlation clusters were picked up at p<0.001 for all normalized DTI image voxels at 1 mm3 resolution.  Computer Simulations The dual water pool model described in the Theory section was used to simulate the progression of WM degeneration by increasing the volume fraction of unbound water, as is found in CSF. Relaxation times at 4T of normal WM (T1/T2=1043/65ms) and pure CSF (T1/T2=4500/120ms) were assumed for the 2 water pools ( Kamman et al., 1988 ; Rooney et al., 2007 ). The proton density differences between the dual water pools were assumed to be governed by the mass fractions of water content of 71% and 100%, for normal WM and pure CSF, respectively ( Curry et al, 1990 ). For DTI, axially symmetrical diffusion tensors in each compartment were assumed having eigenvalues (0.95, 0.35, 0.35)×10?3 and (2.3, 2.3, 2.3)×10?3 mm2/s, respectively ( Le Bihan et al., 2001 ). A fast water exchange was assumed in signal estimation for both FLAIR and DTI based on the in vivo imaging parameters listed above. Gaussian distributed noise was added to simulate an SNR of 60:1 for FLAIR and an SNR of 80:1 for DTI reference images (corrected after repetitions). These SNR values were based on experimental in vivo raw data. The b value of 1000 s/mm2 was used to calculate the FA and MD measurements. Ten successive WML severity intervals of f = [0, 0.1], [0.1, 0.2], … [0.9, 1.0] were used to estimate the DTI-FLAIR correlations for different severities. A total of 20 independent trials were repeated to obtain the mean and standard deviation of the correlation coefficients between the two modalities in each severity interval.  Results Simulation results are presented in Theory Fig. 1 through Fig. 4 . Experimental Mean FA and mean WML maps In Fig. 5(a) and (b) , the mean FA map of all subjects at threshold of FA>0.35 for major WM tracts is superimposed in color on the grayscale T1 templates to demonstrate the cross-modality coregistration quality. In column (a), the background T1 template used for the DTI spatial normalization shows a moderate misregistration to the mean FA map, especially near the corpus callosum. In column (b), the manually aligned T1 template demonstrates reduced misregistration to the same mean FA map. In column (c), the mean WML intensity map of all subjects is superimposed in color on the aligned T1 template, onto which all FLAIR images and WML maps have been registered. Because of the MRI similarities between FLAIR and T1, the registration between the two is generally much better than between DTI and T1. Therefore, the insufficient coregistration between DTI and FLAIR can be primarily attributed to the DTI-to-T1 template misalignments. Correlations between DTI and WML Volume Fig. 6 shows the profile of voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the total WML volume, overlaid on either mean FA or mean WML intensity maps. The correlation clusters are selected at threshold p<0.001 using blue and red to represent negative and positive correlations, respectively. This shows that significant correlations between DTI and WML volumes primarily appear on or adjacent to the WM regions where the mean WML intensities are moderately high, and that no significant correlation clusters are detected in the regions where the mean WML intensities are the highest, as demonstrated in periventricular regions. Compared to the correlations between FA and WML volume, which are dominantly negative, the correlations between MD and WML volume are generally positive and occur on similar and slightly wider areas, indicating a stronger MD-WML correlation. In Fig. 6(b) and (d) , the same correlation clusters as shown in (a) and (c) are imposed on the mean WML map to visually enhance the spatial correspondence with respect to the corresponding WML intensities. In general, FA and MD exhibit consistent correlations with the total WML volume with opposite signs, partially overlapping the WML regions. It is interesting to observe that these clusters distribute on “boundary” WML areas, rather than concentrate on the most intense WML regions. Correlations between DTI and WML intensity Using a similar display, the voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the WML intensity are illustrated in Fig. 7 . The axial slice used in the lower row is identical to the axial slice in Fig. 6 . The blue clusters in columns (a) and (b) are negative FA-WML intensity correlations selected at p<0.001, overlaid on the mean FA and mean WML intensity maps, respectively. The red clusters in columns (b) and (c) represent the positive correlations between MD and WML intensity, displayed on the background of mean FA and mean WML intensity maps. The similarity of cluster distributions in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 suggest that the WML intensity and the total WML volume are associated in their correlations with the DTI measurements. Comparatively, DTI to WML intensity correlations are more significant and distributed slightly closer to the major WM tracts than the DTI to WML volume correlations. Consistent to the results shown in Fig. 6 , the DTI-WML intensity correlation clusters in Fig. 7 exhibit a pattern of partial overlapping over the mean WML map. Again, these clusters appear only on the regions where the WML intensities are moderate rather than the areas where the WML intensities are particularly high.  Results Simulation results are presented in Theory Fig. 1 through Fig. 4 . Experimental Mean FA and mean WML maps In Fig. 5(a) and (b) , the mean FA map of all subjects at threshold of FA>0.35 for major WM tracts is superimposed in color on the grayscale T1 templates to demonstrate the cross-modality coregistration quality. In column (a), the background T1 template used for the DTI spatial normalization shows a moderate misregistration to the mean FA map, especially near the corpus callosum. In column (b), the manually aligned T1 template demonstrates reduced misregistration to the same mean FA map. In column (c), the mean WML intensity map of all subjects is superimposed in color on the aligned T1 template, onto which all FLAIR images and WML maps have been registered. Because of the MRI similarities between FLAIR and T1, the registration between the two is generally much better than between DTI and T1. Therefore, the insufficient coregistration between DTI and FLAIR can be primarily attributed to the DTI-to-T1 template misalignments. Correlations between DTI and WML Volume Fig. 6 shows the profile of voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the total WML volume, overlaid on either mean FA or mean WML intensity maps. The correlation clusters are selected at threshold p<0.001 using blue and red to represent negative and positive correlations, respectively. This shows that significant correlations between DTI and WML volumes primarily appear on or adjacent to the WM regions where the mean WML intensities are moderately high, and that no significant correlation clusters are detected in the regions where the mean WML intensities are the highest, as demonstrated in periventricular regions. Compared to the correlations between FA and WML volume, which are dominantly negative, the correlations between MD and WML volume are generally positive and occur on similar and slightly wider areas, indicating a stronger MD-WML correlation. In Fig. 6(b) and (d) , the same correlation clusters as shown in (a) and (c) are imposed on the mean WML map to visually enhance the spatial correspondence with respect to the corresponding WML intensities. In general, FA and MD exhibit consistent correlations with the total WML volume with opposite signs, partially overlapping the WML regions. It is interesting to observe that these clusters distribute on “boundary” WML areas, rather than concentrate on the most intense WML regions. Correlations between DTI and WML intensity Using a similar display, the voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the WML intensity are illustrated in Fig. 7 . The axial slice used in the lower row is identical to the axial slice in Fig. 6 . The blue clusters in columns (a) and (b) are negative FA-WML intensity correlations selected at p<0.001, overlaid on the mean FA and mean WML intensity maps, respectively. The red clusters in columns (b) and (c) represent the positive correlations between MD and WML intensity, displayed on the background of mean FA and mean WML intensity maps. The similarity of cluster distributions in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 suggest that the WML intensity and the total WML volume are associated in their correlations with the DTI measurements. Comparatively, DTI to WML intensity correlations are more significant and distributed slightly closer to the major WM tracts than the DTI to WML volume correlations. Consistent to the results shown in Fig. 6 , the DTI-WML intensity correlation clusters in Fig. 7 exhibit a pattern of partial overlapping over the mean WML map. Again, these clusters appear only on the regions where the WML intensities are moderate rather than the areas where the WML intensities are particularly high.  Experimental Mean FA and mean WML maps In Fig. 5(a) and (b) , the mean FA map of all subjects at threshold of FA>0.35 for major WM tracts is superimposed in color on the grayscale T1 templates to demonstrate the cross-modality coregistration quality. In column (a), the background T1 template used for the DTI spatial normalization shows a moderate misregistration to the mean FA map, especially near the corpus callosum. In column (b), the manually aligned T1 template demonstrates reduced misregistration to the same mean FA map. In column (c), the mean WML intensity map of all subjects is superimposed in color on the aligned T1 template, onto which all FLAIR images and WML maps have been registered. Because of the MRI similarities between FLAIR and T1, the registration between the two is generally much better than between DTI and T1. Therefore, the insufficient coregistration between DTI and FLAIR can be primarily attributed to the DTI-to-T1 template misalignments.  Experimental Mean FA and mean WML maps In Fig. 5(a) and (b) , the mean FA map of all subjects at threshold of FA>0.35 for major WM tracts is superimposed in color on the grayscale T1 templates to demonstrate the cross-modality coregistration quality. In column (a), the background T1 template used for the DTI spatial normalization shows a moderate misregistration to the mean FA map, especially near the corpus callosum. In column (b), the manually aligned T1 template demonstrates reduced misregistration to the same mean FA map. In column (c), the mean WML intensity map of all subjects is superimposed in color on the aligned T1 template, onto which all FLAIR images and WML maps have been registered. Because of the MRI similarities between FLAIR and T1, the registration between the two is generally much better than between DTI and T1. Therefore, the insufficient coregistration between DTI and FLAIR can be primarily attributed to the DTI-to-T1 template misalignments.  Correlations between DTI and WML Volume Fig. 6 shows the profile of voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the total WML volume, overlaid on either mean FA or mean WML intensity maps. The correlation clusters are selected at threshold p<0.001 using blue and red to represent negative and positive correlations, respectively. This shows that significant correlations between DTI and WML volumes primarily appear on or adjacent to the WM regions where the mean WML intensities are moderately high, and that no significant correlation clusters are detected in the regions where the mean WML intensities are the highest, as demonstrated in periventricular regions. Compared to the correlations between FA and WML volume, which are dominantly negative, the correlations between MD and WML volume are generally positive and occur on similar and slightly wider areas, indicating a stronger MD-WML correlation. In Fig. 6(b) and (d) , the same correlation clusters as shown in (a) and (c) are imposed on the mean WML map to visually enhance the spatial correspondence with respect to the corresponding WML intensities. In general, FA and MD exhibit consistent correlations with the total WML volume with opposite signs, partially overlapping the WML regions. It is interesting to observe that these clusters distribute on “boundary” WML areas, rather than concentrate on the most intense WML regions.  Correlations between DTI and WML Volume Fig. 6 shows the profile of voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the total WML volume, overlaid on either mean FA or mean WML intensity maps. The correlation clusters are selected at threshold p<0.001 using blue and red to represent negative and positive correlations, respectively. This shows that significant correlations between DTI and WML volumes primarily appear on or adjacent to the WM regions where the mean WML intensities are moderately high, and that no significant correlation clusters are detected in the regions where the mean WML intensities are the highest, as demonstrated in periventricular regions. Compared to the correlations between FA and WML volume, which are dominantly negative, the correlations between MD and WML volume are generally positive and occur on similar and slightly wider areas, indicating a stronger MD-WML correlation. In Fig. 6(b) and (d) , the same correlation clusters as shown in (a) and (c) are imposed on the mean WML map to visually enhance the spatial correspondence with respect to the corresponding WML intensities. In general, FA and MD exhibit consistent correlations with the total WML volume with opposite signs, partially overlapping the WML regions. It is interesting to observe that these clusters distribute on “boundary” WML areas, rather than concentrate on the most intense WML regions.  Correlations between DTI and WML intensity Using a similar display, the voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the WML intensity are illustrated in Fig. 7 . The axial slice used in the lower row is identical to the axial slice in Fig. 6 . The blue clusters in columns (a) and (b) are negative FA-WML intensity correlations selected at p<0.001, overlaid on the mean FA and mean WML intensity maps, respectively. The red clusters in columns (b) and (c) represent the positive correlations between MD and WML intensity, displayed on the background of mean FA and mean WML intensity maps. The similarity of cluster distributions in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 suggest that the WML intensity and the total WML volume are associated in their correlations with the DTI measurements. Comparatively, DTI to WML intensity correlations are more significant and distributed slightly closer to the major WM tracts than the DTI to WML volume correlations. Consistent to the results shown in Fig. 6 , the DTI-WML intensity correlation clusters in Fig. 7 exhibit a pattern of partial overlapping over the mean WML map. Again, these clusters appear only on the regions where the WML intensities are moderate rather than the areas where the WML intensities are particularly high.  Correlations between DTI and WML intensity Using a similar display, the voxelwise correlations between the DTI index (FA or MD) and the WML intensity are illustrated in Fig. 7 . The axial slice used in the lower row is identical to the axial slice in Fig. 6 . The blue clusters in columns (a) and (b) are negative FA-WML intensity correlations selected at p<0.001, overlaid on the mean FA and mean WML intensity maps, respectively. The red clusters in columns (b) and (c) represent the positive correlations between MD and WML intensity, displayed on the background of mean FA and mean WML intensity maps. The similarity of cluster distributions in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 suggest that the WML intensity and the total WML volume are associated in their correlations with the DTI measurements. Comparatively, DTI to WML intensity correlations are more significant and distributed slightly closer to the major WM tracts than the DTI to WML volume correlations. Consistent to the results shown in Fig. 6 , the DTI-WML intensity correlation clusters in Fig. 7 exhibit a pattern of partial overlapping over the mean WML map. Again, these clusters appear only on the regions where the WML intensities are moderate rather than the areas where the WML intensities are particularly high.  Discussion The present study aimed to examine the intrinsic relationship between DTI and FLAIR measurements in characterizing WM degeneration in elderly subjects. The in vivo data acquired at 4T indicate that the inter-subject variations of DTI measurements (FA and MD) significantly correlate with the FLAIR measurements of WML volume and intensity. The results from voxelwise correlation analyses revealed an interesting spatial “mismatch” between DTI-FLAIR correlation clusters and the average spatial distribution of WML. More specifically, significant correlations appear only at edges of the average WML region, where the average WML intensity is moderately high, whereas the correlations disappear in the center of WML regions, where WML intensity is particularly high, as in the periventricular regions. It is worthwhile to note that the insufficient coregistration between DTI and FLAIR images cannot explain the “mismatch” phenomenon. First, we used a pair of slightly different T1 templates (created by a manual affine adjustment) to reduce DTI-FLAIR misalignments to a level of less than 2 mm or so (See Fig. 5 ), far less than the mismatch, which can reach up to 8 mm as shown in columns (b) and (d) in Fig. 6 or Fig. 7 . Second, susceptibility-induced geometrical distortions in DTI images primarily occur along the inferior-superior phase-encoding direction and therefore cannot explain the mismatch in other directions. Third, separate from WML intensity, we used WML volume to perform the correlation with DTI measurements at each image voxel, and this type of correlation is independent from the quality of DTI-FLAIR coregistration. We used a dual pool model of water to express WML disease and to approximate the DTI and FLAIR behaviors in the WM degeneration with a continuum from normal WM to pure CSF for progressing WML severity. The simulations predict the correlation-WML mismatch exhibited in the in vivo data, especially the disappearance of correlations between DTI and FLAIR at the peak intensities of FLAIR. Moreover, the simulations correctly predict the signs of correlation coefficients, i.e. negative and positive for FA and MD indices, respectively, in the majority of WM regions. According to Fig. 4(b) and (c) , the MD-FLAIR correlations should reverse the sign for the highly sever WML when approximating the pure CSF end. It is interesting to observe in Fig. 6 that the negative MD-WML correlations do exist on minor regions of WML, primarily in the inferior part of the brain. Further investigations are required to determine whether the severity of WML is more advanced in reverse-sign regions than in others, as the simulations imply. The absence of the reverse-sign regions in FA-WML correlation maps could be explained by the flatter tail of FA curve with respect to the WML severity, as well as the higher noise vulnerability of FA index. According to our simulations (see Fig. 3 ), FA is more sensitive to noise especially at the pure CSF end, where the lower intensities in both FLAIR and diffusion weighted images enhance the effects of noisy fluctuations so that minor DTI-FLAIR correlations can be wiped out. The non-monotonic pattern of FLAIR intensity can be intuitively explained by the design of FLAIR acquisition, in which the inversion time is chosen to null the signal contribution from CSF ( Gauvrit et al., 2006 ) and hence also attenuates WML that appear like CSF because of their advanced degradation. An animal study with infarcted rat brain demonstrated a similar pattern of FLAIR signal with respect to the percentage of WM cavity ( Taoka et al., 2004 ). It should be noted that other MRI contrasts exhibit different curve patterns for the WML severity as indicated by the volume fraction of the free water pool. T1-weighed images, for example, show monotonically decreasing intensities for increasing lesion severity. However, the signal variations of WML in T1-weighted are much smaller than those in FLAIR, which makes more difficult to detect the lesion with the T1-weighted MRI. Furthermore, the common T2-weighted relaxation properties of both FLAIR and DTI modalities are also important to guarantee the validity of our fast-exchange dual water-pool model, which can be equally applied to both modalities without considering the complicated interactions among the water pools with different relaxation properties. A fast-exchange condition was assumed in the simulations for both FLAIR and DTI modalities. Nevertheless, we noticed that using a slow-exchange condition would not change the major points of our analysis, although the FA curves become more sensitive to the b values, and the revised sign of FA-FLAIR correlation coefficients would be slightly stronger (r <0.2) for greater WML severities ( f = 0.8~0.9). On the other hand, we implemented the same imaging parameters and noise levels for both simulations and in vivo experiments at 4T in order to make the results as comparable as possible. It should be noted that varying the imaging parameters (e.g. TR, TE, TI, b value, and relaxation times, etc.) modulate the signal curves with respect to the lesion severity f , as implied by the equations described in Theory. However, the basic monotonic and/or non-monotonic trend of the curves remain unchanged within the range of practically useful parameter vales at 3T and 4T, even though the position the peak FLAIR intensity may have minor shifts within ± 0.1. Therefore, the results regarding the DTI-FLAIR correlations remain in principle intact. Although the present DTI-FLAIR correlation simulations are based on FLAIR intensity modeling, we used both WML volume and intensity to perform the correlation analysis for the in vivo data. The practical reason for doing so is that we need a crosscheck in the correlation analysis as a quality control measure for DTI-FLAIR coregistration. As mentioned above, the correlations between DTI and WML volume are insensitive to the DTI-FLAIR misregistration because a single value of WML volume is uniformly used in all voxels. Thus, the overall consistency of correlation profiles between using WML volume or WML intensity confirmed that the DTI-FLAIR coregistration quality is generally acceptable for the present study. On the other hand, this consistency may also indicate that WML intensities are distributed with a high degree of spatial coherence, so that the measurement to the total WML volume is actually a good representation of the WML intensity distribution. If this is true, a quasi-linear relationship between WML volume and intensity might be valid in general, and thus the model-based simulations with WML intensity can be directly extended to the WML volume cases. This is an interesting topic that we would like to explore in the future. Our data support the hypothesis that a common physical mechanism exists behind the measured FLAIR and DTI changes of WM degeneration in normal elderly subjects, because the same volume fraction model for both modalities is able to explain the major results of in vivo correlation analysis. Even though, we have to point out the limitations that the proposed dual pool model for WM degeneration has been tested here only on the normal aging, and that this model could be an oversimplification of WM disease and other mechanisms, such as cross-correlation and dipolar coupling of bound water, likely need to be taken into consideration, as others have previously demonstrated ( Kiihne et al., 2000 ). We intend to explore the general validity of the WM degeneration model for other clinical conditions applications as well. For example, there are several situations characterized by altered FLAIR signal and increased diffusivity which are very different from a microstructural and histopathological viewpoint, such as chronic vascular lesions, MS lesions and perilesional areas in brain tumors. It would be important to understand to what extent this simplified model can hold for other conditions, or a more complicated WM model ( Lancaster et al., 2003 ) is necessary.  Discussion The present study aimed to examine the intrinsic relationship between DTI and FLAIR measurements in characterizing WM degeneration in elderly subjects. The in vivo data acquired at 4T indicate that the inter-subject variations of DTI measurements (FA and MD) significantly correlate with the FLAIR measurements of WML volume and intensity. The results from voxelwise correlation analyses revealed an interesting spatial “mismatch” between DTI-FLAIR correlation clusters and the average spatial distribution of WML. More specifically, significant correlations appear only at edges of the average WML region, where the average WML intensity is moderately high, whereas the correlations disappear in the center of WML regions, where WML intensity is particularly high, as in the periventricular regions. It is worthwhile to note that the insufficient coregistration between DTI and FLAIR images cannot explain the “mismatch” phenomenon. First, we used a pair of slightly different T1 templates (created by a manual affine adjustment) to reduce DTI-FLAIR misalignments to a level of less than 2 mm or so (See Fig. 5 ), far less than the mismatch, which can reach up to 8 mm as shown in columns (b) and (d) in Fig. 6 or Fig. 7 . Second, susceptibility-induced geometrical distortions in DTI images primarily occur along the inferior-superior phase-encoding direction and therefore cannot explain the mismatch in other directions. Third, separate from WML intensity, we used WML volume to perform the correlation with DTI measurements at each image voxel, and this type of correlation is independent from the quality of DTI-FLAIR coregistration. We used a dual pool model of water to express WML disease and to approximate the DTI and FLAIR behaviors in the WM degeneration with a continuum from normal WM to pure CSF for progressing WML severity. The simulations predict the correlation-WML mismatch exhibited in the in vivo data, especially the disappearance of correlations between DTI and FLAIR at the peak intensities of FLAIR. Moreover, the simulations correctly predict the signs of correlation coefficients, i.e. negative and positive for FA and MD indices, respectively, in the majority of WM regions. According to Fig. 4(b) and (c) , the MD-FLAIR correlations should reverse the sign for the highly sever WML when approximating the pure CSF end. It is interesting to observe in Fig. 6 that the negative MD-WML correlations do exist on minor regions of WML, primarily in the inferior part of the brain. Further investigations are required to determine whether the severity of WML is more advanced in reverse-sign regions than in others, as the simulations imply. The absence of the reverse-sign regions in FA-WML correlation maps could be explained by the flatter tail of FA curve with respect to the WML severity, as well as the higher noise vulnerability of FA index. According to our simulations (see Fig. 3 ), FA is more sensitive to noise especially at the pure CSF end, where the lower intensities in both FLAIR and diffusion weighted images enhance the effects of noisy fluctuations so that minor DTI-FLAIR correlations can be wiped out. The non-monotonic pattern of FLAIR intensity can be intuitively explained by the design of FLAIR acquisition, in which the inversion time is chosen to null the signal contribution from CSF ( Gauvrit et al., 2006 ) and hence also attenuates WML that appear like CSF because of their advanced degradation. An animal study with infarcted rat brain demonstrated a similar pattern of FLAIR signal with respect to the percentage of WM cavity ( Taoka et al., 2004 ). It should be noted that other MRI contrasts exhibit different curve patterns for the WML severity as indicated by the volume fraction of the free water pool. T1-weighed images, for example, show monotonically decreasing intensities for increasing lesion severity. However, the signal variations of WML in T1-weighted are much smaller than those in FLAIR, which makes more difficult to detect the lesion with the T1-weighted MRI. Furthermore, the common T2-weighted relaxation properties of both FLAIR and DTI modalities are also important to guarantee the validity of our fast-exchange dual water-pool model, which can be equally applied to both modalities without considering the complicated interactions among the water pools with different relaxation properties. A fast-exchange condition was assumed in the simulations for both FLAIR and DTI modalities. Nevertheless, we noticed that using a slow-exchange condition would not change the major points of our analysis, although the FA curves become more sensitive to the b values, and the revised sign of FA-FLAIR correlation coefficients would be slightly stronger (r <0.2) for greater WML severities ( f = 0.8~0.9). On the other hand, we implemented the same imaging parameters and noise levels for both simulations and in vivo experiments at 4T in order to make the results as comparable as possible. It should be noted that varying the imaging parameters (e.g. TR, TE, TI, b value, and relaxation times, etc.) modulate the signal curves with respect to the lesion severity f , as implied by the equations described in Theory. However, the basic monotonic and/or non-monotonic trend of the curves remain unchanged within the range of practically useful parameter vales at 3T and 4T, even though the position the peak FLAIR intensity may have minor shifts within ± 0.1. Therefore, the results regarding the DTI-FLAIR correlations remain in principle intact. Although the present DTI-FLAIR correlation simulations are based on FLAIR intensity modeling, we used both WML volume and intensity to perform the correlation analysis for the in vivo data. The practical reason for doing so is that we need a crosscheck in the correlation analysis as a quality control measure for DTI-FLAIR coregistration. As mentioned above, the correlations between DTI and WML volume are insensitive to the DTI-FLAIR misregistration because a single value of WML volume is uniformly used in all voxels. Thus, the overall consistency of correlation profiles between using WML volume or WML intensity confirmed that the DTI-FLAIR coregistration quality is generally acceptable for the present study. On the other hand, this consistency may also indicate that WML intensities are distributed with a high degree of spatial coherence, so that the measurement to the total WML volume is actually a good representation of the WML intensity distribution. If this is true, a quasi-linear relationship between WML volume and intensity might be valid in general, and thus the model-based simulations with WML intensity can be directly extended to the WML volume cases. This is an interesting topic that we would like to explore in the future. Our data support the hypothesis that a common physical mechanism exists behind the measured FLAIR and DTI changes of WM degeneration in normal elderly subjects, because the same volume fraction model for both modalities is able to explain the major results of in vivo correlation analysis. Even though, we have to point out the limitations that the proposed dual pool model for WM degeneration has been tested here only on the normal aging, and that this model could be an oversimplification of WM disease and other mechanisms, such as cross-correlation and dipolar coupling of bound water, likely need to be taken into consideration, as others have previously demonstrated ( Kiihne et al., 2000 ). We intend to explore the general validity of the WM degeneration model for other clinical conditions applications as well. For example, there are several situations characterized by altered FLAIR signal and increased diffusivity which are very different from a microstructural and histopathological viewpoint, such as chronic vascular lesions, MS lesions and perilesional areas in brain tumors. It would be important to understand to what extent this simplified model can hold for other conditions, or a more complicated WM model ( Lancaster et al., 2003 ) is necessary.  Conclusion In elderly subjects, significant DTI-FLAIR correlations were found in regions with moderate WML intensities and no significant correlations in the regions with high WML intensities, such as in periventricular regions. These findings are consistent with our simulations using a dual water-pool model of WM degeneration. The model predicts that the correlation between DTI and FLAIR gradually disappears as the intensity of WML in FLAIR reaches a maximum, and re-emerges with reversed signs and less significance as lesion severity further increases. This study provides a new multimodal characterization to the different stages of WM degeneration in elderly subjects based on the significance and the signs of the DTI-FLAIR correlation that avoid some ambiguities in single modality measurements of lesions.  Figures Fig. 1 (a) Effective T1 and T2 of WML at 4T respective as a function of increasing lesion severity represented as the free water-pool volume fraction f . (b) The joint (T1, T2) trajectory in the degeneration from normal WM (lower left) to pure CSF (upper right). Fig. 2 (a) FLAIR intensity surface in the (T1, T2) rectangular area defined by normal WM and CSF relaxation times; (b) FLAIR intensity curve of WML with respect to the lesion progression (i.e. the partial volume fraction of free water pool) from normal WM ( f =0) to pure CSF ( f =1)as quantified by the volume fraction of CSF The blue curve is the results after proton density correction. Fig. 3 DTI indices are plotted as the function of WML severities (represented by the free water pool volume fraction f ) for b = 500~3000 (s/mm2). (a) Fractional anisotropy (FA) in noise free, (b) Mean diffusivity (MD) in noise free, (c) FA in SNR= 80:1 (b=0), and (d) MD in SNR=80:1 (b=0). Fig. 4 Simulated DTI-FLAIR correlations (mean values and standard deviations of 20 independent trials, represented by blue and red bars, respectively) are illustrated for 10 successive intervals of WML severity (represented by the free water-pool volume fraction f ) under the condition of b= 1000 s/mm2 and realistic noise levels as estimated from in vivo data. (a) FLAIR intensities on 10 intervals of WML severity, (b) Correlation coefficients estimated between FA and FLAIR, and (c) Correlation coefficients estimated between MD and FLAIR. Fig. 5 (a) Mean FA map (threshold at 0.35) is overlaid on the original T1 template, showing clear misregistration of WM at corpus callosum. (b) Mean FA map (threshold at 0.35) is overlaid on the adjusted T1 template showing less misregistration. (c) The mean WML map is overlaid on the adjusted T1 template to which the FLAIR images have been registered. Fig. 6 Voxelwise correlations between DTI measurements and the total WML volume for all subjects. The upper row corresponds to the identical axial slice as use in Fig. 5 , while the lower row uses a coronal slice. In columns (a) and (b), blue clusters are selected for negative correlations between FA and WML volume at threshold of p<0.001, overlaid on the background of mean FA and mean WML intensity image, respectively. In columns (c) and (d), red clusters are for positive correlations between MD and WML volume at threshold of p<0.001, overlaid respectively on the mean FA and mean WML intensity image. Fig. 7 Correlations between DTI index (FA or MD) and WML intensity are estimated in each voxel across all subjects. The images in the upper and lower rows correspond to 2 axial slices in the normalized space, and the lower one is identical to the axial slice used in Fig. 6 . The blue clusters in columns (a) and (b) are negative FA-WML intensity correlations selected at p<0.001, overlaid on the mean FA and mean WML maps, respectively. The red clusters in columns (b) and (c) represent the positive correlations between MD and WML intensity, overlaid on the mean FA and mean WML intensity maps. 