Toward Quantifying the Aesthetic Outcomes of Breast Cancer Treatment: Comparison of Clinical Photography and Colorimetry Rationale, aims and objectives Scarring is a significant cause of dissatisfaction for women who undergo breast surgery. Scar tissue may be clinically distinguished from normal skin by aberrant color, rough surface texture, increased thickness (hypertrophy), and firmness. Colorimeters or spectrophotometers can be used to quantitatively assess scar color, but they require direct patient interaction and can cost thousands of dollars By comparison, digital photography is already in widespread use to document clinical outcomes and requires less patient interaction. Thus, assessment of scar coloration by digital photography is an attractive alternative. The goal of this study was to compare color measurements obtained by digital photography and colorimetry. Method Agreement between photographic and colorimetric measurements of color were evaluated. Experimental conditions were controlled by performing measurements on artificial scars created by a makeup artist. The colorimetric measurements of the artificial scars were compared to those reported in the literature for real scars in order to confirm the validity of this approach. We assessed the agreement between the colorimetric and photographic measurements of color using a hypothesis test for equivalence, the intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC), and the Bland-Altman method. Results Overall, good agreement was obtained for three parameters (L*a*b*) measured by colorimetry and photography from the results of three statistical analyses. Conclusion Color measurements obtained by digital photography were equivalent to those obtained using colorimetry. Thus, digital photography is a reliable, cost-effective measurement method of skin color and should be further investigated for quantitative analysis of surgical outcomes.  INTRODUCTION Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer among American women, with one in eight women diagnosed with breast cancer during her lifetime. It is predicted that in 2007, there will be 176,295 new cases diagnosed ( 1 ). Improved screening and treatment methods have increased the breast cancer survival rate. Thus, there is an increased emphasis on the quality of life that women experience after breast cancer treatment. Mastectomy followed by breast reconstruction is a common form of cancer treatment for the patient with early staged breast cancer or who has contraindications to radiotherapy ( 2 , 3 ). Reconstruction can help breast cancer survivors regain their quality of life by restoring physical balance and helping them carry out their daily lives without being constantly reminded that they are cancer survivors. The goal of reconstructive plastic surgery of the breast is to recreate a natural appearance that is satisfying to the patient. The American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) estimates that approximately 56,000 breast reconstructive surgeries were performed in the US in 2006 ( 4 ). However, breast surgery, including breast reconstruction, leaves scars that can be disfiguring, aesthetically unpleasant, and can negatively affect a patient’s quality of life ( 5 – 7 ). Scars can cause itching, tenderness, pain, sleep disturbances, anxiety, depression, and disruption of daily activities. Other psychosocial complications include development of post-traumatic stress reactions, loss of self-esteem, and stigmatization ( 5 , 6 ). Assessment of aesthetic outcomes, including scarring, is important to protect patients’ health and well-being ( 8 ), but there is no accepted method for assessing the appearance of surgical scars. Methods have been proposed to measure the mechanical aspects of scars ( 9 , 10 ). However, while mechanical properties of scars influence the comfort of a patient, they do not impact the visibility, and thus the aesthetics, of scars. The visibility of a scar is significantly influenced by surface area, vascularity, and pigmentation ( 11 ). Since the size and color of scars have the largest influences on the overall visibility, quantitative ways of obtaining these data have been of great interest ( 9 , 11 – 13 ). Vascularity and pigmentation can be separately evaluated by observing the color of the scar before and after it is blanched using a tool such as a piece of clear plastic ( 9 , 11 ). However, for purposes of quantifying the visibility of scars, it is not necessary to distinguish between coloration due to vascularity vs. pigmentation ( 14 ). A cost-effective, practical means of quantitatively assessing scar color is needed. Digital photography has high potential as a tool to achieve this aim. Color assessment To standardize the quantification of color, CIE (International Commission on Illumination) recommended tri-stimulus color values XYZ, which are read using spectrometric reflectance data from an object and three primary stimuli strictly defined by the commission. CIE L*a*b* (CIELAB) is the most complete color model used conventionally to describe all the colors visible to the human eye. The three parameters in the model represent the lightness of the color (L*, L* = 0 indicates black and L* = 100 indicates white), its position between magenta and green (a*, a* = ?60 indicates green and a* = 60 indicates magenta), and its position between yellow and blue (b*, b* = ?60 indicates blue and b* = 60 indicates yellow) ( 15 ). While for purposes of assessing scar visibility it is not necessary to separate the color contributions from the underlying physiological factors of vascularity and pigmentation, for completeness we briefly review how the color parameters are known to relate to the skin physiology. Studies using the simulated skin model have shown that L* and melanin index correlate almost linearly if the Hb (oxyhemoglobin) amount is constant. ( 12 , 16 ). These findings suggest that L*, b*, or combinations of them could be used with less accuracy for evaluation of pigmentation since the cutaneous blood volume and flow is not similar at all sites. The a* index is a good parameter for evaluating the degree of erythema or cutaneous blood volume. The difference values between the test and control sites are the best parameters for evaluating erythema and pigmentation ( 16 ). These findings suggest that a combination of L* and b* can be used for measuring pigmentation and a* can be used for evaluating the redness of surgical scars. Although all of the L*a*b* parameters are important indicators of vascular changes or pigmentation, the a* parameter is the most relevant and sensitive one for erythemous or vasodiatatory change ( 15 ). The drawback to the use of colorimeters is that they require direct patient interaction and can cost thousands of dollars. By comparison, digital photography is already in widespread use to document clinical outcomes. Moreover, digital photographs can be evaluated after the fact and so required less patient interaction. Thus, assessment of scar coloration by digital photography is an attractive alternative. Towards this aim, it is encouraging that digital photography has been demonstrated to be a viable alternative to color measurements by a colorimeter for objective evaluation of UV erythema. Coelho et al. used the change in the a* parameter to quantify erythema, and L was used to evaluate the level of pigmentation that develops during tanning for three subjects in each of three ethnic/racial groups: Asian, Black or African American, and White ( 17 ). They reported their computer assisted digital image evaluation (CADIE) system, which uses a commercial digital SLR camera, a Nikon D1 (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan), and image processing software, Adobe Photoshop 6.0 (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA), produced results comparable to those obtained with a spectroscopy system, the Minolta CM 2002 (Minolta, Ramsey, New Jersey). They found good agreement between the a* (Pearson r = 0.77–0.97) and L* (Pearson r = 0.66–0.96) generated by the two methods. Careful experimental control and standardization is needed in order to collect precise color information. Past studies found that an artificial skin model could be successfully created to control the experimental environment and to demonstrate the diversity of color of skin regions ( 18 , 19 ). In particular, a multilayered skin model was developed to measure the amount of melanin and hemoglobin with a microscope interfaced with a computer and the values were compared with those of real skin regions. Similarly, in this study, artificial scars created by a makeup artist were employed in order to achieve maximal control of the experimental set up, i.e., there was no hemoglobin in the makeup used to create the artificial scar. Overview of paper In this study, we compared color measurements of the artificial scars obtained by clinical digital photography to those from a standard colorimeter. Experimental conditions were controlled by performing measurements on artificial scars created by a makeup artist (TC). The colorimetric measurements of the artificial scars were compared to those reported in the literature for real scars in order to confirm the validity of this approach. Agreement in photographic and colorimetric measurements was statistically analyzed using the hypothesis test for equivalence ( 20 ), the ICC coefficient ( 21 ), and the Bland-Altman method ( 22 , 23 ).  Color assessment To standardize the quantification of color, CIE (International Commission on Illumination) recommended tri-stimulus color values XYZ, which are read using spectrometric reflectance data from an object and three primary stimuli strictly defined by the commission. CIE L*a*b* (CIELAB) is the most complete color model used conventionally to describe all the colors visible to the human eye. The three parameters in the model represent the lightness of the color (L*, L* = 0 indicates black and L* = 100 indicates white), its position between magenta and green (a*, a* = ?60 indicates green and a* = 60 indicates magenta), and its position between yellow and blue (b*, b* = ?60 indicates blue and b* = 60 indicates yellow) ( 15 ). While for purposes of assessing scar visibility it is not necessary to separate the color contributions from the underlying physiological factors of vascularity and pigmentation, for completeness we briefly review how the color parameters are known to relate to the skin physiology. Studies using the simulated skin model have shown that L* and melanin index correlate almost linearly if the Hb (oxyhemoglobin) amount is constant. ( 12 , 16 ). These findings suggest that L*, b*, or combinations of them could be used with less accuracy for evaluation of pigmentation since the cutaneous blood volume and flow is not similar at all sites. The a* index is a good parameter for evaluating the degree of erythema or cutaneous blood volume. The difference values between the test and control sites are the best parameters for evaluating erythema and pigmentation ( 16 ). These findings suggest that a combination of L* and b* can be used for measuring pigmentation and a* can be used for evaluating the redness of surgical scars. Although all of the L*a*b* parameters are important indicators of vascular changes or pigmentation, the a* parameter is the most relevant and sensitive one for erythemous or vasodiatatory change ( 15 ). The drawback to the use of colorimeters is that they require direct patient interaction and can cost thousands of dollars. By comparison, digital photography is already in widespread use to document clinical outcomes. Moreover, digital photographs can be evaluated after the fact and so required less patient interaction. Thus, assessment of scar coloration by digital photography is an attractive alternative. Towards this aim, it is encouraging that digital photography has been demonstrated to be a viable alternative to color measurements by a colorimeter for objective evaluation of UV erythema. Coelho et al. used the change in the a* parameter to quantify erythema, and L was used to evaluate the level of pigmentation that develops during tanning for three subjects in each of three ethnic/racial groups: Asian, Black or African American, and White ( 17 ). They reported their computer assisted digital image evaluation (CADIE) system, which uses a commercial digital SLR camera, a Nikon D1 (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan), and image processing software, Adobe Photoshop 6.0 (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA), produced results comparable to those obtained with a spectroscopy system, the Minolta CM 2002 (Minolta, Ramsey, New Jersey). They found good agreement between the a* (Pearson r = 0.77–0.97) and L* (Pearson r = 0.66–0.96) generated by the two methods. Careful experimental control and standardization is needed in order to collect precise color information. Past studies found that an artificial skin model could be successfully created to control the experimental environment and to demonstrate the diversity of color of skin regions ( 18 , 19 ). In particular, a multilayered skin model was developed to measure the amount of melanin and hemoglobin with a microscope interfaced with a computer and the values were compared with those of real skin regions. Similarly, in this study, artificial scars created by a makeup artist were employed in order to achieve maximal control of the experimental set up, i.e., there was no hemoglobin in the makeup used to create the artificial scar.  Overview of paper In this study, we compared color measurements of the artificial scars obtained by clinical digital photography to those from a standard colorimeter. Experimental conditions were controlled by performing measurements on artificial scars created by a makeup artist (TC). The colorimetric measurements of the artificial scars were compared to those reported in the literature for real scars in order to confirm the validity of this approach. Agreement in photographic and colorimetric measurements was statistically analyzed using the hypothesis test for equivalence ( 20 ), the ICC coefficient ( 21 ), and the Bland-Altman method ( 22 , 23 ).  Method Agreement between photographic and colorimetric measurements of color were evaluated. Experimental conditions were controlled by performing measurements on artificial scars created by a makeup artist. The colorimetric measurements of the artificial scars were compared to those reported in the literature for real scars in order to confirm the validity of this approach. We assessed the agreement between the colorimetric and photographic measurements of color using a hypothesis test for equivalence, the intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC), and the Bland-Altman method.  Results Overall, good agreement was obtained for three parameters (L*a*b*) measured by colorimetry and photography from the results of three statistical analyses.  Conclusion Color measurements obtained by digital photography were equivalent to those obtained using colorimetry. Thus, digital photography is a reliable, cost-effective measurement method of skin color and should be further investigated for quantitative analysis of surgical outcomes.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Artificial Scar Creation on Models Two female models in their early twenties representing two major race groups (Model A: White and not Latino or Hispanic, Model B: Black or African American and not Latino or Hispanic) were hired for the study. Their demographic and clinical background information is summarized in Table 1 . Neither of the two models has a history of pregnancy or lactation, but Model B has a history of a breast biopsy on her left side approximately 7 years ago. A makeup artist (TC) created 6 types of scars while taking into consideration the reality of the scar appearance from a distance, excessive shine, and the utilization of latex or collodion makeup. An experienced plastic surgeon (GPR) guided the creation of artificial scars that emulate the appearance of scars that would result after breast reconstruction with a latissmus dorsi (LD) flap or a transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap. In LD reconstruction, the flap is composed of an elliptical patch of skin that lies over the latissimus dorsi muscle. Typically, the flap is used to replace the breast skin removed during the mastectomy and the breast volume is replaced with a breast implant ( 24 ). The TRAM is the most popular form of tissue-based breast reconstruction, wherein a flap from the abdomen, either with blood vessels intact or completely severed from the body, is transferred to the chest either via a subcutaneous tunnel or using microsurgical technique to replace the breast skin and volume ( 25 – 29 ). Note that artificial donor site scars were not created in this study. The scars created for Model A resemble normal scars ( Figure 1 , Figure 2 ,) and hypertrophic scars ( Figure 3 ), raised scars that remain within the boundaries of the original lesion, as typically seen 3 to 6 months after surgery Scar A1 was created on left breast around the nipple-areola complex (NAC) with the incision running into the low superior lateral area. Scar A2 was started from Scar A1 and the scar was expanded around the NAC into the medial region of the left breast. Liquid latex was added on Scar A2 to make the nipple more asymmetric in photographs of Scar A3. The scars created for Model B resemble normal scars ( Figure 4 ), hypertrophic scars ( Figure 5 ), and a keloid scar ( Figure 6 ), a scar that has spread beyond the margins of the original wound and invades the surrounding normal skin ( 8 ). The scars on Model B resemble those typically seen 6 months to 1 year after surgery. Scar B1 was created on left breast around the nipple-areola complex (NAC) with incision running into the low superior lateral area. Scar B2 was started from Scar B1 and crescent shaped region to lateral side of areola was added. Scar B3 was built off from Scar B2 and added rigid collodion to create a keloid appearance. The basic scar shape was initially created using liquid latex, rigid collodion, or a combination of these products on top of alcohol cleansed skin in order to get the desired effect. The simulated scars were then covered with a natural skin-toned base foundation to help blend the edges of the created scars with the bare skin. Top detailing color makeup in various tones was next meticulously placed over the simulated scars to give them a more organic appearance. Neutral set powder was pressed over the simulated scars to finalize the makeup and to reduce shine. For Model A, the following top detailing colors were used to create all three artificial scars (Mehron Inc., Chestnut Ridge, New York): Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Bloody Rose”, Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Midnight Sky”, Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Burnt Maroon”. For Model B, Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Midnight Sky” was used to create scar B1 ( Figure 4 ) and scar B2 ( Figure 5 ) whereas Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Midnight Sky” and Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Burnt Maroon” was used to create scar B3 ( Figure 6 ). Color Measurements using a Colorimeter One of the widely used opto-electric tri-stimulus instruments commercially available for measuring skin colors in dermatology area is the Chroma-Meter (Konica Minolta, Osaka, Japan) ( 30 – 32 ). Previous studies of the Chroma-Meter CR300 on normal skin have reported excellent intra-observer agreement (ICC ? 0.98) and good to excellent inter-observer agreement (ICC ? 0.85) for all of the three parameters (L*a*b*) ( 31 ). A Chroma-Meter CR300 was used to record color information of specific regions of interest defined by a plastic surgeon (GPR). Before measurements were taken, the instrument was calibrated to a standard white plate provided by the manufacturer. One measurement consisted of three consecutive flashes of illumination to obtain a mean value. Before any scar was created, color was measured between the breasts, on each breast mound, on the tan line (if applicable), in each nipple region, and of any natural scars for retrospective analyses. Only the skin color measured between the breasts were grouped and the mean value was taken as the control value for normal skin to which the color values of artificial scars and natural scars were compared. For each artificial scar, color was measured on the scar region and multiple measurements were performed if the scar varied substantially in width. For accuracy and consistency of measurement, calibration was performed before a scar was created and each time a new scar was created. A total of seven calibrations were used for the measurements. Past studies have shown that there are significant differences between the color parameters of hypertrophic scar regions (aged 6–12 months) due to burns, scalds, trauma and surgical incisions and normal skin regions, including upper arm, forearm, hand, chest, abdomen, back, and thigh ( 33 ). The L* and b* values of normal skin collected using a spectro-colorimeter, Lab Scan XE (Hunter Associates Laboratory, Inc. Reston, VA), were significantly higher than those of hypertrophic scars, while measurements of a* of hypertrophic scars were significantly higher than those of normal skin. The authors did not report data on variability across racial groups in these trends of normal vs. scar measurements. To verify that our artificial scars also exhibit these properties, we analyzed the differences between normal skin regions and hypertrophic scars in CIE L*a*b*. Color Measurements using a Camera 30 photographs, including before and after the artificial scars were applied, in sets of five standard views (AP, left oblique, left lateral, right oblique, Right lateral), were taken. A Nikon 8400 was employed for all scar photographs because it is the model most commonly used for record keeping at The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. The main light source was overhead fluorescent lighting, and the camera was set to white balance, fluorescent lighting with ISO of 400. The aperture priority mode was set to the smallest value with spot metering for exposure level selection. Image quality was set to highest level possible to catch the details of the scars. The model stood in front of a dark sky blue background wall. Distance from subject to lens barrel was standardized to 150 cm. For this study, scar regions of interest (ROIs) were delineated using the polygon selection tool of ImageJ (Rasband, W.S., ImageJ, U. S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA, http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/ , 1997–2007) by looking at the images at 400% zoom ratio on the computer screen with consistent resolution and size (1490×900). The RGB values were collected from each image for both the scar, and normal skin regions (between breasts, breast mounds). The reference values of “C” white used for the computations were provided by the Chroma-Meter CR300 instruction manual. The CIE L*a*b* data of scar regions from photography were compared with those of colorimeter. Statistical Analysis The agreement between color measurements obtained by colorimetry and digital photography was analyzed separately for each model. Three different statistical methods were used because each method has its technical limitations ( 34 ). The methods used were: a hypothesis test for equivalence ( 20 ), the ICC ( 21 ), and the Bland-Altman methods ( 22 , 23 ). The Bland-Altman method provides a qualitative assessment while the hypothesis test for equivalence and ICC methods provide quantitative measures of agreement between measurements. In testing for equivalence between two measurements, the null hypothesis is that the measurements by photography are not equivalent to those by colorimeter and the alternative hypothesis is that they are equivalent. This hypothesis is specifically intended for assessing equivalence and is distinct from that of the familiar paired t -test wherein a null hypothesis of equal value and an alternative hypothesis of unequal value are compared. The test statistic for assessing equivalence is t = n ( x ¯ ± ? ) s where x? and s denote the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of the differences between the photographic and colorimetric measurements. The value of ? is computed as a factor multiplied by the mean of the measurements by colorimeter. In this study, the factor was 0.20, 0.25, or 0.30. The variable ? accounts for the expected variability in the measurements made by two methods. A smaller value of ? implies stricter criteria for demonstrating that the measurements of the two methods are equivalent, in other words, photography can be used in place of colorimetry. To report the agreement between two measurements, a single-score two way random model was used since the set of images is a random subset of images from the class of representative cases of post-operative images and the camera and colorimeter are also randomly selected from the population of cameras and colorimeters. ICC = M S R ? M S E M S R + ( k ? 1 ) M S E + k n ( M S C ? M S E ) where n denotes the number of scar measurements by photography and colorimeter and, k denotes the number of measurement methods, MS R is the mean square error, MS E is the residual mean square error, and MS C is the mean square error between photographic and colorimeter measurements, respectively. The guideline for the interpretation of ICC used is that an ICC value of less than 0.40 indicates poor reproducibility, ICC values in the range 0.40 to 0.75 indicate fair to good reproducibility, and an ICC value of greater than 0.75 shows excellent reproducibility ( 35 ). Bland-Altman method is used for qualitatively measuring the degree of agreement, where the differences between photographic and colorimeter measurements are plotted against the average value of these measurements. If 95% of the differences are within ±1.96 standard deviations of the mean of the differences, than the two methods are considered to be in good agreement.  Artificial Scar Creation on Models Two female models in their early twenties representing two major race groups (Model A: White and not Latino or Hispanic, Model B: Black or African American and not Latino or Hispanic) were hired for the study. Their demographic and clinical background information is summarized in Table 1 . Neither of the two models has a history of pregnancy or lactation, but Model B has a history of a breast biopsy on her left side approximately 7 years ago. A makeup artist (TC) created 6 types of scars while taking into consideration the reality of the scar appearance from a distance, excessive shine, and the utilization of latex or collodion makeup. An experienced plastic surgeon (GPR) guided the creation of artificial scars that emulate the appearance of scars that would result after breast reconstruction with a latissmus dorsi (LD) flap or a transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap. In LD reconstruction, the flap is composed of an elliptical patch of skin that lies over the latissimus dorsi muscle. Typically, the flap is used to replace the breast skin removed during the mastectomy and the breast volume is replaced with a breast implant ( 24 ). The TRAM is the most popular form of tissue-based breast reconstruction, wherein a flap from the abdomen, either with blood vessels intact or completely severed from the body, is transferred to the chest either via a subcutaneous tunnel or using microsurgical technique to replace the breast skin and volume ( 25 – 29 ). Note that artificial donor site scars were not created in this study. The scars created for Model A resemble normal scars ( Figure 1 , Figure 2 ,) and hypertrophic scars ( Figure 3 ), raised scars that remain within the boundaries of the original lesion, as typically seen 3 to 6 months after surgery Scar A1 was created on left breast around the nipple-areola complex (NAC) with the incision running into the low superior lateral area. Scar A2 was started from Scar A1 and the scar was expanded around the NAC into the medial region of the left breast. Liquid latex was added on Scar A2 to make the nipple more asymmetric in photographs of Scar A3. The scars created for Model B resemble normal scars ( Figure 4 ), hypertrophic scars ( Figure 5 ), and a keloid scar ( Figure 6 ), a scar that has spread beyond the margins of the original wound and invades the surrounding normal skin ( 8 ). The scars on Model B resemble those typically seen 6 months to 1 year after surgery. Scar B1 was created on left breast around the nipple-areola complex (NAC) with incision running into the low superior lateral area. Scar B2 was started from Scar B1 and crescent shaped region to lateral side of areola was added. Scar B3 was built off from Scar B2 and added rigid collodion to create a keloid appearance. The basic scar shape was initially created using liquid latex, rigid collodion, or a combination of these products on top of alcohol cleansed skin in order to get the desired effect. The simulated scars were then covered with a natural skin-toned base foundation to help blend the edges of the created scars with the bare skin. Top detailing color makeup in various tones was next meticulously placed over the simulated scars to give them a more organic appearance. Neutral set powder was pressed over the simulated scars to finalize the makeup and to reduce shine. For Model A, the following top detailing colors were used to create all three artificial scars (Mehron Inc., Chestnut Ridge, New York): Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Bloody Rose”, Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Midnight Sky”, Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Burnt Maroon”. For Model B, Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Midnight Sky” was used to create scar B1 ( Figure 4 ) and scar B2 ( Figure 5 ) whereas Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Midnight Sky” and Mehron ProColoRing Bruise “Burnt Maroon” was used to create scar B3 ( Figure 6 ).  Color Measurements using a Colorimeter One of the widely used opto-electric tri-stimulus instruments commercially available for measuring skin colors in dermatology area is the Chroma-Meter (Konica Minolta, Osaka, Japan) ( 30 – 32 ). Previous studies of the Chroma-Meter CR300 on normal skin have reported excellent intra-observer agreement (ICC ? 0.98) and good to excellent inter-observer agreement (ICC ? 0.85) for all of the three parameters (L*a*b*) ( 31 ). A Chroma-Meter CR300 was used to record color information of specific regions of interest defined by a plastic surgeon (GPR). Before measurements were taken, the instrument was calibrated to a standard white plate provided by the manufacturer. One measurement consisted of three consecutive flashes of illumination to obtain a mean value. Before any scar was created, color was measured between the breasts, on each breast mound, on the tan line (if applicable), in each nipple region, and of any natural scars for retrospective analyses. Only the skin color measured between the breasts were grouped and the mean value was taken as the control value for normal skin to which the color values of artificial scars and natural scars were compared. For each artificial scar, color was measured on the scar region and multiple measurements were performed if the scar varied substantially in width. For accuracy and consistency of measurement, calibration was performed before a scar was created and each time a new scar was created. A total of seven calibrations were used for the measurements. Past studies have shown that there are significant differences between the color parameters of hypertrophic scar regions (aged 6–12 months) due to burns, scalds, trauma and surgical incisions and normal skin regions, including upper arm, forearm, hand, chest, abdomen, back, and thigh ( 33 ). The L* and b* values of normal skin collected using a spectro-colorimeter, Lab Scan XE (Hunter Associates Laboratory, Inc. Reston, VA), were significantly higher than those of hypertrophic scars, while measurements of a* of hypertrophic scars were significantly higher than those of normal skin. The authors did not report data on variability across racial groups in these trends of normal vs. scar measurements. To verify that our artificial scars also exhibit these properties, we analyzed the differences between normal skin regions and hypertrophic scars in CIE L*a*b*.  Color Measurements using a Camera 30 photographs, including before and after the artificial scars were applied, in sets of five standard views (AP, left oblique, left lateral, right oblique, Right lateral), were taken. A Nikon 8400 was employed for all scar photographs because it is the model most commonly used for record keeping at The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. The main light source was overhead fluorescent lighting, and the camera was set to white balance, fluorescent lighting with ISO of 400. The aperture priority mode was set to the smallest value with spot metering for exposure level selection. Image quality was set to highest level possible to catch the details of the scars. The model stood in front of a dark sky blue background wall. Distance from subject to lens barrel was standardized to 150 cm. For this study, scar regions of interest (ROIs) were delineated using the polygon selection tool of ImageJ (Rasband, W.S., ImageJ, U. S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA, http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/ , 1997–2007) by looking at the images at 400% zoom ratio on the computer screen with consistent resolution and size (1490×900). The RGB values were collected from each image for both the scar, and normal skin regions (between breasts, breast mounds). The reference values of “C” white used for the computations were provided by the Chroma-Meter CR300 instruction manual. The CIE L*a*b* data of scar regions from photography were compared with those of colorimeter.  Statistical Analysis The agreement between color measurements obtained by colorimetry and digital photography was analyzed separately for each model. Three different statistical methods were used because each method has its technical limitations ( 34 ). The methods used were: a hypothesis test for equivalence ( 20 ), the ICC ( 21 ), and the Bland-Altman methods ( 22 , 23 ). The Bland-Altman method provides a qualitative assessment while the hypothesis test for equivalence and ICC methods provide quantitative measures of agreement between measurements. In testing for equivalence between two measurements, the null hypothesis is that the measurements by photography are not equivalent to those by colorimeter and the alternative hypothesis is that they are equivalent. This hypothesis is specifically intended for assessing equivalence and is distinct from that of the familiar paired t -test wherein a null hypothesis of equal value and an alternative hypothesis of unequal value are compared. The test statistic for assessing equivalence is t = n ( x ¯ ± ? ) s where x? and s denote the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of the differences between the photographic and colorimetric measurements. The value of ? is computed as a factor multiplied by the mean of the measurements by colorimeter. In this study, the factor was 0.20, 0.25, or 0.30. The variable ? accounts for the expected variability in the measurements made by two methods. A smaller value of ? implies stricter criteria for demonstrating that the measurements of the two methods are equivalent, in other words, photography can be used in place of colorimetry. To report the agreement between two measurements, a single-score two way random model was used since the set of images is a random subset of images from the class of representative cases of post-operative images and the camera and colorimeter are also randomly selected from the population of cameras and colorimeters. ICC = M S R ? M S E M S R + ( k ? 1 ) M S E + k n ( M S C ? M S E ) where n denotes the number of scar measurements by photography and colorimeter and, k denotes the number of measurement methods, MS R is the mean square error, MS E is the residual mean square error, and MS C is the mean square error between photographic and colorimeter measurements, respectively. The guideline for the interpretation of ICC used is that an ICC value of less than 0.40 indicates poor reproducibility, ICC values in the range 0.40 to 0.75 indicate fair to good reproducibility, and an ICC value of greater than 0.75 shows excellent reproducibility ( 35 ). Bland-Altman method is used for qualitatively measuring the degree of agreement, where the differences between photographic and colorimeter measurements are plotted against the average value of these measurements. If 95% of the differences are within ±1.96 standard deviations of the mean of the differences, than the two methods are considered to be in good agreement.  RESULTS Colorimetric measurements (CIE L*a*b*) of the artificial scars and normal skin were evaluated for characteristic differences ( Table 2 , Table 3 ) anticipated based on prior knowledge. Recall that the L*a*b* parameters indicate lightness, redness, and yellowness, respectively. The normal skin regions of model B had significantly higher a* and b* values than the normal skin regions of model A, while model A had a significantly higher L* value. This result is consistent with expectations since model B has a darker skin tone than Model A ( 36 ). A similar pattern was seen when color measurements of the artificial scar regions were compared between the two models. Recall that the scars created for Model A resemble normal scars ( Figure 1 , Figure 2 ) and hypertrophic ( Figure 3 ) scars typically seen 3 to 6 months after surgery. The scars created for Model B resemble normal scars ( Figure 4 ), hypertrophic scars ( Figure 5 ), and keloid scar ( Figure 6 ), typically seen 6 months to 1 year after surgery. The artificial scars of model B had substantially higher a* and b* values than the artificial scars of model A, while model A had a substantially higher L* value. This result is consistent with our expectations from clinical experience that scar colors vary across racial groups, but we are unaware of any systematic studies that have evaluated this trend. There were no notable differences between the L* and a* values of Model B’s natural scar and those of the artificial scars created upon her skin. However, the artificial scars had lower b* values (less yellow) than her natural scar. We are unaware of any prior studies reporting how colorimeter measurements of scars change as scars mature. Thus, it is difficult to compare the measurements of the artificial scars, which were designed to emulate scars 6–12 months following surgery, to the subject’s real scar, which was several years old. Table 2 shows the colorimetric measurements of artificial scars created on Model A, and their comparison with those of her normal skin. Likewise, Table 3 shows the colorimetric measurements of artificial scars and normal skin of Model B. Artificial scars on model A had very slightly lower L* values and substantially higher a* values than her normal skin. Similarly, artificial scars on model B also had slightly lower L* values and slightly higher a* values than her normal skin. In other words, as expected, the artificial scar regions look darker and redder than normal skin regions, as is the case for real scars. A previous study reported similar trends in the L* and a* measurements of real hypertrophic scars (6–12 months after skin injury) as compared with normal skin regions ( 33 ). In contrast, they reported that scars are less yellow (lower b* value) than normal skin ( 33 ). However, there was no notable difference in the b* values of Model A’s artificial scars and her normal skin or between the artificial scars and normal skin of Model B. Note that the authors ( 33 ) did not report data on variability across racial groups in these trends of normal vs. scar measurements The L*a*b* values of the artificial keloid scar (scar B3) were significantly lower than those of the artificial hypertrophic scars (scars B1 and B2). In other words, the artificial keloid scar was darker, less red, and less yellow than the artificial hypertrophic scars. This result is consistent with our expectations since hypertrophic scars should be lighter due to less melanin, redder due to the increase in vascularity, and less yellow. However, we are unaware of any studies in which colorimeter measurements of keloid and hypertrophic scars were compared. The agreement between photographic and colorimetric measurements was analyzed using a hypothesis test for equivalence, the Bland-Altman method, and ICC. Agreement was assessed separately for each model and was based on measurements of three artificial scars per model. Using a hypothesis test for equivalence, agreement between the photographic and colorimetric measurements was demonstrated for both models at the 20% level for the a* ( p = 0.03, p = 0.03) and b* ( p = 0.01, p = 0.01) parameters ( Table 4 ). Equivalence was also achieved at the 20% level for L* in Model B (p = 0.04), but was not achieved even at the 30% level for the L* value for Model A ( p = 0.08). The degree of agreement between the measurements was also analyzed using the Bland-Altman method. Good agreement between the photographic and colorimetric measurements was obtained for all three parameters for both Models A and B as indicated by the fact that 95% of the differences were within the limit of agreement defined by Bland-Altman ( Figure 7 ). Similarly, the degree of agreement between the measurements was assessed using the ICC ( Table 5 ). ICC results were consistent with the hypothesis test for equivalence and Bland-Altman in that that there was “excellent” agreement between photographic and colorimetric measurements for the L* value of Model A (ICC = 0.99) and “fair to good agreement” for the L* value (ICC = 0.56) for Model B. In contrast to the other statistical assessments, ICC indicated unacceptable agreement in the a* and b* values (0.05–0.34).  RESULTS Colorimetric measurements (CIE L*a*b*) of the artificial scars and normal skin were evaluated for characteristic differences ( Table 2 , Table 3 ) anticipated based on prior knowledge. Recall that the L*a*b* parameters indicate lightness, redness, and yellowness, respectively. The normal skin regions of model B had significantly higher a* and b* values than the normal skin regions of model A, while model A had a significantly higher L* value. This result is consistent with expectations since model B has a darker skin tone than Model A ( 36 ). A similar pattern was seen when color measurements of the artificial scar regions were compared between the two models. Recall that the scars created for Model A resemble normal scars ( Figure 1 , Figure 2 ) and hypertrophic ( Figure 3 ) scars typically seen 3 to 6 months after surgery. The scars created for Model B resemble normal scars ( Figure 4 ), hypertrophic scars ( Figure 5 ), and keloid scar ( Figure 6 ), typically seen 6 months to 1 year after surgery. The artificial scars of model B had substantially higher a* and b* values than the artificial scars of model A, while model A had a substantially higher L* value. This result is consistent with our expectations from clinical experience that scar colors vary across racial groups, but we are unaware of any systematic studies that have evaluated this trend. There were no notable differences between the L* and a* values of Model B’s natural scar and those of the artificial scars created upon her skin. However, the artificial scars had lower b* values (less yellow) than her natural scar. We are unaware of any prior studies reporting how colorimeter measurements of scars change as scars mature. Thus, it is difficult to compare the measurements of the artificial scars, which were designed to emulate scars 6–12 months following surgery, to the subject’s real scar, which was several years old. Table 2 shows the colorimetric measurements of artificial scars created on Model A, and their comparison with those of her normal skin. Likewise, Table 3 shows the colorimetric measurements of artificial scars and normal skin of Model B. Artificial scars on model A had very slightly lower L* values and substantially higher a* values than her normal skin. Similarly, artificial scars on model B also had slightly lower L* values and slightly higher a* values than her normal skin. In other words, as expected, the artificial scar regions look darker and redder than normal skin regions, as is the case for real scars. A previous study reported similar trends in the L* and a* measurements of real hypertrophic scars (6–12 months after skin injury) as compared with normal skin regions ( 33 ). In contrast, they reported that scars are less yellow (lower b* value) than normal skin ( 33 ). However, there was no notable difference in the b* values of Model A’s artificial scars and her normal skin or between the artificial scars and normal skin of Model B. Note that the authors ( 33 ) did not report data on variability across racial groups in these trends of normal vs. scar measurements The L*a*b* values of the artificial keloid scar (scar B3) were significantly lower than those of the artificial hypertrophic scars (scars B1 and B2). In other words, the artificial keloid scar was darker, less red, and less yellow than the artificial hypertrophic scars. This result is consistent with our expectations since hypertrophic scars should be lighter due to less melanin, redder due to the increase in vascularity, and less yellow. However, we are unaware of any studies in which colorimeter measurements of keloid and hypertrophic scars were compared. The agreement between photographic and colorimetric measurements was analyzed using a hypothesis test for equivalence, the Bland-Altman method, and ICC. Agreement was assessed separately for each model and was based on measurements of three artificial scars per model. Using a hypothesis test for equivalence, agreement between the photographic and colorimetric measurements was demonstrated for both models at the 20% level for the a* ( p = 0.03, p = 0.03) and b* ( p = 0.01, p = 0.01) parameters ( Table 4 ). Equivalence was also achieved at the 20% level for L* in Model B (p = 0.04), but was not achieved even at the 30% level for the L* value for Model A ( p = 0.08). The degree of agreement between the measurements was also analyzed using the Bland-Altman method. Good agreement between the photographic and colorimetric measurements was obtained for all three parameters for both Models A and B as indicated by the fact that 95% of the differences were within the limit of agreement defined by Bland-Altman ( Figure 7 ). Similarly, the degree of agreement between the measurements was assessed using the ICC ( Table 5 ). ICC results were consistent with the hypothesis test for equivalence and Bland-Altman in that that there was “excellent” agreement between photographic and colorimetric measurements for the L* value of Model A (ICC = 0.99) and “fair to good agreement” for the L* value (ICC = 0.56) for Model B. In contrast to the other statistical assessments, ICC indicated unacceptable agreement in the a* and b* values (0.05–0.34).  DISCUSSION While colorimeters have been widely accepted as reliable tools for the assessment of skin color in Dermatology, they have not been routinely utilized in the Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery. However, digital photography is commonly used to document surgical outcomes. Thus, it would valuable if digital photography could also be used to quantitatively evaluate skin color. In order to assess the validity of color measurements obtained by clinical photography, we compared the measurements of a digital camera and a colorimeter. In order to conduct controlled experiments, artificial scars created by a makeup artist (TC) on professional models under the guidance of an experienced plastic surgeon (GPR) were used in this study. Comparisons between normal skin regions and artificial scars in CIE L*a*b* were consistent with expectations based on prior experience and previous studies ( 33 ). Using multiple statistical methods, we demonstrated that color measurements obtained by digital photography were equivalent to those obtained using a colorimeter. Differences across the statistical methods may be due to the limited sample size (N=3 for each scar groups) we employed in this study. This study suggests that clinical photography can be employed for reliable, cost-effective measurement methods of skin color for the analysis of surgical outcomes, but future, larger analyses employing real scars are needed. While our results support the use of clinical photography for quantitative measurements of skin properties such as scarring, it is important to note that standardization of photographic conditions is critical. Substantial variability may be observed if the photographic conditions are not controlled. Important parameters to standardize include: lighting intensity, distance and direction from the light to the subject, camera lighting settings, background color, and the subject’s pose relative to the camera. While studio lighting is typically recommended for standardization of photography ( 37 ), in practice, this may not be feasible since it requires special equipment and training and might not be available to all clinicians, and it also requires enough room with lights placed a standard distance from each other, the patient, and the background. Fortunately, reliable images can be collected without studio conditions provided consistent settings are used. In this study, variability was controlled by avoiding the use of any built-in or external flashes and by simply setting the camera to white balance under fluorescent lamp, an option available on any commercial digital camera. This setting was also found to be advantageous in that it prevented a “washed-out” appearance of scars and surrounding skin colors. Consistent with our previous study that employed manual identification of fiducial points on clinical photographs ( 38 ), we found that non-clinical observers could delineate regions of interest surrounding scars if a minimal amount of basic training was provided. However, a more automated method would be better for large outcome studies or for developing intra-operative tools since it took about 2 minutes to identify and delineate a region of interests. In conclusion, we found that photography can be used in place of a colorimeter for measuring color properties of skin in a controlled setting. We also demonstrated that artificial scars created by a makeup artist under the guidance of a surgeon exhibit color properties consistent with real scars.  DISCUSSION While colorimeters have been widely accepted as reliable tools for the assessment of skin color in Dermatology, they have not been routinely utilized in the Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery. However, digital photography is commonly used to document surgical outcomes. Thus, it would valuable if digital photography could also be used to quantitatively evaluate skin color. In order to assess the validity of color measurements obtained by clinical photography, we compared the measurements of a digital camera and a colorimeter. In order to conduct controlled experiments, artificial scars created by a makeup artist (TC) on professional models under the guidance of an experienced plastic surgeon (GPR) were used in this study. Comparisons between normal skin regions and artificial scars in CIE L*a*b* were consistent with expectations based on prior experience and previous studies ( 33 ). Using multiple statistical methods, we demonstrated that color measurements obtained by digital photography were equivalent to those obtained using a colorimeter. Differences across the statistical methods may be due to the limited sample size (N=3 for each scar groups) we employed in this study. This study suggests that clinical photography can be employed for reliable, cost-effective measurement methods of skin color for the analysis of surgical outcomes, but future, larger analyses employing real scars are needed. While our results support the use of clinical photography for quantitative measurements of skin properties such as scarring, it is important to note that standardization of photographic conditions is critical. Substantial variability may be observed if the photographic conditions are not controlled. Important parameters to standardize include: lighting intensity, distance and direction from the light to the subject, camera lighting settings, background color, and the subject’s pose relative to the camera. While studio lighting is typically recommended for standardization of photography ( 37 ), in practice, this may not be feasible since it requires special equipment and training and might not be available to all clinicians, and it also requires enough room with lights placed a standard distance from each other, the patient, and the background. Fortunately, reliable images can be collected without studio conditions provided consistent settings are used. In this study, variability was controlled by avoiding the use of any built-in or external flashes and by simply setting the camera to white balance under fluorescent lamp, an option available on any commercial digital camera. This setting was also found to be advantageous in that it prevented a “washed-out” appearance of scars and surrounding skin colors. Consistent with our previous study that employed manual identification of fiducial points on clinical photographs ( 38 ), we found that non-clinical observers could delineate regions of interest surrounding scars if a minimal amount of basic training was provided. However, a more automated method would be better for large outcome studies or for developing intra-operative tools since it took about 2 minutes to identify and delineate a region of interests. In conclusion, we found that photography can be used in place of a colorimeter for measuring color properties of skin in a controlled setting. We also demonstrated that artificial scars created by a makeup artist under the guidance of a surgeon exhibit color properties consistent with real scars. 