When does age-related cognitive decline begin? Cross-sectional comparisons have consistently revealed that increased age is associated with lower levels of cognitive performance, even in the range from 18 to 60 years of age. However, the validity of cross-sectional comparisons of cognitive functioning in young and middle-aged adults has been questioned because of the discrepant age trends found in longitudinal and cross-sectional analyses. The results of the current project suggest that a major factor contributing to the discrepancy is the masking of age-related declines in longitudinal comparisons by large positive effects associated with prior test experience. Results from three methods of estimating retest effects in this project, together with results from studies comparing non-human animals raised in constant environments and from studies examining neurobiological variables not susceptible to retest effects, converge on a conclusion that some aspects of age-related cognitive decline begin in healthy educated adults when they are in their 20s and 30s.  Methods Sample Characteristics of the samples of participants are summarized in Table 1 . The research participants were recruited from newspaper advertisements, flyers, and referrals from other participants, and all were tested individually. The cross-sectional sample included the first assessment from the participants in the samples with longitudinal and short-term retest data, plus additional participants from other studies ( Salthouse, 2004 ; 2005 ). All research participants were between 18 and 60 years of age, and most participants rated their health as “very good” or “excellent”. Age-adjusted scaled scores on four standardized tests (i.e., WAIS III Vocabulary and Digit Symbol and WMS III Word Recall and Logical Memory) can be used to assess the representativeness of samples. Scaled scores have means of 10 and standard deviations of 3 in the nationally representative normative samples (cf., Wechsler, 1997 ). The values in Table 1 indicate that the scaled score means in the current samples were about ½ to 1 SD above the means in the normative sample, but because the standard deviations were close to 3, it can be inferred that the samples had nearly the same magnitude of between-person variability as the nationally representative normative sample. The retest intervals in the longitudinal study varied across participants, and ranged from 1 to 7 years, with an average of 2.5 years. The number of participants at each retest interval was 122 at 1 year, 295 at 2 years, 186 at 3 years, 88 at 4 years and 36 at 5 or more years. There was no correlation between age and retest interval (i.e., r = .02). The retest intervals in the short-term retest study ranged from about 1 to 14 days. Variables Nearly all of the participants performed the complete battery of 12 tests, with identical versions of the tests administered on the second test session in the longitudinal and short-term retest studies. Three different types of tests were used to assess the cognitive abilities of inductive reasoning, spatial visualization, episodic memory, and perceptual speed. The cognitive tests, and their reliabilities, are listed in the supplementary materials and have been described in previous reports ( Salthouse, 2004 ; Salthouse, et al., 2003 ), as have results of confirmatory factor analyses establishing that the variables can be assumed to represent four distinct cognitive abilities.  Sample Characteristics of the samples of participants are summarized in Table 1 . The research participants were recruited from newspaper advertisements, flyers, and referrals from other participants, and all were tested individually. The cross-sectional sample included the first assessment from the participants in the samples with longitudinal and short-term retest data, plus additional participants from other studies ( Salthouse, 2004 ; 2005 ). All research participants were between 18 and 60 years of age, and most participants rated their health as “very good” or “excellent”. Age-adjusted scaled scores on four standardized tests (i.e., WAIS III Vocabulary and Digit Symbol and WMS III Word Recall and Logical Memory) can be used to assess the representativeness of samples. Scaled scores have means of 10 and standard deviations of 3 in the nationally representative normative samples (cf., Wechsler, 1997 ). The values in Table 1 indicate that the scaled score means in the current samples were about ½ to 1 SD above the means in the normative sample, but because the standard deviations were close to 3, it can be inferred that the samples had nearly the same magnitude of between-person variability as the nationally representative normative sample. The retest intervals in the longitudinal study varied across participants, and ranged from 1 to 7 years, with an average of 2.5 years. The number of participants at each retest interval was 122 at 1 year, 295 at 2 years, 186 at 3 years, 88 at 4 years and 36 at 5 or more years. There was no correlation between age and retest interval (i.e., r = .02). The retest intervals in the short-term retest study ranged from about 1 to 14 days.  Variables Nearly all of the participants performed the complete battery of 12 tests, with identical versions of the tests administered on the second test session in the longitudinal and short-term retest studies. Three different types of tests were used to assess the cognitive abilities of inductive reasoning, spatial visualization, episodic memory, and perceptual speed. The cognitive tests, and their reliabilities, are listed in the supplementary materials and have been described in previous reports ( Salthouse, 2004 ; Salthouse, et al., 2003 ), as have results of confirmatory factor analyses establishing that the variables can be assumed to represent four distinct cognitive abilities.  Results All of the cognitive variables were converted to z-scores by subtracting the score from the total sample mean at the first assessment, and dividing the difference by the standard deviation (SD). Figure 2 portrays the cross-sectional age trends for the 12 variables, where it can be seen that every variable had a linear relation with age. Three variables, Matrix Reasoning, Form Boards, and Pattern Comparison, also had significant quadratic trends, but in each case the quadratic trend was associated with less than 0.2% of the variance. The performance difference from age 18 to age 60 was about 1 SD for the speed and spatial visualization variables, and was between .6 and .7 SD for the reasoning and memory variables. The simple correlations of the variables with age ranged from -.07 to -.41, with a median of -.26. The correlations were slightly more negative (i.e., median of -.36) after control of years of education, self-rated health, number of medications taken per week, report of current or past neurological treatment, reported loss of consciousness for more than 5 minutes, a measure of near-vision visual acuity, and self-reported measures of depression and anxiety. (The actual correlations are provided in the supplementary materials ). These results therefore imply that the cross-sectional age-cognition relations in this project are not induced by age-related variations in these particular characteristics. Analyses were also conducted to determine the age group with the highest mean score, and the next older age group in which the mean was significantly (p<.01) lower. The peak age across the 12 variables ranged from 22 to 27, and the next older age at which the mean was significantly different from the peak age ranged from 27 to 42. (The details for each variable are in the supplementary materials .) Cross-sectional and longitudinal results for each cognitive variable are displayed in Figure 3 . The longitudinal results represent the change over the average interval of 2.5 years. The cross-sectional differences correspond to the slope of the regression equation relating the cognitive variable to age, multiplied by 2.5 to have a comparable interval for the cross-sectional differences and the longitudinal changes. Inspection of the figure reveals that most of the variables have a pattern similar to that in earlier studies with negative cross-sectional differences, and either stable or positive longitudinal changes. If anything, the discrepancy between the cross-sectional and longitudinal age trends in this study was larger than that in the Seattle Longitudinal Study ( Schaie, 2005 ). That is, the average cross-sectional and longitudinal differences in the bottom panels of Figure 1 were -.06 and .01 SD units, respectively, and the medians for the reasoning and spatial visualization variables in Figure 3 were -.05 for the cross-sectional difference and .08 for the longitudinal change. Figure 3 also portrays the changes from the short-term retest study in which the average retest interval was about 1 week. It can be seen that all of the short-term retest changes were positive, and considerably larger than the negative cross-sectional age differences. Finally, Figure 3 portrays estimates of the retest effects from the difference between scores of participants taking the test for the second time compared to participants taking it for the first time, and from the mixed effects regression analyses based on the variable retest intervals. (The estimates were derived from procedures very similar to those used in earlier studies, and details are provided in the supplementary materials .) Although there is clearly some variation in the absolute magnitude of the estimates, it is important to note that nearly all of the estimated retest effects were positive, and substantially larger than the cross-sectional differences. A series of independent groups t-tests was conducted comparing the short-term retest changes with the longitudinal changes for the 122 participants who had a 1-year interval between assessments. Most of the variables had significantly more positive changes in the short-term retest group than in the 1-year longitudinal group. The only exceptions were one speed test (Letter Comparison), one reasoning test (Letter Sets), and the three spatial tests (Spatial Relations, Paper Folding, and Form Boards). These results indicate that for most of the variables the benefits of prior test experience diminished over the one week to one year interval after the initial assessment. A final set of analyses examined the relation between the length of the interval between the two assessments and the magnitude of longitudinal change in the longitudinal sample. The only variables with significant interval effects were the Digit Symbol, Pattern Comparison, Word Recall, and Paper Folding variables. In each case the change values were smaller as the interval increased, with slopes ranging from -.12 to -.16 z -score units per year. For these specific variables, therefore, the change can be predicted to reach zero at retest intervals of 3.6 years (Digit Symbol), 1.6 years (Pattern Comparison), 2.5 years (Word Recall), and 2.4 years (Paper Folding). The lack of significant interval effects for the other variables precludes meaningful estimates of the decay of the retest effects for those variables.  Results All of the cognitive variables were converted to z-scores by subtracting the score from the total sample mean at the first assessment, and dividing the difference by the standard deviation (SD). Figure 2 portrays the cross-sectional age trends for the 12 variables, where it can be seen that every variable had a linear relation with age. Three variables, Matrix Reasoning, Form Boards, and Pattern Comparison, also had significant quadratic trends, but in each case the quadratic trend was associated with less than 0.2% of the variance. The performance difference from age 18 to age 60 was about 1 SD for the speed and spatial visualization variables, and was between .6 and .7 SD for the reasoning and memory variables. The simple correlations of the variables with age ranged from -.07 to -.41, with a median of -.26. The correlations were slightly more negative (i.e., median of -.36) after control of years of education, self-rated health, number of medications taken per week, report of current or past neurological treatment, reported loss of consciousness for more than 5 minutes, a measure of near-vision visual acuity, and self-reported measures of depression and anxiety. (The actual correlations are provided in the supplementary materials ). These results therefore imply that the cross-sectional age-cognition relations in this project are not induced by age-related variations in these particular characteristics. Analyses were also conducted to determine the age group with the highest mean score, and the next older age group in which the mean was significantly (p<.01) lower. The peak age across the 12 variables ranged from 22 to 27, and the next older age at which the mean was significantly different from the peak age ranged from 27 to 42. (The details for each variable are in the supplementary materials .) Cross-sectional and longitudinal results for each cognitive variable are displayed in Figure 3 . The longitudinal results represent the change over the average interval of 2.5 years. The cross-sectional differences correspond to the slope of the regression equation relating the cognitive variable to age, multiplied by 2.5 to have a comparable interval for the cross-sectional differences and the longitudinal changes. Inspection of the figure reveals that most of the variables have a pattern similar to that in earlier studies with negative cross-sectional differences, and either stable or positive longitudinal changes. If anything, the discrepancy between the cross-sectional and longitudinal age trends in this study was larger than that in the Seattle Longitudinal Study ( Schaie, 2005 ). That is, the average cross-sectional and longitudinal differences in the bottom panels of Figure 1 were -.06 and .01 SD units, respectively, and the medians for the reasoning and spatial visualization variables in Figure 3 were -.05 for the cross-sectional difference and .08 for the longitudinal change. Figure 3 also portrays the changes from the short-term retest study in which the average retest interval was about 1 week. It can be seen that all of the short-term retest changes were positive, and considerably larger than the negative cross-sectional age differences. Finally, Figure 3 portrays estimates of the retest effects from the difference between scores of participants taking the test for the second time compared to participants taking it for the first time, and from the mixed effects regression analyses based on the variable retest intervals. (The estimates were derived from procedures very similar to those used in earlier studies, and details are provided in the supplementary materials .) Although there is clearly some variation in the absolute magnitude of the estimates, it is important to note that nearly all of the estimated retest effects were positive, and substantially larger than the cross-sectional differences. A series of independent groups t-tests was conducted comparing the short-term retest changes with the longitudinal changes for the 122 participants who had a 1-year interval between assessments. Most of the variables had significantly more positive changes in the short-term retest group than in the 1-year longitudinal group. The only exceptions were one speed test (Letter Comparison), one reasoning test (Letter Sets), and the three spatial tests (Spatial Relations, Paper Folding, and Form Boards). These results indicate that for most of the variables the benefits of prior test experience diminished over the one week to one year interval after the initial assessment. A final set of analyses examined the relation between the length of the interval between the two assessments and the magnitude of longitudinal change in the longitudinal sample. The only variables with significant interval effects were the Digit Symbol, Pattern Comparison, Word Recall, and Paper Folding variables. In each case the change values were smaller as the interval increased, with slopes ranging from -.12 to -.16 z -score units per year. For these specific variables, therefore, the change can be predicted to reach zero at retest intervals of 3.6 years (Digit Symbol), 1.6 years (Pattern Comparison), 2.5 years (Word Recall), and 2.4 years (Paper Folding). The lack of significant interval effects for the other variables precludes meaningful estimates of the decay of the retest effects for those variables.  Discussion Figure 2 reveals that there were significant negative relations between age and several different types of cognitive measures for healthy educated adults ranging from 18 to 60 years of age. Furthermore, additional analyses revealed that the age relations were not attributable to a variety of plausible confounding variables. These results, together with similar findings in many other studies, clearly establish the existence of cross-sectional age-related declines for many cognitive variables prior to age 60. Characteristics related to cohort influences may still be contributing to some of the cross-sectional differences, but these characteristics need to be identified and measured in order for this interpretation to be directly investigated. It is apparent in Figure 3 that many cognitive variables exhibit the typical pattern of negative cross-sectional age trends and either stable or positive longitudinal age trends. The unique feature of the current project is that three estimates of retest effects were also available for every variable. Almost all of these estimates were positive, and generally much larger in magnitude than the cross-sectional age differences, which suggest that longitudinal comparisons probably underestimate age-related change for many cognitive variables. If one assumes that longitudinal changes reflect a mixture of maturation effects and retest effects, a crude method of adjusting the longitudinal changes for retest effects is to subtract the retest estimates from the observed longitudinal changes. Inspection of Figure 3 reveals that this type of adjustment would dramatically alter the magnitude, and direction, of the longitudinal age trends, and make them much more similar to the cross-sectional patterns. This subtraction method is undoubtedly too simplistic, but only if the retest effects were very small would they not be expected to influence the second assessment in a longitudinal study, and this was not the case for most of the variables in this project. Inspection of Figure 3 reveals that there was variability in the magnitude of the retest estimates across variables, and across analytical methods for the same variables. The reasons for this variation are not yet clear, but the results signify the importance of being cautious in basing conclusions on a single variable, or a single analytical method. Despite the differences in the magnitudes of the retest effects, it is important to emphasize that most of the estimates were positive, indicating that the retest phenomenon is robust across different analytical methods, and sets of assumptions. To summarize, the results of the current project, together with results from research on non-human animals and on neurobiological variables, suggest that age-related cognitive decline begins relatively early in adulthood, but that it may not be detected in longitudinal comparisons until effects of prior test experience are taken into consideration. Not all aspects of cognitive functioning exhibit early age-related declines because measures based on accumulated knowledge, such as performance on tests of vocabulary or general information, are consistently found to increase until at least age 60. However, only those variables exhibiting negative age-related differences in cross-sectional comparisons are directly relevant to the question of when age-related cognitive decline begins. There is some evidence that the magnitude of age-related decline accelerates at older ages. To illustrate, a sample of about 800 adults between 61 and 96 years of age in my laboratory had cross-sectional slopes of about -.04 to -.05 SD units per year compared to the slopes of -.02 to -.03 SD units per year for adults under age 60. In absolute units, the decline in speed variables was about twice as great in this age range compared to adults under age 60, and the decline in the memory variables was nearly 4 times greater. What is not yet known is whether these quantitatively different age trends reflect changes in the same set of influences, or the operation of qualitatively different types of influences. However, what does appear clear is that several different types of results converge on the conclusion that age-related cognitive decline begins relatively early in adulthood, and certainly before age 60 in healthy educated adults. Finally, although the results of this project suggest that at least some of the differences in the age trends in cross-sectional and longitudinal comparisons are attributable to retest effects distorting longitudinal comparisons, the results should not be interpreted as implying that longitudinal comparisons are not meaningful or valuable. In fact, quite the opposite is true because only with longitudinal data can one examine within-individual changes distinct from between-person differences. Instead, the major point is that merely because the changes are observed within the same individual does not mean that they only reflect aspects of maturation. Strengths and weaknesses of both cross-sectional and longitudinal data therefore need to be considered when reaching conclusions about age trends in cognitive functioning.  Discussion Figure 2 reveals that there were significant negative relations between age and several different types of cognitive measures for healthy educated adults ranging from 18 to 60 years of age. Furthermore, additional analyses revealed that the age relations were not attributable to a variety of plausible confounding variables. These results, together with similar findings in many other studies, clearly establish the existence of cross-sectional age-related declines for many cognitive variables prior to age 60. Characteristics related to cohort influences may still be contributing to some of the cross-sectional differences, but these characteristics need to be identified and measured in order for this interpretation to be directly investigated. It is apparent in Figure 3 that many cognitive variables exhibit the typical pattern of negative cross-sectional age trends and either stable or positive longitudinal age trends. The unique feature of the current project is that three estimates of retest effects were also available for every variable. Almost all of these estimates were positive, and generally much larger in magnitude than the cross-sectional age differences, which suggest that longitudinal comparisons probably underestimate age-related change for many cognitive variables. If one assumes that longitudinal changes reflect a mixture of maturation effects and retest effects, a crude method of adjusting the longitudinal changes for retest effects is to subtract the retest estimates from the observed longitudinal changes. Inspection of Figure 3 reveals that this type of adjustment would dramatically alter the magnitude, and direction, of the longitudinal age trends, and make them much more similar to the cross-sectional patterns. This subtraction method is undoubtedly too simplistic, but only if the retest effects were very small would they not be expected to influence the second assessment in a longitudinal study, and this was not the case for most of the variables in this project. Inspection of Figure 3 reveals that there was variability in the magnitude of the retest estimates across variables, and across analytical methods for the same variables. The reasons for this variation are not yet clear, but the results signify the importance of being cautious in basing conclusions on a single variable, or a single analytical method. Despite the differences in the magnitudes of the retest effects, it is important to emphasize that most of the estimates were positive, indicating that the retest phenomenon is robust across different analytical methods, and sets of assumptions. To summarize, the results of the current project, together with results from research on non-human animals and on neurobiological variables, suggest that age-related cognitive decline begins relatively early in adulthood, but that it may not be detected in longitudinal comparisons until effects of prior test experience are taken into consideration. Not all aspects of cognitive functioning exhibit early age-related declines because measures based on accumulated knowledge, such as performance on tests of vocabulary or general information, are consistently found to increase until at least age 60. However, only those variables exhibiting negative age-related differences in cross-sectional comparisons are directly relevant to the question of when age-related cognitive decline begins. There is some evidence that the magnitude of age-related decline accelerates at older ages. To illustrate, a sample of about 800 adults between 61 and 96 years of age in my laboratory had cross-sectional slopes of about -.04 to -.05 SD units per year compared to the slopes of -.02 to -.03 SD units per year for adults under age 60. In absolute units, the decline in speed variables was about twice as great in this age range compared to adults under age 60, and the decline in the memory variables was nearly 4 times greater. What is not yet known is whether these quantitatively different age trends reflect changes in the same set of influences, or the operation of qualitatively different types of influences. However, what does appear clear is that several different types of results converge on the conclusion that age-related cognitive decline begins relatively early in adulthood, and certainly before age 60 in healthy educated adults. Finally, although the results of this project suggest that at least some of the differences in the age trends in cross-sectional and longitudinal comparisons are attributable to retest effects distorting longitudinal comparisons, the results should not be interpreted as implying that longitudinal comparisons are not meaningful or valuable. In fact, quite the opposite is true because only with longitudinal data can one examine within-individual changes distinct from between-person differences. Instead, the major point is that merely because the changes are observed within the same individual does not mean that they only reflect aspects of maturation. Strengths and weaknesses of both cross-sectional and longitudinal data therefore need to be considered when reaching conclusions about age trends in cognitive functioning.  Supplementary Material 01  Supplementary Material 01  Figures and Table Figure 1 Estimates of cross-sectional differences and longitudinal changes over 7 years in two variables from the Seattle Longitudinal Study. Cross-sectional data from Table 4.2 and longitudinal data from Table 5.1 of Schaie (2005) . The figures in the top two panels portray results of cross-sectional (dotted lines) and longitudinal (solid lines) comparisons in T-score units. The figures in the bottom two panels portray the same data as differences or changes over a 2.5 year interval in standard deviation units. Figure 2 Means and standard errors for 12 cognitive variables by 5-year age intervals. The variables are grouped according to the type of cognitive ability as determined by confirmatory factor analyses. Figure 3 Estimates of cross-sectional differences and longitudinal changes over 2.5 years, of the short-term retest effect, and of retest effects derived from two analytical methods for 12 cognitive variables. The vertical axis is in standard deviation units. Table 1 Characteristics of samples All Longitudinal Short-term Retest N 2350 729 139 Age 40.7 (13.3) 42.1 (12.0) 43.3 (13.2) % Females 68.0 69.0 70.0 Education 15.5 (2.5) 15.4 (2.5) 15.5 (2.3) Health 2.1 (0.9) 2.1 (0.9) 2.0 (0.9) Scaled Scores ?Vocabulary 12.5 (3.0) 12.6 (3.0) 11.8 (2.7) ?Digit Symbol 11.3 (2.9) 11.4 (2.9) 11.1 (2.9) ?Logical Memory 11.7 (2.7) 11.7 (2.7) 11.9 (2.6) ?Word Recall 12.3 (3.2) 12.5 (3.2) 11.7 (3.0) Retest Interval N.A. 2.5 (1.1) 7.1 (8.5) Note: Education is in years of formal education completed, and health is a self-rating of health on a scale ranging from 1 for excellent to 5 for poor. Vocabulary is the raw score on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III ( Wechsler, 1997 ) Vocabulary test. Retest interval is in years for the longitudinal sample and in days for the short-term retest sample. N.A. means that the variable is not available in that sample.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Estimates of cross-sectional differences and longitudinal changes over 7 years in two variables from the Seattle Longitudinal Study. Cross-sectional data from Table 4.2 and longitudinal data from Table 5.1 of Schaie (2005) . The figures in the top two panels portray results of cross-sectional (dotted lines) and longitudinal (solid lines) comparisons in T-score units. The figures in the bottom two panels portray the same data as differences or changes over a 2.5 year interval in standard deviation units. Figure 2 Means and standard errors for 12 cognitive variables by 5-year age intervals. The variables are grouped according to the type of cognitive ability as determined by confirmatory factor analyses. Figure 3 Estimates of cross-sectional differences and longitudinal changes over 2.5 years, of the short-term retest effect, and of retest effects derived from two analytical methods for 12 cognitive variables. The vertical axis is in standard deviation units. Table 1 Characteristics of samples All Longitudinal Short-term Retest N 2350 729 139 Age 40.7 (13.3) 42.1 (12.0) 43.3 (13.2) % Females 68.0 69.0 70.0 Education 15.5 (2.5) 15.4 (2.5) 15.5 (2.3) Health 2.1 (0.9) 2.1 (0.9) 2.0 (0.9) Scaled Scores ?Vocabulary 12.5 (3.0) 12.6 (3.0) 11.8 (2.7) ?Digit Symbol 11.3 (2.9) 11.4 (2.9) 11.1 (2.9) ?Logical Memory 11.7 (2.7) 11.7 (2.7) 11.9 (2.6) ?Word Recall 12.3 (3.2) 12.5 (3.2) 11.7 (3.0) Retest Interval N.A. 2.5 (1.1) 7.1 (8.5) Note: Education is in years of formal education completed, and health is a self-rating of health on a scale ranging from 1 for excellent to 5 for poor. Vocabulary is the raw score on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III ( Wechsler, 1997 ) Vocabulary test. Retest interval is in years for the longitudinal sample and in days for the short-term retest sample. N.A. means that the variable is not available in that sample. 