New insights into the genetics of addiction Drug addiction is a common brain disorder that is extremely costly to the individual and to society. Genetics contributes significantly to vulnerability to this disorder, but identification of susceptibility genes has been slow. Recent genome-wide linkage and association studies have implicated several regions and genes in addiction to various substances, including alcohol and, more recently, tobacco. Current efforts aim not only to replicate these findings in independent samples but also to determine the functional mechanisms of these genes and variants.  Conclusions Significant progress has been made in identifying susceptibility loci and genes for addictions. Comparison of linkage peaks for addictions to various substances confirms what we have learned from genetic epidemiological studies, namely that genetic vulnerability to different substances in part overlaps. Variants in several genes, including aldehyde dehydrogenases, GABRA2 , ANKK1 , and neurexins 1 and 3, have been associated with addictions to multiple drugs. Most recently, variants of the CHRNA5/A3/B4 cluster on chromosome 15 were found by GWAS, as well as by targeted studies, to be associated not only with addictions to tobacco, alcohol, and cocaine, but with lung cancer as well. These genes have effects on nicotine responses in animal models and can thus be considered established targets for these studies. Nevertheless, the exact nature of the variants and their functions are still unknown. Functional studies as well as studies in other ethnic populations with different LD structure may be revealing. GWAS confirmation of candidate gene findings is reassuring, and similar to the robust findings in type II diabetes 85 but in sharp contrast to GWAS results in other psychiatric disorders, which so far have failed to replicate any candidate findings. 54 Such candidate genes with prior biochemical evidence and animal models allow a quicker move to functional studies. Well-designed GWASs with large samples should help to identify additional genes, including genes that implicate novel biological pathways involved in addiction. Box 1: Definition of addiction and challenges in addiction genetics research Diagnostic assessment of addiction: nicotine dependence as an example Drug addiction is characterized by a compulsion to take a substance, with goal-directed behavior toward excessive substance intake and a loss of control in limiting intake. Clinical addictions generally are diagnosed using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV (DSM-IV) 86 and the International Classification of Disease, 10th Revision (ICD-10) of the World Health Organization (WHO). 87 The most recent versions of DSM-IV and ICD-10 recognize two categorizes of addiction: abuse or harmful use , characterized by regular and increasing intake despite adverse consequences, and dependence , which in addition requires symptoms of withdrawal and/or tolerance. Although there is significant comorbidity among addiction to different drugs, the measurement of various addictions differs greatly. Here, we use nicotine dependence (ND) to illustrate the complexity of this behavior. Historically, the assessment of ND has relied largely on the use of the Fagerström Tolerance Questionnaire 88 or a shorter version, the FTND. 89 Since they were introduced, these two scales have been used frequently in both clinical and research settings, partly because of their relation to treatment outcome. However, the Fagerström scales were developed as unidimensional measures of physical tolerance 88 and thus do not assess some important aspects of ND, such as craving, subjective compulsion to smoke, nicotine withdrawal symptoms, BEHAVIORAL SALIENCY , or BEHAVIORAL AUTOMATICITY , which often are regarded as core constructs of ND. 90 ND also can be assessed by diagnostic criteria based on the DSM-IV. 86 However, these symptoms are ultimately aggregated into a dichotomous classification as “dependent” or “not dependent,” which limits its usefulness for research into the causes of addiction. Given that a diagnosis of dependence can be assigned by meeting various combinations of criteria, the diagnosis is conceptually heterogeneous. To expand the breadth of the diagnosis criteria and thereby improve the self-reported assessment of ND, new scales such as the Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives 91 and the Nicotine Dependence Syndrome Scale 92 were developed. Whether these new scales can capture different aspects underlying ND and reduce the phenotypic heterogeneity among smokers remains to be investigated, especially in non-Caucasian smokers. Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity One of the most significant challenges in genetic research on addiction concerns heterogeneity at both the phenotypic and genetic levels. Phenotypic heterogeneity is extensive in the manifestation of addiction, with users differing in magnitudes such as age of onset of problems, drug symptoms, abusing history, and comorbid disorders. One means to reduce phenotypic heterogeneity is to classify more genetically or neurobiological homogeneous phenotypes or use ENDOPHENOTYPES as an intermediate phenotype between an addicted phenotype and the biological processes responsible for the manifestation of that disorder. GENETIC HETEROGENEITY is another major concern in genetic studies on addiction. Genetic differences exist between different ethnic groups or samples from different geographic locations. One way to minimize the impact on final genetics findings is to increase sample size and use more homogeneous samples. Box 2: Composition and function of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) in the brain [contains figure] Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors belong to a super-family of ligand-gated ion channels that also includes receptors for GABA, glutamate, glycine, and serotonin. nAChRs are pentameric complexes assembled from an extensive family of subunits. In vertebrates, 12 nAChR subunit genes with a common ancestor have been cloned and classified into two subfamilies of nine alpha (?2–?10) and three beta subunits (?2–?4). There is considerable subunit diversity amongst nAChR subtypes and, consequently, receptor subtypes are commonly referred to by their subunit composition. nAChRs are widely distributed in the brain, and their subunit composition is cell and region specific. Most nAChRs in the nervous system contain one type of ? and one type of ? subunit, with ?4?2 receptors accounting for 90% of the high-affinity nAChRs in the brain; ?3?4 receptors are the main subtype in the autonomic ganglia and adrenal medulla as well as in subsets of central nervous system neurons. The ?4?2 and ?3?4 subtypes also can contain the ?5 subunit, which is believed to increase the rate of channel desensitization and calcium permeability. Because nAChRs are the primary site of action for nicotine in the brain, they are important targets for the development of therapeutic agents that facilitate smoking cessation efforts. nAChRs are composed of five subunits that combine to form a functional receptor (Panel a ). Each subunit comprises four membrane-spanning domains, which are arranged in concentric layers around a central aqueous pore with the M2 domain lining the pore. On nAChR activation by an endogenous agonist (acetylcholine, for example) or exogenous agonist (such as nicotine), the domains of each of the five nAChR subunits rearrange such that the central pore opens and permits cationic trafficking (Panel b ). Nicotine binds at the interface between the ? and ? subunits in heteromeric nAChRs to activate the receptor (Panel c ). Activation of nAChRs can potentiate neurotransmitter release (when expressed at presynaptic terminals) and neuronal excitability (when expressed at postsynaptic terminals) throughout the brain. As a result, nAChRs contribute to a wide range of brain activities that include cognitive functions and neuronal development and degeneration. Nicotine dependence is initiated through the activation of nAChRs. Chronic nicotine exposure produces the long-lasting physiological and behavioral changes associated with addiction, including nAChR up-regulation, gene expression alteration, and long-term potentiation and depression induction at glutamatergic synapses.  Diagnostic assessment of addiction: nicotine dependence as an example Drug addiction is characterized by a compulsion to take a substance, with goal-directed behavior toward excessive substance intake and a loss of control in limiting intake. Clinical addictions generally are diagnosed using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV (DSM-IV) 86 and the International Classification of Disease, 10th Revision (ICD-10) of the World Health Organization (WHO). 87 The most recent versions of DSM-IV and ICD-10 recognize two categorizes of addiction: abuse or harmful use , characterized by regular and increasing intake despite adverse consequences, and dependence , which in addition requires symptoms of withdrawal and/or tolerance. Although there is significant comorbidity among addiction to different drugs, the measurement of various addictions differs greatly. Here, we use nicotine dependence (ND) to illustrate the complexity of this behavior. Historically, the assessment of ND has relied largely on the use of the Fagerström Tolerance Questionnaire 88 or a shorter version, the FTND. 89 Since they were introduced, these two scales have been used frequently in both clinical and research settings, partly because of their relation to treatment outcome. However, the Fagerström scales were developed as unidimensional measures of physical tolerance 88 and thus do not assess some important aspects of ND, such as craving, subjective compulsion to smoke, nicotine withdrawal symptoms, BEHAVIORAL SALIENCY , or BEHAVIORAL AUTOMATICITY , which often are regarded as core constructs of ND. 90 ND also can be assessed by diagnostic criteria based on the DSM-IV. 86 However, these symptoms are ultimately aggregated into a dichotomous classification as “dependent” or “not dependent,” which limits its usefulness for research into the causes of addiction. Given that a diagnosis of dependence can be assigned by meeting various combinations of criteria, the diagnosis is conceptually heterogeneous. To expand the breadth of the diagnosis criteria and thereby improve the self-reported assessment of ND, new scales such as the Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives 91 and the Nicotine Dependence Syndrome Scale 92 were developed. Whether these new scales can capture different aspects underlying ND and reduce the phenotypic heterogeneity among smokers remains to be investigated, especially in non-Caucasian smokers.  Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity One of the most significant challenges in genetic research on addiction concerns heterogeneity at both the phenotypic and genetic levels. Phenotypic heterogeneity is extensive in the manifestation of addiction, with users differing in magnitudes such as age of onset of problems, drug symptoms, abusing history, and comorbid disorders. One means to reduce phenotypic heterogeneity is to classify more genetically or neurobiological homogeneous phenotypes or use ENDOPHENOTYPES as an intermediate phenotype between an addicted phenotype and the biological processes responsible for the manifestation of that disorder. GENETIC HETEROGENEITY is another major concern in genetic studies on addiction. Genetic differences exist between different ethnic groups or samples from different geographic locations. One way to minimize the impact on final genetics findings is to increase sample size and use more homogeneous samples.  Supplementary Material 1  Figure and Table Figure 1 Chromosomal locations of peaks or intervals for addiction to multiple substances Summary of chromosomal locations of nominated peaks or intervals for addictions to alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, heroin, nicotine, and opoids. Each linkage is given with either a color-filled circle or a rectangle, representing a reported linkage peak or region, respectively. “Significant” or “suggestive” linkage was determined by independent studies on at least two substances of abuse. The determination of “significant” or “suggestive linkage” at each linkage peak/interval was based on the rigorous criteria proposed by Lander and Kruglyak, 34 which define an LOD of >3.6 or a P value of <2.2 × 10?5 as a “significant linkage” and an LOD of >2.2 but <3.6 or a P value of 7.4 × 10?4 as a “suggestive linkage.” Each color represents a type of abused substance. The “unit” for each chromosome is “cM.” Table 1 Candidate genes associated with at least one drug addiction that are verified by meta-analysis * Gene Symbol Gene Name Biological System and Function Chrom. Location Drug (phenotype # ) Evidence from KO animal model References for meta-analysis 5HTT/ SERT 5-Hydroxytryptamine transporter Neurotransmitter transport 17q11.1-q12 Alcohol (i, d, c); Cocaine (d, c); Heroin (d); Methamphetamine (d); Nicotine (d) Increased sensitivity to alcohol-induced sedation/hypnosis; Motor-coordination deficits in response to alcohol; Reduced gross alcohol intake; Altered behavioral responses to cocaine and alcohol 93 , 94 CYP2A6 Cytochrome P450, family 2, subfamily A, polypeptide 6 Oxidation reduction 19q13.2 Alcohol (d); Nicotine (i, d, c) 94 DAT1 Dopamine transporter Neurotransmitter transport 5p15.3 Alcohol (d, c); Cocaine (d); Heroin (d); Methamphetamine (d); Nicotine (i, d, c) Reduces alcohol preference in female mice; Cocaine-induced stereotypy 94 , 95 DRD2 Dopamine receptor 2 Synaptic transmission, dopaminergic 11q23.1-q23.2 Alcohol (d, c); Cocaine (d); Heroin (d); Nicotine (i, d, c) Alcohol preference and alcohol-induced ataxia; limit rates of high-dose cocaine self-administration 96 – 99 IL10 Interleukin -10 Cytokine activity 1q31-q32 Alcohol (d) 100 BDNF Brain-derived neurotropic factor Regulation of synaptic plasticity 11p13 Alcohol (i, d, c); Nicotine (d); Cocaine (d); Methamphetamine (d) Increased alcohol intake; Increased preference for cocaine 101 Notes: * : The genes reported here have one or more variants that have been associated with more than one addiction. # : d – Abuse/Dependence; i - initiation; c - cessation/withdrawal. This table may only represent a partial list of genes that have been investigated for association with addictions. 