Population-Based Screening for CKD Organizations both in the U.S. and globally have advocated for screening for chronic kidney disease with a urine test for proteinuria followed by subsequent testing with creatinine-based, eGFR determinations. Screening for a disease, such as chronic kidney disease, can have value, but a decision to screen is not a trivial decision. Criteria must be met in order to balance the aggregate benefits with the risks and costs of a screening test. We discuss how screening for chronic kidney disease meets many of these criteria, but also how the populations to whom it is applied must be targeted and the strategies for testing must be clearly defined.  Conclusion Screening for chronic diseases such as CKD can be valuable if applied appropriately. Much of the evidence regarding population based screening for CKD suggests that screening should be targeted, rather than universally performed, and screening should be performed with urine testing followed by creatinine-based eGFR testing. The value of screening may be enhanced by implementing it along with other disease detection programs used in the general population. Future work should continue to examine the performance characteristics of different screening tests in various settings, optimal timing intervals for screening and the benefits, risks and costs of screening strategies with various components. This will help address global consensus on approaches and recommendations for screening. In addition, research on new biomarkers for kidney disease identification that can be used in screening and research on new pharmacologic agents for more effective protection from kidney disease damage or progression should be supported. Box 1: Recommendation on Population Screening for CKD from the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes conference in Amsterdam 2006. From [<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R3">3</xref>] All countries should have a targeted screening program for CKD. Target groups should include patients with hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. – Other groups might include families of patients with CKD, individuals with hyperlipidemia, obesity, metabolic syndrome, smokers, patients treated with potentially nephrotoxic drugs, some chronic infectious diseases and cancers, and age > 60 years. Tests for CKD screening should include both a urine test for proteinuria and a blood test for creatinine to estimate GFR. – Tests for proteinuria should be selected and performed according to local guidelines. Verification of proteinuria would require two out of three positive tests. – Equations for estimating GFR should be appropriate for standardization of the method and application to majority racial and ethnic groups. Frequency of testing should be according to available guidelines and target group to be tested. In absence of specific recommendations, testing need not be more frequent than once per year.  Box 1: Recommendation on Population Screening for CKD from the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes conference in Amsterdam 2006. From [<xref ref-type="bibr" rid="R3">3</xref>] All countries should have a targeted screening program for CKD. Target groups should include patients with hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. – Other groups might include families of patients with CKD, individuals with hyperlipidemia, obesity, metabolic syndrome, smokers, patients treated with potentially nephrotoxic drugs, some chronic infectious diseases and cancers, and age > 60 years. Tests for CKD screening should include both a urine test for proteinuria and a blood test for creatinine to estimate GFR. – Tests for proteinuria should be selected and performed according to local guidelines. Verification of proteinuria would require two out of three positive tests. – Equations for estimating GFR should be appropriate for standardization of the method and application to majority racial and ethnic groups. Frequency of testing should be according to available guidelines and target group to be tested. In absence of specific recommendations, testing need not be more frequent than once per year.  Figures Figure 1 Analytic Framework for Evidence on Screening Topics from the United States Preventive Services Taskforce. From [ 8 ]. Figure 2 Depiction of Screening Strategies, Health States and Possible Transitions in Decision Analytic Model Comparing the Cost-effectiveness of Screening for Proteinuria to Identify Chronic Kidney Disease. From [ 11 ]. Figure 3 Comparison of the Cost-effectiveness of Screening for Chronic Kidney Disease with urine dipstick testing with screening intervention for other diseases. Adapted from [ 11 ]. Figure 4 Cost-effectiveness of Screening for Proteinuria at Different Frequencies and Ages for Persons with Neither Hypertension nor Diabetes. From [ 11 ]. 