Emerging therapies for multiple myeloma Multiple myeloma (MM) is a clonal plasma cell malignancy clinically characterized by osteolytic lesions, immunodeficiency, and renal disease. There are an estimated 750,000 people diagnosed with MM worldwide, with a median overall survival of 3 – 5 years. Besides chromosomal aberrations, translocations, and mutations in essential growth and tumor-suppressor genes, accumulating data strongly highlight the pathophysiologic role of the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment in MM pathogenesis. Based on this knowledge, several novel agents have been identified, and treatment options in MM have fundamentally changed during the last decade. Thalidomide, bortezomib, and lenalidomide have been incorporated into conventional cytotoxic and transplantation regimens, first in relapsed and refractory and now also in newly diagnosed MM. Despite these significant advances, there remains an urgent need for more efficacious and tolerable drugs. Indeed, a plethora of preclinical agents awaits translation from the bench to the bedside. This article reviews the scientific rationale of new therapy regimens and newly identified therapeutic agents – small molecules as well as therapeutic antibodies – that hold promise to further improve outcome in MM.  9. Expert opinion and conclusions Significant advances in MM therapy during the last 8 years have been achieved with the introduction of Thal, Len, and bortezomib, which target the tumor cell in its microenvironment in both laboratory and animal models. Preclinical results have rapidly translated from the bench to the bedside: each of these agents was first used effectively to treat relapsed/refractory disease and then combined with Dex in transplant candidates and with MP in elderly patients as initial therapy to achieve increased frequency and extent of response. The most promising new bortezomib combinations include bortezomib with doxil, tanespimycin, Len, and LBH589 or SAHA, which are likely to further improve MM treatment regimens. In the future, oncogenomics will be useful not only to identify novel therapeutic targets and to validate targeted therapies, but also to inform the design of clinical trials. Indeed, gene profiling and array comparative genomic hybridization are allowing for RNA- and DNA-based classifications of patients in order to identify those most likely to respond [ 190 , 191 ]. Remarkably, complete responses are achieved in up to 40% of newly diagnosed MM patients with combinations of chemotherapeutic/novel therapies, i.e., Len–bortezomib–Dex. These high response rates now allow for clinical trials to assess the added value of autologous SCT in initial therapy regimens [ 38 ]. There has been much progress in MM treatment options; many of the novel drug combinations with conventional chemotherapy have resulted in better response rates. However, most of the studies show no benefit in terms of TTP or OS, i.e., a recent update of the randomized Italian trial comparing MP with MPT [ 67 ]. Therefore there remains the urgent need for less toxic and more potent targeted therapies. The most promising novel agents target: i) signaling events in tumor cell development (e.g., FGFR3, PRO-001); ii) cytokines, growth factors and their receptors (e.g., IL-6, CD40, BAFF); iii) signaling sequelae triggered by cytokines and growth factors as well as MM cell–BMSC interactions (MEK: AZD644; PKC: Enzastaurin; NF-?B: MLN120B; Akt: perifosine; proteasomes: NPI0001, carfilzomib); iv) molecules at the cell membrane (e.g., CS-1); v) the tumor-supportive MM microenvironment, including BM angiogenesis (VEGF: avastin, pazopanib); and vi) mechanisms of MM bone disease (e.g., RANKL). Although these compounds, especially when given in combination, show high activity in preclinical in vitro and in vivo settings, we eagerly await their clinical evaluation. Indeed, most of these agents are already under evaluation for their therapeutic potential in MM treatment either alone or in combination with other novel or conventional agents. Combination therapies have been curative in childhood acute lymphocyte leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease, and we are now poised to rationally combine novel and conventional therapies to similarly improve patient outcome in MM. 