Learning therapeutic lessons from metastasis suppressor proteins Metastasis suppressor proteins regulate multiple steps in the metastatic cascade, including cancer cell invasion, survival in the vascular and lymphatic circulation, and colonization of distant organ sites. Understanding the biology of metastasis suppressors provides valuable mechanistic insights that may translate to therapeutic opportunities. Several reports have explored novel strategies for restoring metastasis suppressor function, including gene transfer, induction of previously suppressed gene expression and exogenous administration of gene product. Pathways activated downstream of metastasis suppressor loss can also be targeted. Although none of these strategies are yet in routine clinical use, several are being tested preclinically and in clinical trials.  Summary In summary, metastasis suppressor genes define a relatively small group of proteins, of which expression or function is lost in cancer cells as metastatic competence increases. When reconstituted in model systems, they suppress in vivo metastasis without abrogating tumour growth. Experimental and epidemiological data suggest that tumours shed many cells into circulation by the time of patient diagnosis. Some of these die in the circulation or after attachment in distant organs, whereas others survive and either remain dormant as a micrometastasis or grow to colonize the organ, forming a clinical macrometastasis. Therefore, suppressing the micrometastasis-to-macrometastasis transition, which is the point at which many metastasis suppressors function, should provide a promising therapeutic window. Although targeting a negative regulator is technically challenging, recent reports have successfully reinduced expression, administered the gene product itself or targeted druggable molecules regulated by the suppressor gene. As functional genomic and proteomic technologies increase the speed and ease of discovery of new metastasis suppressors, the field of targets is likely to swell both in number and kind, particularly given the recent description of microRNA metastasis suppressors. As the field grows, and additional novel strategies for therapeutic intervention are developed, unanswered questions will become more salient. Among others, questions of generality (the relevance of a particular metastasis suppressor to different types of cancer), specificity (the relevance of a particular metastasis suppressor to suppression of metastasis in different second sites) and toxicity to normal cells ( BOX 2 ) will need to be addressed in a systematic manner. Future candidate metastasis suppressor genes may prove more or less tractable as targets. Nonetheless, the strategies described herein form a framework for transposing these promising findings to other genes, and novel informatic technologies might ease drug discovery and patient selection for future metastasis suppressor-based therapies. Box 2 Key unresolved questions in metastasis suppressor research Generality The relevance of most described metastasis suppressors across various types of cancer has only been superficially validated in pathological studies; rates of loss of expression and mutation, as appropriate to therapeutic strategies, must be carefully and independently validated. Given observations of early, wide cellular dissemination of tumour cells 24 , are metastasis suppressors that chiefly inhibit invasion the relevant targets? Specificity Recent reports suggest rich complexity in the genetic regulation of organ-specific tropism of metastasis 112 , 113 . It follows that metastasis suppressor function might also be highly organ specific. The ability of any given metastasis suppressor gene to suppress metastases to multiple organs has only just begun to be assessed, with two recent reports examining the role of metastasis suppressors in metastasis to multiple organs 82 , 114 . Adaptability As a corollary to the above questions, is it true that a strategy reconstituting a metastasis suppressor should necessarily only work in cancers where the suppressor or its function is commonly lost? Might its reconstitution in ‘irrelevant’ cancer types still target latent pathways resulting in the same goal of suppression of metastasis? Toxicity One of the theoretical advantages of reconstituting a lost, negative regulator such as a suppressor is that toxicity is likely to be lower than when poisoning a positive regulator that operates physiologically in normal cells. Has the observation that several metastasis suppressors impinge directly and negatively on essential cell signalling pathways 4 called this postulate into question? Integration The integration of metastasis suppressor-targeting therapeutics into current therapeutic regimens is non-trivial: would therapy resulting in suppression of distant proliferation of micrometastases not decrease sensitivity to traditional cytotoxic chemotherapeutics? Patient selection Several targeted agents now available for cancer therapy have been shown to be highly efficacious in patient subsets exhibiting particular molecular lesions. What biomarkers would be used for individualized therapy targeting metastasis suppressor genes? Is a primary tumour the appropriate tissue to analyse? Trial design Patients who enter clinical trials often have failed standard therapies and developed gross metastatic recurrences. Could such candidates even potentially benefit from metastasis suppression therapies? At a glance Metastasis accounts for the preponderance of morbidity and mortality in cancer, and accumulating evidence suggests that dissemination of tumour cells may occur earlier in the development of cancer than previously appreciated. Metastasis is regulated either positively or negatively by proteins that promote steps in the metastatic cascade or those that suppress them. Metastasis suppressor genes encode proteins that prevent or reduce the development of metastases in vivo , without simultaneously affecting primary tumour growth. This is in contrast to tumour suppressors, which affect primary tumorigenesis. Metastasis suppressor proteins are lost primarily during cancer progression and not during transformation. Until recently, relatively few metastasis suppressor genes had been characterized. However, expanding genomic technology has made possible in recent years the description of many metastasis suppressor genes impinging on a wide variety of cellular processes. Although metastasis suppressor genes have been shown to work at multiple steps in the process of metastasis, several have been recently demonstrated to specifically suppress the colonization step of metastasis, the process by which solitary or small clusters of tumour cells living in a second organ site (micrometastases) grow to form clinically apparent and lethal macrometastases. Recent work has shown techniques that restore metastasis suppressor function. These include re-expression of the gene from the endogenous locus or by exogenous gene therapy, direct administration of the protein itself and targeting important metastasis mediators downstream of the suppressor that are reciprocally induced with metastasis suppressor protein losses.  Generality The relevance of most described metastasis suppressors across various types of cancer has only been superficially validated in pathological studies; rates of loss of expression and mutation, as appropriate to therapeutic strategies, must be carefully and independently validated. Given observations of early, wide cellular dissemination of tumour cells 24 , are metastasis suppressors that chiefly inhibit invasion the relevant targets?  Specificity Recent reports suggest rich complexity in the genetic regulation of organ-specific tropism of metastasis 112 , 113 . It follows that metastasis suppressor function might also be highly organ specific. The ability of any given metastasis suppressor gene to suppress metastases to multiple organs has only just begun to be assessed, with two recent reports examining the role of metastasis suppressors in metastasis to multiple organs 82 , 114 .  Adaptability As a corollary to the above questions, is it true that a strategy reconstituting a metastasis suppressor should necessarily only work in cancers where the suppressor or its function is commonly lost? Might its reconstitution in ‘irrelevant’ cancer types still target latent pathways resulting in the same goal of suppression of metastasis?  Toxicity One of the theoretical advantages of reconstituting a lost, negative regulator such as a suppressor is that toxicity is likely to be lower than when poisoning a positive regulator that operates physiologically in normal cells. Has the observation that several metastasis suppressors impinge directly and negatively on essential cell signalling pathways 4 called this postulate into question?  Integration The integration of metastasis suppressor-targeting therapeutics into current therapeutic regimens is non-trivial: would therapy resulting in suppression of distant proliferation of micrometastases not decrease sensitivity to traditional cytotoxic chemotherapeutics?  Patient selection Several targeted agents now available for cancer therapy have been shown to be highly efficacious in patient subsets exhibiting particular molecular lesions. What biomarkers would be used for individualized therapy targeting metastasis suppressor genes? Is a primary tumour the appropriate tissue to analyse?  Trial design Patients who enter clinical trials often have failed standard therapies and developed gross metastatic recurrences. Could such candidates even potentially benefit from metastasis suppression therapies?  At a glance Metastasis accounts for the preponderance of morbidity and mortality in cancer, and accumulating evidence suggests that dissemination of tumour cells may occur earlier in the development of cancer than previously appreciated. Metastasis is regulated either positively or negatively by proteins that promote steps in the metastatic cascade or those that suppress them. Metastasis suppressor genes encode proteins that prevent or reduce the development of metastases in vivo , without simultaneously affecting primary tumour growth. This is in contrast to tumour suppressors, which affect primary tumorigenesis. Metastasis suppressor proteins are lost primarily during cancer progression and not during transformation. Until recently, relatively few metastasis suppressor genes had been characterized. However, expanding genomic technology has made possible in recent years the description of many metastasis suppressor genes impinging on a wide variety of cellular processes. Although metastasis suppressor genes have been shown to work at multiple steps in the process of metastasis, several have been recently demonstrated to specifically suppress the colonization step of metastasis, the process by which solitary or small clusters of tumour cells living in a second organ site (micrometastases) grow to form clinically apparent and lethal macrometastases. Recent work has shown techniques that restore metastasis suppressor function. These include re-expression of the gene from the endogenous locus or by exogenous gene therapy, direct administration of the protein itself and targeting important metastasis mediators downstream of the suppressor that are reciprocally induced with metastasis suppressor protein losses.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Metastasis suppressor genes and steps in the metastatic cascade in human cancer The biological process of metastasis is a complex cascade with multiple steps in which suppressor activity may prevent clinically apparent metastasis. Given the prevalence and mortality of human breast cancer, we focus here on this tissue type, although these principles apply to most solid malignancies. In the primary tumour, deregulation of oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes mediates the conversion of normal cells to a neoplastic phenotype 1 . By definition, metastasis suppressor genes do not prevent these steps, but must function subsequently in the cascade as shown. Invasion of the basement membrane, stroma and vasculature constitutes one key, negative prognostic turning point in the natural history of breast and other cancer types. Many metastasis suppressor genes, including NM23 (REF. 40 ), DLC1 (REF. 115 ), KAI1 (REF. 116 ) and NDRG1 (REF. 70 ) have been shown to function in in vitro and in vivo surrogates of invasion in breast cancer cells. Nodal metastasis is also a key prognostic stage for breast cancer patients 117 , now aggressively managed clinically. Loss of the metastasis suppressors Raf kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP) 66 and RhoGTPase dissociation inhibitor 2 (RHOGDI2) 93 have been shown to be associated with nodal metastasis in breast cancer. Survival during circulatory dissemination is another step of the metastatic cascade that has been studied in less detail; however, several reports have suggested that resistance to anoikis is important for metastasis 118 and that the metastasis suppressor gene BRMS1 (breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1) increases anoikis 114 , 119 . Because increasing data suggest that tumours are widely disseminated on an individual cellular basis even at the time of diagnosis of localized disease, the role of metastasis suppressors in preventing outgrowth of isolated single or cellular clusters (micrometastases), known as the ‘colonization stage’ of metastasis, is compelling. NM23 (REF. 29 ), KAI1 (REF. 54 ), RHOGDI2 (REF. 94 ) and KISS1 (REFs 82 , 120 ) have been shown to function at this stage. Figure 2 Strategies for restoring metastasis suppressor function Given the key roles shown for metastasis suppressors in vivo and the association of their loss with negative outcomes in patients, re-expression of these proteins would seem a rational therapeutic strategy. This has been accomplished by strategies that are both specific — for example, re-induction of endogenous NM23 expression by medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) 45 ( a ) — and general — for example, the use of chromatin-modifying drugs 67 , 70 , 71 ( b ), including trichostatin A, which induces repressed gene expression by inhibiting histone deacetylases (HDACs). Exogenous viral gene therapy for re-expression of metastasis suppressor protein has also been reported ( c ) and has shown promise in preclinical models 49 , 61 , 62 . Non-viral vectors 121 for suppressor re-expression, including naked plasmid and cationic liposomes, have also been reported 61 . Direct administration of the metastasis suppressor protein is another strategy ( d ). In at least two cases, the metastasis suppressor protein itself is a soluble, secreted factor, amenable to direct therapeutic administration, in a fashion analogous to that of insulin. In 2001, Ohtaki et al. reported the use of osmotic pumps to administer KISS1 to prevent the development of metastasis 83 . This may proceed through induction of dormancy through KISS1R or another receptor 82 and, for KISS1, small molecule mimetics are also under development 84 . Figure 3 Targeting key genes downstream of metastasis suppressors In the case of two metastasis suppressor genes, NM23 (REFs 40 , 100 ) and RhoGTPase dissociation inhibitor 2 (RHOGDI2) 95 , 98 , investigators have found by microarray expression profiling that loss of metastasis suppressor expression results in transcriptional deregulation. a. By re-expressing RHOGDI2 in metastatic bladder cancer cells and comparing transcripts repressed by the suppressor to genes overexpressed in invasive bladder tumours, Titus et al. discovered both endothelin 1 (ET1), which is druggable by an inhibitor of its receptor, atrasentan, and neuromedin U, which is a potent pro-metastatic gene that cannot yet be targeted therapeutically. b. By microarray profiling breast cancer cells re-expressing NM23 and mutants lacking suppressor activity, then screening differentially expressed transcripts for appropriate correlations to NM23 expression levels in human tumours 40 , Horak et al. uncovered LPAR1, a lysophosphatidic acid receptor, among other genes, as a key downstream target potentiating motility and metastasis 100 in breast cancer cells. An antagonist of LPAR1, Ki16425, has been reported and is being evaluated for therapeutic activity 32 . Figure 4 Targeting metastasis suppressor signatures through the Connectivity Map and COXen (Coexpression extrapolation) Advanced informatic technologies including the Connectivity Map 103 allow for screening an entire ‘metastasis suppressor-expressing cell’-type gene expression signature against gene expression changes induced by compounds, potentially systematically identifying molecules capable of inducing non-metastatic gene expression and phenotype. The list of hits is then further filtered using the COXEN algorithm, which provides a list of those suppressor signature-inducing agents that additionally have therapeutic efficacy in the NCI-60 cell line system 99 and, most importantly, predicts function in patient tumours 104 . Together, this integrated approach could deliver therapeutics based on metastasis suppressor biology to the clinic with a high likelihood of efficacy. Timeline Key advances in the metastasis suppressor field Table 1 Metastasis suppressor genes: functions and reported targeting strategies Symbol Alias(es) Function(s) Potential targeting strategy BMP4 BMP2B Soluble cytokine Direct therapeutic administration of suppressor protein * BRMS1 None Chromatin and transcriptional regulation; regulation of gap junctions None published at present CTGF CCN2, IGFBP8 Soluble cytokine None published at present DLC1 ARHGAP7 Regulation of RhoGTPase signalling Re-induction of endogenous gene through HDAC inhibition 69 KAI1 CD82, kangai 1 Inhibition of EGFR signaling; induction of senescence through interaction with DARC Therapeutic re-induction of endogenous gene by plant extracts 60 ; viral 62 and non-viral 61 gene therapy KISS1 KiSS-1, metastin Soluble ligand for G-protein-coupled receptor Direct therapeutic administration of suppressor protein 83 ; possibly small molecule mimetics 84 MKK4 MAP2K4 Signal transduction Antibody-mediated activation pathway upstream of MKK4 (REF. 122 ) NDRG1 CAP43, DRG1, RTP Unknown Induced by iron chelators 123 , p53 (REF. 124 ) and PTEN expression 125 NM23 NME1, NM23-H1 Histidine kinase activity to KSR1, decreasing Ras signalling; regulation of downstream gene expression Re-induction of endogenous gene 42 , 47 , 48 ; viral gene therapy 49 ; inhibition of downstream genes 40 RHOGDI2 ARHGDIB, LyGDI, GDID4 Regulation of Rho family member activation; regulation of downstream gene expression Inhibition of downstream genes 95 RKIP PEBP1 Binds to and inhibits Raf kinase activity and downstream signalling Epigenetic re-induction of endogenous gene 67 * R. Anderson, unpublished data, also presented at the 2008 Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research-Metastasis Research Society, Vancouver, Canada. BMP4 , bone morphogenetic protein 4; BRMS1 , breast cancer metastasis suppressor 1; DARC, Duffy chemokine receptor; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; HDAC, histone deacetylase; MKK4 , MAPK kinase 4; RHOGDI2 , RhoGTPase dissociation inhibitor 2; RKIP, Raf kinase inhibitory protein. 