Watching the watcher: regulation of p53 by mitochondria p53 has been referred to as the ‘guardian of the genome’ because of its role in protecting the cell from DNA damage. p53 performs its duties by regulating cell-cycle progression and DNA repair and, in cases of irreparable DNA damage, by executing programmed cell death. Mitochondria are an important target of transcription-dependent and -independent actions of p53 to carry out the apoptotic function. However, increasing evidence suggests that p53 activity is regulated by mitochondria. Cellular insults that alter mitochondrial function can have important consequences on p53 activity. In light of these new findings, the following review focuses on p53/mitochondria connections, in particular how reactive oxygen species generated at mitochondria regulate p53 activity. A better understanding of the mechanisms by which mitochondria regulate p53 may have an impact on our understanding of the development and progression of many diseases, especially cancer.  Conclusion p53 is vital to the life of a cell, regulating many activities that maintain genomic stability and cell viability through both transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms. The mitochondrion is an important target of p53 activity. While p53 regulates many mitochondrial functions, the mitochondrion can also regulate p53 accumulation and activity through ROS-mediated mechanisms. As mitochondrial activity is altered by UV exposure, control of p53 by the mitochondrion may prove to be important in UV-induced skin carcinogenesis, and an understanding of this relationship might lead to improved skin cancer therapies and chemoprevention.  Future perspective To better understand the mechanisms by which mitochondrial ROS regulate p53 stability and activity, many questions remain to be answered. Various ROS are produced by mitochondria, including superoxide, hydrogen peroxide and peroxynitrite. Post-translational modifications of p53 are important for the stabilization, as well as the activation, of p53. Do these ROS alter p53 activity by directly modifying p53 protein or by altering the activity of certain proteins that interact with and/or alter p53, such as MDM2, molecular chaperones, or even other members of the p53 family (p63 and p73)? How does p53 get to mitochondria without mitochondrial targeting sequences? Once p53 migrates to mitochondria, does it undergo further ROS-mediated modifications that alter its activity within the organelle? Post-translational modifications have diverse effects on p53 activity, with some modifications increasing and others decreasing p53 activity. Do the same conditions that cause p53 to migrate to mitochondria also cause p53 to later migrate to the nucleus? Does p53 mitochondrial localization alter the activity of mitochondria in such a way that a different set of signals causes p53 nuclear translocation? Finally, what roles do p53 gene polymorphisms and mutations play in ROS-induced p53 mitochondrial translocation? For instance, the Arg72 variant of p53 has a greater affinity toward mitochondrial translocation than the Pro72 variant has. Do other polymorphisms or mutations also modify p53 subcellular localization, thereby affecting p53-induced cell-cycle regulation or apoptosis? p53 polymorphisms and mutations may have two effects on p53 that make them more susceptible to ROS-mediated modification. First, changes in the amino acid sequence of p53 introduced by mutations and/or polymorphisms may alter the conformation of p53 in such a way that reactive amino acids are available for modification. Second, these mutations and polymorphisms may themselves be reactive toward either direct modification by ROS or some ROS-mediated post-translational modification. Executive Summary Actions of p53 at mitochondria p53 controls the expression of genes that regulate oxidative phosphorylation ( SCO2 ) or are involved in pathways that feed into oxidative phosphorylation ( PGM and TIGAR ). p53 maintains mitochondrial genome stability by directly interacting with proteins involved in mitochondrial base excision repair. p53 controls mitochondria-centered apoptosis in two ways: p53 regulates the expression of genes that participate in apoptosis (transcription-dependent actions); and p53 translocates to mitochondria and physically interacts with mitochondrial proteins that carry out apoptosis (transcription-independent actions). Mitochondria & reactive oxygen and nitrogen species Mitochrondria are a major source of reactive oxygen species (ROS) through superoxide radical formation at complexes I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) and III (ubiquinol-cytocohrome c oxidoreductase). Mitochondria contain several enzymes that detoxify ROS (manganese superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and peroxiredoxin). p53 oligomerization and DNA-binding activity is altered by its redox status through changes in conformation, changes in zinc binding at the DNA-binding domain and oxidation of key cysteine residues. Changes in mitochondrial function directly impact p53 activity by altering ROS levels. Implications for skin cancer UV irradiation causes increased oxidative stress, in part, through increased mitochondrial ROS production and changes in mitochondrial membrane potential. UV irradiation results in accumulation of p53 due to increased ROS production and decreased mitochondria membrane potential.  Executive Summary Actions of p53 at mitochondria p53 controls the expression of genes that regulate oxidative phosphorylation ( SCO2 ) or are involved in pathways that feed into oxidative phosphorylation ( PGM and TIGAR ). p53 maintains mitochondrial genome stability by directly interacting with proteins involved in mitochondrial base excision repair. p53 controls mitochondria-centered apoptosis in two ways: p53 regulates the expression of genes that participate in apoptosis (transcription-dependent actions); and p53 translocates to mitochondria and physically interacts with mitochondrial proteins that carry out apoptosis (transcription-independent actions). Mitochondria & reactive oxygen and nitrogen species Mitochrondria are a major source of reactive oxygen species (ROS) through superoxide radical formation at complexes I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) and III (ubiquinol-cytocohrome c oxidoreductase). Mitochondria contain several enzymes that detoxify ROS (manganese superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and peroxiredoxin). p53 oligomerization and DNA-binding activity is altered by its redox status through changes in conformation, changes in zinc binding at the DNA-binding domain and oxidation of key cysteine residues. Changes in mitochondrial function directly impact p53 activity by altering ROS levels. Implications for skin cancer UV irradiation causes increased oxidative stress, in part, through increased mitochondrial ROS production and changes in mitochondrial membrane potential. UV irradiation results in accumulation of p53 due to increased ROS production and decreased mitochondria membrane potential.  Actions of p53 at mitochondria p53 controls the expression of genes that regulate oxidative phosphorylation ( SCO2 ) or are involved in pathways that feed into oxidative phosphorylation ( PGM and TIGAR ). p53 maintains mitochondrial genome stability by directly interacting with proteins involved in mitochondrial base excision repair. p53 controls mitochondria-centered apoptosis in two ways: p53 regulates the expression of genes that participate in apoptosis (transcription-dependent actions); and p53 translocates to mitochondria and physically interacts with mitochondrial proteins that carry out apoptosis (transcription-independent actions).  Mitochondria & reactive oxygen and nitrogen species Mitochrondria are a major source of reactive oxygen species (ROS) through superoxide radical formation at complexes I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) and III (ubiquinol-cytocohrome c oxidoreductase). Mitochondria contain several enzymes that detoxify ROS (manganese superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and peroxiredoxin). p53 oligomerization and DNA-binding activity is altered by its redox status through changes in conformation, changes in zinc binding at the DNA-binding domain and oxidation of key cysteine residues. Changes in mitochondrial function directly impact p53 activity by altering ROS levels.  Implications for skin cancer UV irradiation causes increased oxidative stress, in part, through increased mitochondrial ROS production and changes in mitochondrial membrane potential. UV irradiation results in accumulation of p53 due to increased ROS production and decreased mitochondria membrane potential.  Figures Figure 1 Major sources of reactive oxygen species in mitochondria and methods of detoxification Superoxide radicals are produced at complexes I and III. Superoxide is dismutated to hydrogen peroxide by MnSOD. Hydrogen peroxide is then decomposed to water using GPx or PRx. Complex I: NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase; complex II: succinateubiquinone oxidoreductase; complex III: ubiquinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase; complex IV: ferrocytochrome c -oxygen oxidoreductase; complex V: ATP synthase; cyt c : Cytochrome c ; CuZnSOD: Copper–zinc superoxide dismutase; GPx: Glutathione peroxidase; GSH: Reduced glutathione; GSSG: Oxidized glutathione; GSR: Glutathione reductase; MnSOD: Manganese superoxide dismutase; PRx: Peroxiredoxin; Q: Coenzyme Q; TRx: Thioredoxin; TRxR: Thioredoxin reductase; VDAC: Voltage-dependent anion channel. Figure 2 Model for the effects of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production on p53 localization and activity Under cellular stress conditions, mitochondrial dysfunction occurs (1), leading to increased ROS production (2). ROS stimulate p53 activation (3) and localization to the mitochondrial matrix and outer membrane (4), where p53 interacts with different proteins to either rescue the cell from the insult or to kill the cell. Mitochondrial p53 further stimulates ROS production through increased mitochondrial dysfunction, promoting a feed-forward mechanism between ROS production and p53 mitochondrial localization, as well as p53 nuclear translocation and altered expression of p53 target genes (5). Blocking mitochondrial ROS production by various methods (6) prevents ROS-stimulated p53 translocation to the nucleus. MnSOD: Manganese superoxide dismutase; MMP: Matrix metalloproteinase. 