Anticipatory Guidance for Prevention of Childhood Obesity: Design of the MOMS Project The prevalence of childhood overweight and obesity in the United States has increased by more than 100% since 1971. Primary care clinicians have a unique opportunity to influence child health during the first year of life via anticipatory guidance (AG). However, little is known about whether AG regarding feeding and meal structure is effective in promoting optimal nutrition and eating behaviors. The purpose of this project, “Making our Mealtimes Special” (MOMS), was to assess 2 distinct methods of pediatric AG during infancy versus a “usual care” condition, with the ultimate goal of prevention of childhood overweight and obesity. The purpose of this article is to describe the ( a ) study design and rationale, ( b ) implementation plan, ( c ) assessment of outcomes, and ( d ) population enrolled. This project will generate important information on the usefulness of nutritional AG during the first year of life in promoting healthy eating behaviors during early childhood.  Baseline Demographic Characteristics of Mother–Infant Dyads The initial sample consisted of 306 mother–infant dyads (at least 100 per clinic) recruited between June 2005 and March 2006. After excluding 14 infants for foster care entry or medical conditions recognized after enrollment (such as pyloric stenosis and hypothyroidism), the final baseline sample had 292 participants ( Table 3 ). The average maternal age was 23 years (15–42 years), and 42% had a high school diploma or equivalent. The majority of participants received support from Medicaid for their infant’s health care (91%), food stamps (61%), and WIC (94%). The racial distribution of the entire sample was as follows: 53% Black, 37% White, 3% Asian, and 2% Hispanic. There were no demographic differences in the 3 groups at baseline, except that the OP cohort had a significantly higher proportion of African Americans than the other 2 sites (73% OP, 66% BF, 20% MFE; P < .05). More than half (53%) of mothers reported a family history of heart disease and/or diabetes in their parents’ generation. Maternal BMI by self-report ranged from 16 to 57, with a mean of 28; 62% of the mothers were overweight or obese.  Project Implementation Intervention Design and Delivery Site-specific and age-specific written materials were developed by the research team with key points of intervention on each handout ( Table 1 ). These were tailored for ease of readability and reading level at grade 6. The health professional delivering the actual AG could be a physician, pediatric resident, clinic nurse, or clinic medical assistant, depending on the routine clinic procedure at that site. Brief reminders for clinicians were embedded in the infant’s chart, with each key point for age and site. The intervention was designed to be delivered at the 2-, 4-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month pediatric well-child visits, with distinct print materials (handouts) for each of the 3 conditions developed by the research team to correspond with these visits. All parents received the designated clinic-based AG regardless of their enrollment status. The educational materials developed by the research team were translated into both Spanish and Somali (languages often spoken by parents in some of these clinic sites) because equivalency of information was sought for all attending the clinic. Staff Training Clinic personnel were oriented to the project and members of the MOMS research team in separate meetings by site. All clinic staff (physicians, nurses, medical assistants, and clerical staff) were present at the training. The MOMS project staff encouraged strong relational bonds, which resulted in continued collaboration of health care and tracking of mothers participating in the study. Clinicians received breakfast or lunch during the educational sessions, and small thank-you gifts were regularly provided to promote continued support of the program. During these sessions, the importance of nutritional AG in the first year of life was stressed, but clinic staff were specifically not told that the purpose of the project was to compare outcomes across 3 sites. The procedures discussed were as follows: nursing staff were to weigh and measure the child per usual clinic protocol. In addition to recording the weight and height on the infant’s chart, this information was also recorded on a MOMS project handout and given to the mother for her own records. Clinic physicians (and/or nurses or medical assistants, depending on clinic division of responsibility) were responsible for discussing the newly designed nutrition information when providing nutritional AG to the mother and to check appropriate boxes on a written chart or online chart documenting AG delivery. Pilot Study To pilot test the outcome measures planned for the study, a convenience sample of 34 women was recruited. The primary selection criterion required that the mother speak and read English well enough to be able to consent to participate and answer the survey. The pilot study was used to refine or adapt surveys for ease of understanding in the population being studied.  Intervention Design and Delivery Site-specific and age-specific written materials were developed by the research team with key points of intervention on each handout ( Table 1 ). These were tailored for ease of readability and reading level at grade 6. The health professional delivering the actual AG could be a physician, pediatric resident, clinic nurse, or clinic medical assistant, depending on the routine clinic procedure at that site. Brief reminders for clinicians were embedded in the infant’s chart, with each key point for age and site. The intervention was designed to be delivered at the 2-, 4-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month pediatric well-child visits, with distinct print materials (handouts) for each of the 3 conditions developed by the research team to correspond with these visits. All parents received the designated clinic-based AG regardless of their enrollment status. The educational materials developed by the research team were translated into both Spanish and Somali (languages often spoken by parents in some of these clinic sites) because equivalency of information was sought for all attending the clinic.  Staff Training Clinic personnel were oriented to the project and members of the MOMS research team in separate meetings by site. All clinic staff (physicians, nurses, medical assistants, and clerical staff) were present at the training. The MOMS project staff encouraged strong relational bonds, which resulted in continued collaboration of health care and tracking of mothers participating in the study. Clinicians received breakfast or lunch during the educational sessions, and small thank-you gifts were regularly provided to promote continued support of the program. During these sessions, the importance of nutritional AG in the first year of life was stressed, but clinic staff were specifically not told that the purpose of the project was to compare outcomes across 3 sites. The procedures discussed were as follows: nursing staff were to weigh and measure the child per usual clinic protocol. In addition to recording the weight and height on the infant’s chart, this information was also recorded on a MOMS project handout and given to the mother for her own records. Clinic physicians (and/or nurses or medical assistants, depending on clinic division of responsibility) were responsible for discussing the newly designed nutrition information when providing nutritional AG to the mother and to check appropriate boxes on a written chart or online chart documenting AG delivery.  Pilot Study To pilot test the outcome measures planned for the study, a convenience sample of 34 women was recruited. The primary selection criterion required that the mother speak and read English well enough to be able to consent to participate and answer the survey. The pilot study was used to refine or adapt surveys for ease of understanding in the population being studied.  Data Collection Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria After the pilot study was completed and the questionnaire instruments were refined, recruitment for the entire study began. Biological mothers of healthy infants 2 months old or younger were recruited. Exclusion criteria included non-English-speaking mother, infants with gastrointestinal disease other than reflux, those with known congenital heart disease causing cyanosis and/or congestive heart failure, those with metabolic disorders, those born younger than 36 weeks gestation, infants hospitalized at birth for more than 1 week, those with a genetic syndrome, or infants in foster care placement. Many exclusion criteria were not obvious at enrollment (diseases or conditions were recognized during the first year of life), resulting in patients being excluded from the study later, after enrollment. Recruitment Process On arrival at their infant’s primary care clinic, the research assistant approached a potential participant, described the study, and received written, informed consent. Following completion of the interview, participants were given a packet of materials that contained a $10 gift certificate to a local grocery store, a magnet with the study phone number and contact information, and a copy of the incentive program for participation. Participants were told that they would be contacted again at their child’s 6-month and 12-month well-child visits for further surveys and that gift cards of increasing value would also be awarded at that time. Participants were also told that they might be selected for a short phone conversation during the study as well (ie, process interviews). The Nationwide Children’s Hospital Research Institute institutional review board approved the project and the consenting procedures. Survey Procedures Participants viewed a paper copy of the questionnaire while the research assistant read each question and entered the answer into a personal digital assistant, or the participant marked the appropriate response on the paper survey. The infant’s height and weight were extracted from the clinic chart by research personnel for the project database. Surveys were repeated at the 6-month and 12-month well-child visits, with grocery gift certificates of $15 and $20, respectively, for filling out surveys. If the research team could not locate the parent at the child’s well-child visit, a telephone survey was performed.  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria After the pilot study was completed and the questionnaire instruments were refined, recruitment for the entire study began. Biological mothers of healthy infants 2 months old or younger were recruited. Exclusion criteria included non-English-speaking mother, infants with gastrointestinal disease other than reflux, those with known congenital heart disease causing cyanosis and/or congestive heart failure, those with metabolic disorders, those born younger than 36 weeks gestation, infants hospitalized at birth for more than 1 week, those with a genetic syndrome, or infants in foster care placement. Many exclusion criteria were not obvious at enrollment (diseases or conditions were recognized during the first year of life), resulting in patients being excluded from the study later, after enrollment.  Recruitment Process On arrival at their infant’s primary care clinic, the research assistant approached a potential participant, described the study, and received written, informed consent. Following completion of the interview, participants were given a packet of materials that contained a $10 gift certificate to a local grocery store, a magnet with the study phone number and contact information, and a copy of the incentive program for participation. Participants were told that they would be contacted again at their child’s 6-month and 12-month well-child visits for further surveys and that gift cards of increasing value would also be awarded at that time. Participants were also told that they might be selected for a short phone conversation during the study as well (ie, process interviews). The Nationwide Children’s Hospital Research Institute institutional review board approved the project and the consenting procedures.  Survey Procedures Participants viewed a paper copy of the questionnaire while the research assistant read each question and entered the answer into a personal digital assistant, or the participant marked the appropriate response on the paper survey. The infant’s height and weight were extracted from the clinic chart by research personnel for the project database. Surveys were repeated at the 6-month and 12-month well-child visits, with grocery gift certificates of $15 and $20, respectively, for filling out surveys. If the research team could not locate the parent at the child’s well-child visit, a telephone survey was performed.  Evaluation Tools Table 2 describes the survey instrument information at baseline and at 6 and 12 months. Maternal Variables Maternal body mass index by self-report of height and weight (BMI<sup>S</sup>) This was calculated from mom’s self-reported current height (inches) and weight (pounds). True obesity prevalence (by BMI) has been shown to be 5% higher in women by actual measurement than by self-reported height and weight (BMIS). 34 When corrected for age, the BMIS had a sensitivity of 91% and a positive predictive value of 94.7%. Self-reported BMI in a group of women 18 to 25 years of age underestimated measured BMI by 0.7 units. 35 Regardless of education level, race/ethnicity, or marital status, women underestimated their weight by 3.5 pounds and overestimated their height by 0.2 inches. 35 Health and other demographic variables Questions included information on family history of heart disease, diabetes, maternal gestational diabetes, age, education, race, household income (assessed by zip code, received WIC, payment source for health care), and family structure. Nutritional intake This questionnaire included 5 questions from the Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) about fruit and vegetable intake. 36 In addition, 7 questions were added assessing carbohydrate, protein, fast food, soda, and water intake. Each mom was asked how often she ate or drank each of these foods (times per day, times per week, or never). A final question asked whether mom ate fresh, canned, or frozen fruits and vegetables. The BRFSS has a sensitivity of 0.38 and a specificity of 0.87 in identifying fruits and vegetables consumed in the past 24 hours when compared with a 24-hour recall. When assessing fruit and vegetable intake over the past year, the BRFSS had a sensitivity of 0.48 and a specificity of 0.76. 36 Eating pattern behavior questionnaire (EPBQ) The original EPBQ, consisting of 51 items, was developed as a predictor of fat and fiber intake. Factor analysis of those items yielded 6 subscales that measured ( a ) low-fat eating, ( b ) emotional eating, ( c ) snacking on sweets, ( d ) cultural/lifestyle behaviors, ( e ) haphazard planning, and ( f ) meal skipping. The measure has been shown to correlate significantly with macronutrient intake as measured by more extensive food frequency measures ( r = 0.33–0.58); it also demonstrates construct validity compared with other eating behavior measures. 37 Fourteen items from the 6 sub-scales were used in the MOMS questionnaire. Emotional health: Center for Epidemiologic Study–Short Depression Scale (CES-D10) A measure of maternal depression was included as a potential confounder of eating behaviors and child growth because of the profound effects maternal depression can have on mother–child interaction. This 10-item instrument has a substantial internal consistency (Cronbach’s ? = .84). The original CES-D has a sensitivity of 0.95 and a specificity of 0.70 among low-income women. 38 Emotional health: Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) This instrument is a mood scale consisting of 10 positive moods and 10 negative moods. This scale was substituted for the CES-D10 at the 12-month interview because research staff found that some concepts embedded in the CES-D10 were difficult for new mothers (especially those born in another country) to answer or were face-threatening. Therefore, at the 6-month survey, the PANAS was used. This alternative measure asks about a range of positive and negative moods. Moms were asked to what extent they had felt each mood (afraid, enthusiastic) in the past week. Answers were recorded on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from very slightly to very much . In a sample of 1003 adults, the PANAS was highly correlated with the Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale ( r = 0.60), and the Cronbach’s ?s were .89 for the positive scale (positive affect, PA) and .85 for the negative scale (NA). 39 USDA food security/hunger core module Food security was included as a potential confounder of infant growth and maternal eating and feeding patterns. This 6-item module was condensed to 1 question (“How often did you skip meals in the past year?”) after pilot testing. Health numeracy Two questions were taken from the numeracy section of the Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults (TOFHLA). The TOFHLA was designed to measure functional health literacy— both numeracy and reading comprehension—using health-related materials such as prescription bottle labels and appointment slips. These questions were included to determine whether specific portion recommendations (as in the OP program) would be understood by mothers in the project. Eating habits (This tool and the following meal planning evaluation tool were developed by our research team of pediatricians, nurses, health communication experts, and an epidemiologist following an in-depth review of the literature). This consisted of 10 questions about eating breakfast, eating family meals, skipping meals, dining location, and watching TV while assessing mom’s eating habits on a daily and weekly basis. The number of times per day, week, or never that mom ate breakfast, family meals, or skipped meals were recorded. Dining location for both the main meal of the day and breakfast are coded on a scale of 1 to 4 depending on various locations. Meal planning This questionnaire assessed mom’s perceived susceptibility and response efficacy to evaluate her ability to plan meals. Mom’s thoughts about the ease, time, expense, and health benefits of meal planning were evaluated by 14 questions, which were scored on a scale of strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5). Child Variables Anthropomorphic measures Child height and weight at baseline, 6 months, 12 months, and 15 months for a subsample (who had reached 15 months of age by the end of the project time period of 2 years) were extracted by chart reviews performed by research personnel. The weight and height data closest in time to the missed well-child visit (if available) was extracted from their chart. Child feeding (This and the following questionnaire on infant nutrition were developed by the research team.) The 12-month questionnaire included 5 items pertaining to the influence of maternal role modeling on infant eating. Questions focused on mothers’ reports of restricting food intake or pressuring the child to eat. Items such as “I have to be sure that my child finishes all of the food on the plate” were scored on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree . Infant nutrition Participants who were currently breast-feeding were asked how they thought their dietary intake influenced their infant’s growth. Based on a 5-point Likert scale, moms were asked 7 questions about dieting while breast-feeding and the importance of good nutrition. For formula-fed infants, the number of ounces that the infant drank per day was recorded. Both mothers who breast-feed and formula-feed were asked 2 questions about their infant’s satiety cues: “When my baby cries, it is because he/she is hungry” and “When my baby falls asleep during feeding, I still try to finish the bottle,” which were based on a 5-point Likert scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree . All participants were asked about feeding preparation, such as warming the bottle, adding sweeteners or cereal to the bottle, or giving their infant juice. Questions about infant meals and snacks were added at the 6-month data collection point. Process Evaluation Process data were collected in 3 ways: ( a ) chart review of each participant’s child, ( b ) telephone survey (ie, 4 months, 9 months, and 15 months) to assess the delivery mechanisms used for the nutrition education messages, and ( c ) clinician surveys of personnel at each of the 3 clinics. Chart review The charts were reviewed at the 2-, 4-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month visits to assess the delivery of AG by noting if appropriate boxes (which were next to written cues for AG elements) were checked. Telephone surveys The telephone survey covered the following information: information dissemination (ie, receipt of handout at well-child visit, receipt of verbal AG by clinic staff member), information comprehension (ie, read handout, questions sufficiently answered), and staff recording of child weight and height. The number of participants was as follows: 4-month survey, n = 50; 9-month survey, n = 54; and 15-month survey (n = 89). Clinician surveys A clinician survey was also used twice to understand attitudes of clinical staff toward implementing the nutritional AG at their clinical site. Elements of this survey included demographics (ie, clinician role, work history, and gender); clinical role regarding project (ie, message delivery of AG, message delivery of handout, records child’s height/ weight); and perception of MOMS staff, attitudes toward the project, and barriers to message delivery or project effectiveness and future assessment of MOMS (ie, perceptions of program expansion to other children’s network clinics). Baseline Demographic Characteristics of Mother–Infant Dyads The initial sample consisted of 306 mother–infant dyads (at least 100 per clinic) recruited between June 2005 and March 2006. After excluding 14 infants for foster care entry or medical conditions recognized after enrollment (such as pyloric stenosis and hypothyroidism), the final baseline sample had 292 participants ( Table 3 ). The average maternal age was 23 years (15–42 years), and 42% had a high school diploma or equivalent. The majority of participants received support from Medicaid for their infant’s health care (91%), food stamps (61%), and WIC (94%). The racial distribution of the entire sample was as follows: 53% Black, 37% White, 3% Asian, and 2% Hispanic. There were no demographic differences in the 3 groups at baseline, except that the OP cohort had a significantly higher proportion of African Americans than the other 2 sites (73% OP, 66% BF, 20% MFE; P < .05). More than half (53%) of mothers reported a family history of heart disease and/or diabetes in their parents’ generation. Maternal BMI by self-report ranged from 16 to 57, with a mean of 28; 62% of the mothers were overweight or obese.  Maternal Variables Maternal body mass index by self-report of height and weight (BMI<sup>S</sup>) This was calculated from mom’s self-reported current height (inches) and weight (pounds). True obesity prevalence (by BMI) has been shown to be 5% higher in women by actual measurement than by self-reported height and weight (BMIS). 34 When corrected for age, the BMIS had a sensitivity of 91% and a positive predictive value of 94.7%. Self-reported BMI in a group of women 18 to 25 years of age underestimated measured BMI by 0.7 units. 35 Regardless of education level, race/ethnicity, or marital status, women underestimated their weight by 3.5 pounds and overestimated their height by 0.2 inches. 35 Health and other demographic variables Questions included information on family history of heart disease, diabetes, maternal gestational diabetes, age, education, race, household income (assessed by zip code, received WIC, payment source for health care), and family structure. Nutritional intake This questionnaire included 5 questions from the Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) about fruit and vegetable intake. 36 In addition, 7 questions were added assessing carbohydrate, protein, fast food, soda, and water intake. Each mom was asked how often she ate or drank each of these foods (times per day, times per week, or never). A final question asked whether mom ate fresh, canned, or frozen fruits and vegetables. The BRFSS has a sensitivity of 0.38 and a specificity of 0.87 in identifying fruits and vegetables consumed in the past 24 hours when compared with a 24-hour recall. When assessing fruit and vegetable intake over the past year, the BRFSS had a sensitivity of 0.48 and a specificity of 0.76. 36 Eating pattern behavior questionnaire (EPBQ) The original EPBQ, consisting of 51 items, was developed as a predictor of fat and fiber intake. Factor analysis of those items yielded 6 subscales that measured ( a ) low-fat eating, ( b ) emotional eating, ( c ) snacking on sweets, ( d ) cultural/lifestyle behaviors, ( e ) haphazard planning, and ( f ) meal skipping. The measure has been shown to correlate significantly with macronutrient intake as measured by more extensive food frequency measures ( r = 0.33–0.58); it also demonstrates construct validity compared with other eating behavior measures. 37 Fourteen items from the 6 sub-scales were used in the MOMS questionnaire. Emotional health: Center for Epidemiologic Study–Short Depression Scale (CES-D10) A measure of maternal depression was included as a potential confounder of eating behaviors and child growth because of the profound effects maternal depression can have on mother–child interaction. This 10-item instrument has a substantial internal consistency (Cronbach’s ? = .84). The original CES-D has a sensitivity of 0.95 and a specificity of 0.70 among low-income women. 38 Emotional health: Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) This instrument is a mood scale consisting of 10 positive moods and 10 negative moods. This scale was substituted for the CES-D10 at the 12-month interview because research staff found that some concepts embedded in the CES-D10 were difficult for new mothers (especially those born in another country) to answer or were face-threatening. Therefore, at the 6-month survey, the PANAS was used. This alternative measure asks about a range of positive and negative moods. Moms were asked to what extent they had felt each mood (afraid, enthusiastic) in the past week. Answers were recorded on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from very slightly to very much . In a sample of 1003 adults, the PANAS was highly correlated with the Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale ( r = 0.60), and the Cronbach’s ?s were .89 for the positive scale (positive affect, PA) and .85 for the negative scale (NA). 39 USDA food security/hunger core module Food security was included as a potential confounder of infant growth and maternal eating and feeding patterns. This 6-item module was condensed to 1 question (“How often did you skip meals in the past year?”) after pilot testing. Health numeracy Two questions were taken from the numeracy section of the Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults (TOFHLA). The TOFHLA was designed to measure functional health literacy— both numeracy and reading comprehension—using health-related materials such as prescription bottle labels and appointment slips. These questions were included to determine whether specific portion recommendations (as in the OP program) would be understood by mothers in the project. Eating habits (This tool and the following meal planning evaluation tool were developed by our research team of pediatricians, nurses, health communication experts, and an epidemiologist following an in-depth review of the literature). This consisted of 10 questions about eating breakfast, eating family meals, skipping meals, dining location, and watching TV while assessing mom’s eating habits on a daily and weekly basis. The number of times per day, week, or never that mom ate breakfast, family meals, or skipped meals were recorded. Dining location for both the main meal of the day and breakfast are coded on a scale of 1 to 4 depending on various locations. Meal planning This questionnaire assessed mom’s perceived susceptibility and response efficacy to evaluate her ability to plan meals. Mom’s thoughts about the ease, time, expense, and health benefits of meal planning were evaluated by 14 questions, which were scored on a scale of strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5).  Maternal body mass index by self-report of height and weight (BMI<sup>S</sup>) This was calculated from mom’s self-reported current height (inches) and weight (pounds). True obesity prevalence (by BMI) has been shown to be 5% higher in women by actual measurement than by self-reported height and weight (BMIS). 34 When corrected for age, the BMIS had a sensitivity of 91% and a positive predictive value of 94.7%. Self-reported BMI in a group of women 18 to 25 years of age underestimated measured BMI by 0.7 units. 35 Regardless of education level, race/ethnicity, or marital status, women underestimated their weight by 3.5 pounds and overestimated their height by 0.2 inches. 35  Health and other demographic variables Questions included information on family history of heart disease, diabetes, maternal gestational diabetes, age, education, race, household income (assessed by zip code, received WIC, payment source for health care), and family structure.  Nutritional intake This questionnaire included 5 questions from the Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) about fruit and vegetable intake. 36 In addition, 7 questions were added assessing carbohydrate, protein, fast food, soda, and water intake. Each mom was asked how often she ate or drank each of these foods (times per day, times per week, or never). A final question asked whether mom ate fresh, canned, or frozen fruits and vegetables. The BRFSS has a sensitivity of 0.38 and a specificity of 0.87 in identifying fruits and vegetables consumed in the past 24 hours when compared with a 24-hour recall. When assessing fruit and vegetable intake over the past year, the BRFSS had a sensitivity of 0.48 and a specificity of 0.76. 36  Eating pattern behavior questionnaire (EPBQ) The original EPBQ, consisting of 51 items, was developed as a predictor of fat and fiber intake. Factor analysis of those items yielded 6 subscales that measured ( a ) low-fat eating, ( b ) emotional eating, ( c ) snacking on sweets, ( d ) cultural/lifestyle behaviors, ( e ) haphazard planning, and ( f ) meal skipping. The measure has been shown to correlate significantly with macronutrient intake as measured by more extensive food frequency measures ( r = 0.33–0.58); it also demonstrates construct validity compared with other eating behavior measures. 37 Fourteen items from the 6 sub-scales were used in the MOMS questionnaire.  Emotional health: Center for Epidemiologic Study–Short Depression Scale (CES-D10) A measure of maternal depression was included as a potential confounder of eating behaviors and child growth because of the profound effects maternal depression can have on mother–child interaction. This 10-item instrument has a substantial internal consistency (Cronbach’s ? = .84). The original CES-D has a sensitivity of 0.95 and a specificity of 0.70 among low-income women. 38  Emotional health: Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) This instrument is a mood scale consisting of 10 positive moods and 10 negative moods. This scale was substituted for the CES-D10 at the 12-month interview because research staff found that some concepts embedded in the CES-D10 were difficult for new mothers (especially those born in another country) to answer or were face-threatening. Therefore, at the 6-month survey, the PANAS was used. This alternative measure asks about a range of positive and negative moods. Moms were asked to what extent they had felt each mood (afraid, enthusiastic) in the past week. Answers were recorded on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from very slightly to very much . In a sample of 1003 adults, the PANAS was highly correlated with the Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale ( r = 0.60), and the Cronbach’s ?s were .89 for the positive scale (positive affect, PA) and .85 for the negative scale (NA). 39  USDA food security/hunger core module Food security was included as a potential confounder of infant growth and maternal eating and feeding patterns. This 6-item module was condensed to 1 question (“How often did you skip meals in the past year?”) after pilot testing.  Health numeracy Two questions were taken from the numeracy section of the Test of Functional Health Literacy in Adults (TOFHLA). The TOFHLA was designed to measure functional health literacy— both numeracy and reading comprehension—using health-related materials such as prescription bottle labels and appointment slips. These questions were included to determine whether specific portion recommendations (as in the OP program) would be understood by mothers in the project.  Eating habits (This tool and the following meal planning evaluation tool were developed by our research team of pediatricians, nurses, health communication experts, and an epidemiologist following an in-depth review of the literature). This consisted of 10 questions about eating breakfast, eating family meals, skipping meals, dining location, and watching TV while assessing mom’s eating habits on a daily and weekly basis. The number of times per day, week, or never that mom ate breakfast, family meals, or skipped meals were recorded. Dining location for both the main meal of the day and breakfast are coded on a scale of 1 to 4 depending on various locations.  Meal planning This questionnaire assessed mom’s perceived susceptibility and response efficacy to evaluate her ability to plan meals. Mom’s thoughts about the ease, time, expense, and health benefits of meal planning were evaluated by 14 questions, which were scored on a scale of strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5).  Child Variables Anthropomorphic measures Child height and weight at baseline, 6 months, 12 months, and 15 months for a subsample (who had reached 15 months of age by the end of the project time period of 2 years) were extracted by chart reviews performed by research personnel. The weight and height data closest in time to the missed well-child visit (if available) was extracted from their chart. Child feeding (This and the following questionnaire on infant nutrition were developed by the research team.) The 12-month questionnaire included 5 items pertaining to the influence of maternal role modeling on infant eating. Questions focused on mothers’ reports of restricting food intake or pressuring the child to eat. Items such as “I have to be sure that my child finishes all of the food on the plate” were scored on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree . Infant nutrition Participants who were currently breast-feeding were asked how they thought their dietary intake influenced their infant’s growth. Based on a 5-point Likert scale, moms were asked 7 questions about dieting while breast-feeding and the importance of good nutrition. For formula-fed infants, the number of ounces that the infant drank per day was recorded. Both mothers who breast-feed and formula-feed were asked 2 questions about their infant’s satiety cues: “When my baby cries, it is because he/she is hungry” and “When my baby falls asleep during feeding, I still try to finish the bottle,” which were based on a 5-point Likert scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree . All participants were asked about feeding preparation, such as warming the bottle, adding sweeteners or cereal to the bottle, or giving their infant juice. Questions about infant meals and snacks were added at the 6-month data collection point.  Anthropomorphic measures Child height and weight at baseline, 6 months, 12 months, and 15 months for a subsample (who had reached 15 months of age by the end of the project time period of 2 years) were extracted by chart reviews performed by research personnel. The weight and height data closest in time to the missed well-child visit (if available) was extracted from their chart.  Child feeding (This and the following questionnaire on infant nutrition were developed by the research team.) The 12-month questionnaire included 5 items pertaining to the influence of maternal role modeling on infant eating. Questions focused on mothers’ reports of restricting food intake or pressuring the child to eat. Items such as “I have to be sure that my child finishes all of the food on the plate” were scored on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree .  Infant nutrition Participants who were currently breast-feeding were asked how they thought their dietary intake influenced their infant’s growth. Based on a 5-point Likert scale, moms were asked 7 questions about dieting while breast-feeding and the importance of good nutrition. For formula-fed infants, the number of ounces that the infant drank per day was recorded. Both mothers who breast-feed and formula-feed were asked 2 questions about their infant’s satiety cues: “When my baby cries, it is because he/she is hungry” and “When my baby falls asleep during feeding, I still try to finish the bottle,” which were based on a 5-point Likert scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree . All participants were asked about feeding preparation, such as warming the bottle, adding sweeteners or cereal to the bottle, or giving their infant juice. Questions about infant meals and snacks were added at the 6-month data collection point.  Process Evaluation Process data were collected in 3 ways: ( a ) chart review of each participant’s child, ( b ) telephone survey (ie, 4 months, 9 months, and 15 months) to assess the delivery mechanisms used for the nutrition education messages, and ( c ) clinician surveys of personnel at each of the 3 clinics. Chart review The charts were reviewed at the 2-, 4-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month visits to assess the delivery of AG by noting if appropriate boxes (which were next to written cues for AG elements) were checked. Telephone surveys The telephone survey covered the following information: information dissemination (ie, receipt of handout at well-child visit, receipt of verbal AG by clinic staff member), information comprehension (ie, read handout, questions sufficiently answered), and staff recording of child weight and height. The number of participants was as follows: 4-month survey, n = 50; 9-month survey, n = 54; and 15-month survey (n = 89). Clinician surveys A clinician survey was also used twice to understand attitudes of clinical staff toward implementing the nutritional AG at their clinical site. Elements of this survey included demographics (ie, clinician role, work history, and gender); clinical role regarding project (ie, message delivery of AG, message delivery of handout, records child’s height/ weight); and perception of MOMS staff, attitudes toward the project, and barriers to message delivery or project effectiveness and future assessment of MOMS (ie, perceptions of program expansion to other children’s network clinics).  Chart review The charts were reviewed at the 2-, 4-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month visits to assess the delivery of AG by noting if appropriate boxes (which were next to written cues for AG elements) were checked.  Telephone surveys The telephone survey covered the following information: information dissemination (ie, receipt of handout at well-child visit, receipt of verbal AG by clinic staff member), information comprehension (ie, read handout, questions sufficiently answered), and staff recording of child weight and height. The number of participants was as follows: 4-month survey, n = 50; 9-month survey, n = 54; and 15-month survey (n = 89).  Clinician surveys A clinician survey was also used twice to understand attitudes of clinical staff toward implementing the nutritional AG at their clinical site. Elements of this survey included demographics (ie, clinician role, work history, and gender); clinical role regarding project (ie, message delivery of AG, message delivery of handout, records child’s height/ weight); and perception of MOMS staff, attitudes toward the project, and barriers to message delivery or project effectiveness and future assessment of MOMS (ie, perceptions of program expansion to other children’s network clinics).  Discussion Primary care clinicians have a unique opportunity to influence child health through multiple well-child visits during the first year of life. AG, the “cornerstone of pediatric health supervision visits,” 22 can be tailored to support healthy child and family eating patterns with the ultimate goal of preventing childhood obesity. This project will generate important information on the efficacy of nutritional AG during the first year of life in promoting such behaviors. A unique feature of this project is the MFE intervention, which focuses on the mothers’ own eating behaviors. To our knowledge, using mothers of young children as an “agent of change” for obesity prevention has not yet been studied. Unlike obesity prevention models that require extra time and personnel (home visits, group discussions), our project uses a system that is already in place—the pediatric well-child visit. If successful, the AG messages developed and assessed in this study could be generalized to other pediatric settings with minimal cost for their dissemination.  Discussion Primary care clinicians have a unique opportunity to influence child health through multiple well-child visits during the first year of life. AG, the “cornerstone of pediatric health supervision visits,” 22 can be tailored to support healthy child and family eating patterns with the ultimate goal of preventing childhood obesity. This project will generate important information on the efficacy of nutritional AG during the first year of life in promoting such behaviors. A unique feature of this project is the MFE intervention, which focuses on the mothers’ own eating behaviors. To our knowledge, using mothers of young children as an “agent of change” for obesity prevention has not yet been studied. Unlike obesity prevention models that require extra time and personnel (home visits, group discussions), our project uses a system that is already in place—the pediatric well-child visit. If successful, the AG messages developed and assessed in this study could be generalized to other pediatric settings with minimal cost for their dissemination. 