Bone Quality Test (BQT) scores of fingernails in postmenopausal patients treated with adjuvant letrozole or tamoxifen for early breast cancer SUMMARY Background The relationship between nail and bone may be measurable, thus making the fingernail a potentially valuable tool for assessing bone health for women receiving treatment for breast cancer. In the BIG 1-98 Fingernail Pilot Substudy, Bone Quality Test (BQT) scores of fingernails were measured at two assessment timepoints. Methods Thirteen eligible patients were enrolled into the substudy during their treatment with tamoxifen (4 patients) or letrozole (9 patients). Two fingernails were tested and BQT scores averaged for two assessments six months apart. Results BQT scores collected six months later (second assessment) significantly decreased compared with those at first collection (p =0.007) regardless of treatment and prior fracture. Conclusion The reduction of BQT scores observed in the patients of our small exploratory study during exposure to bone-altering breast cancer treatments is an incentive for larger studies using this technique.  METHODS Study Design The Fingernail Pilot Substudy was launched in April 2005 and closed in July 2007. Postmenopausal women with operated breast cancer, randomized and receiving adjuvant endocrine treatment within BIG 1-98 with either letrozole or tamoxifen (assigned for 5 years) who were still receiving trial treatment (prior to completion of five years trial treatment) and who had not relapsed or had a second primary cancer were eligible for this substudy. The objectives of the substudy are to compare the effects of tamoxifen and letrozole on the fingernails, to compare fingernail assessments for patients who have had a bone fracture and those who have not, and to evaluate the effect of further drug treatment (after 6 months) on the properties of fingernails. The original sample size target was 60 evaluable patients, 15 in each of the four cohorts defined by treatment group and prior occurrence of a bone fracture: patients receiving tamoxifen who had not had a bone fracture; patients receiving letrozole who had not had a bone fracture; patients receiving tamoxifen who had had a bone fracture; patients receiving letrozole who had had a bone fracture. As the BQT techniques are new, there have not been any large-scale studies from which to establish reliable statistics that can be used in power calculations. As a pilot study, 30 in each treatment group and 30 in each bone fracture group (with and without) were considered to be enough to establish reasonably reliable statistics for use in further study sample size calculation. Sixteen patients were eventually enrolled and informed consent was obtained from all. In many participating centers the substudy was either not activated or activated late, and after all of the patients on the BIG 1-98 trial had completed their five year treatment program the Fingernail Pilot Substudy closed. Two fingernail clippings were obtained at the first collection and six months later (i.e. the second collection) for each patient. The BQT scores of the fingernail clippings were obtained by Crescent Diagnostics,, which evaluated different potentially relevant features in the Raman spectra collected from the fingernails. The average of BQT scores of the two fingernail clippings obtained at the same time were used for the analysis. Therefore, for each patient, there are two BQT scores, one at the first collection and the other six months later (i.e. the second collection). All fingernail samples (first and second collections) were analyzed blinded and at the same time. Statistical Methods Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to compare the BQT scores for tamoxifen vs. letrozole and for fracture vs. non-fracture at each assessment. Wilcoxon signed rank tests were used to assess the statistical significance of changes in BQT scores between the two assessments. Wilcoxon sum rank tests were used to compare the change of BQT scores (BQT at second assessment – BQT at first assessment) between the tamoxifen and letrozole groups, and between the fracture and non-fracture groups.  Study Design The Fingernail Pilot Substudy was launched in April 2005 and closed in July 2007. Postmenopausal women with operated breast cancer, randomized and receiving adjuvant endocrine treatment within BIG 1-98 with either letrozole or tamoxifen (assigned for 5 years) who were still receiving trial treatment (prior to completion of five years trial treatment) and who had not relapsed or had a second primary cancer were eligible for this substudy. The objectives of the substudy are to compare the effects of tamoxifen and letrozole on the fingernails, to compare fingernail assessments for patients who have had a bone fracture and those who have not, and to evaluate the effect of further drug treatment (after 6 months) on the properties of fingernails. The original sample size target was 60 evaluable patients, 15 in each of the four cohorts defined by treatment group and prior occurrence of a bone fracture: patients receiving tamoxifen who had not had a bone fracture; patients receiving letrozole who had not had a bone fracture; patients receiving tamoxifen who had had a bone fracture; patients receiving letrozole who had had a bone fracture. As the BQT techniques are new, there have not been any large-scale studies from which to establish reliable statistics that can be used in power calculations. As a pilot study, 30 in each treatment group and 30 in each bone fracture group (with and without) were considered to be enough to establish reasonably reliable statistics for use in further study sample size calculation. Sixteen patients were eventually enrolled and informed consent was obtained from all. In many participating centers the substudy was either not activated or activated late, and after all of the patients on the BIG 1-98 trial had completed their five year treatment program the Fingernail Pilot Substudy closed. Two fingernail clippings were obtained at the first collection and six months later (i.e. the second collection) for each patient. The BQT scores of the fingernail clippings were obtained by Crescent Diagnostics,, which evaluated different potentially relevant features in the Raman spectra collected from the fingernails. The average of BQT scores of the two fingernail clippings obtained at the same time were used for the analysis. Therefore, for each patient, there are two BQT scores, one at the first collection and the other six months later (i.e. the second collection). All fingernail samples (first and second collections) were analyzed blinded and at the same time.  Statistical Methods Wilcoxon rank sum tests were used to compare the BQT scores for tamoxifen vs. letrozole and for fracture vs. non-fracture at each assessment. Wilcoxon signed rank tests were used to assess the statistical significance of changes in BQT scores between the two assessments. Wilcoxon sum rank tests were used to compare the change of BQT scores (BQT at second assessment – BQT at first assessment) between the tamoxifen and letrozole groups, and between the fracture and non-fracture groups.  RESULTS Eligible Patients Of the 16 patients enrolled, three patients were ineligible, all on the tamoxifen arm. Two of these patients had the first sample obtained after treatment completion, and one patient was taking bisphosphonates. The remaining 13 eligible patients were included in this analysis. Figure 1 shows the timing of the two assessments with the five-year treatment period for the 13 eligible patients. The first collection of fingernails ranged from 3.0 to 4.7 years after patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All 13 patients had the first assessment, and 12 patients had the second assessment. Characteristics at the substudy entry for the 13 eligible patients are shown in Table 1 . The average age was 63.8 years. Nine patients received letrozole and 4 patients received tamoxifen. Eight patients had a prior bone fracture. Among these, 3 had bone fractures prior to receiving treatment and 5 had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment. For the 3 patients who had fracture prior to treatment, the sites of fractures were radius right, ribs, tibia; and the occurrences of the fractures ranged from 0.2 year to 3.4 years before the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. For the 5 patients who had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment, the sites of fractures were metacarpal, wrist, pelvis, humerus/wrist, and ankle; and the most recent occurrences of the fractures were 0.2, 4.3, 1.1, 2.6, 1.2 years respectively after the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All the fractures occurring while on treatment were due to trauma. BQT Scores at First and Second Collections Figure 2 gives scatter plots of the BQT scores at the first collection and second collection, and also the differences of BQT scores between the two collections. Table 2 provides the descriptive summary data of the BQT scores and the percentage change of the BQT scores overall, by treatment arms, and by fracture/non-fracture groups. We observed no treatment effect on BQT scores at the first and the second assessments. Also no differences were observed in BQT scores at the first and the second assessments in patients with or without prior fracture. However, clearly there was a consistent decrease of BQT scores from the first collection to the second collection. The BQT scores collected six months later significantly decreased compared with those at first collection (p=0.007; based on signed rank test). This reduction was similar in both treatment groups and fracture/non-fracture groups. There were no treatment or bone fracture effects on the changes of BQT scores between the two time points ( Tables 2 ).  RESULTS Eligible Patients Of the 16 patients enrolled, three patients were ineligible, all on the tamoxifen arm. Two of these patients had the first sample obtained after treatment completion, and one patient was taking bisphosphonates. The remaining 13 eligible patients were included in this analysis. Figure 1 shows the timing of the two assessments with the five-year treatment period for the 13 eligible patients. The first collection of fingernails ranged from 3.0 to 4.7 years after patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All 13 patients had the first assessment, and 12 patients had the second assessment. Characteristics at the substudy entry for the 13 eligible patients are shown in Table 1 . The average age was 63.8 years. Nine patients received letrozole and 4 patients received tamoxifen. Eight patients had a prior bone fracture. Among these, 3 had bone fractures prior to receiving treatment and 5 had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment. For the 3 patients who had fracture prior to treatment, the sites of fractures were radius right, ribs, tibia; and the occurrences of the fractures ranged from 0.2 year to 3.4 years before the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. For the 5 patients who had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment, the sites of fractures were metacarpal, wrist, pelvis, humerus/wrist, and ankle; and the most recent occurrences of the fractures were 0.2, 4.3, 1.1, 2.6, 1.2 years respectively after the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All the fractures occurring while on treatment were due to trauma. BQT Scores at First and Second Collections Figure 2 gives scatter plots of the BQT scores at the first collection and second collection, and also the differences of BQT scores between the two collections. Table 2 provides the descriptive summary data of the BQT scores and the percentage change of the BQT scores overall, by treatment arms, and by fracture/non-fracture groups. We observed no treatment effect on BQT scores at the first and the second assessments. Also no differences were observed in BQT scores at the first and the second assessments in patients with or without prior fracture. However, clearly there was a consistent decrease of BQT scores from the first collection to the second collection. The BQT scores collected six months later significantly decreased compared with those at first collection (p=0.007; based on signed rank test). This reduction was similar in both treatment groups and fracture/non-fracture groups. There were no treatment or bone fracture effects on the changes of BQT scores between the two time points ( Tables 2 ).  Eligible Patients Of the 16 patients enrolled, three patients were ineligible, all on the tamoxifen arm. Two of these patients had the first sample obtained after treatment completion, and one patient was taking bisphosphonates. The remaining 13 eligible patients were included in this analysis. Figure 1 shows the timing of the two assessments with the five-year treatment period for the 13 eligible patients. The first collection of fingernails ranged from 3.0 to 4.7 years after patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All 13 patients had the first assessment, and 12 patients had the second assessment. Characteristics at the substudy entry for the 13 eligible patients are shown in Table 1 . The average age was 63.8 years. Nine patients received letrozole and 4 patients received tamoxifen. Eight patients had a prior bone fracture. Among these, 3 had bone fractures prior to receiving treatment and 5 had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment. For the 3 patients who had fracture prior to treatment, the sites of fractures were radius right, ribs, tibia; and the occurrences of the fractures ranged from 0.2 year to 3.4 years before the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. For the 5 patients who had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment, the sites of fractures were metacarpal, wrist, pelvis, humerus/wrist, and ankle; and the most recent occurrences of the fractures were 0.2, 4.3, 1.1, 2.6, 1.2 years respectively after the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All the fractures occurring while on treatment were due to trauma.  Eligible Patients Of the 16 patients enrolled, three patients were ineligible, all on the tamoxifen arm. Two of these patients had the first sample obtained after treatment completion, and one patient was taking bisphosphonates. The remaining 13 eligible patients were included in this analysis. Figure 1 shows the timing of the two assessments with the five-year treatment period for the 13 eligible patients. The first collection of fingernails ranged from 3.0 to 4.7 years after patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All 13 patients had the first assessment, and 12 patients had the second assessment. Characteristics at the substudy entry for the 13 eligible patients are shown in Table 1 . The average age was 63.8 years. Nine patients received letrozole and 4 patients received tamoxifen. Eight patients had a prior bone fracture. Among these, 3 had bone fractures prior to receiving treatment and 5 had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment. For the 3 patients who had fracture prior to treatment, the sites of fractures were radius right, ribs, tibia; and the occurrences of the fractures ranged from 0.2 year to 3.4 years before the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. For the 5 patients who had bone fractures while on BIG 1-98 treatment, the sites of fractures were metacarpal, wrist, pelvis, humerus/wrist, and ankle; and the most recent occurrences of the fractures were 0.2, 4.3, 1.1, 2.6, 1.2 years respectively after the patients were randomized to BIG 1-98. All the fractures occurring while on treatment were due to trauma.  BQT Scores at First and Second Collections Figure 2 gives scatter plots of the BQT scores at the first collection and second collection, and also the differences of BQT scores between the two collections. Table 2 provides the descriptive summary data of the BQT scores and the percentage change of the BQT scores overall, by treatment arms, and by fracture/non-fracture groups. We observed no treatment effect on BQT scores at the first and the second assessments. Also no differences were observed in BQT scores at the first and the second assessments in patients with or without prior fracture. However, clearly there was a consistent decrease of BQT scores from the first collection to the second collection. The BQT scores collected six months later significantly decreased compared with those at first collection (p=0.007; based on signed rank test). This reduction was similar in both treatment groups and fracture/non-fracture groups. There were no treatment or bone fracture effects on the changes of BQT scores between the two time points ( Tables 2 ).  BQT Scores at First and Second Collections Figure 2 gives scatter plots of the BQT scores at the first collection and second collection, and also the differences of BQT scores between the two collections. Table 2 provides the descriptive summary data of the BQT scores and the percentage change of the BQT scores overall, by treatment arms, and by fracture/non-fracture groups. We observed no treatment effect on BQT scores at the first and the second assessments. Also no differences were observed in BQT scores at the first and the second assessments in patients with or without prior fracture. However, clearly there was a consistent decrease of BQT scores from the first collection to the second collection. The BQT scores collected six months later significantly decreased compared with those at first collection (p=0.007; based on signed rank test). This reduction was similar in both treatment groups and fracture/non-fracture groups. There were no treatment or bone fracture effects on the changes of BQT scores between the two time points ( Tables 2 ).  DISCUSSION From this pilot substudy, with only 13 eligible patients, no differences were detected in BQT scores between treatment and between patients with or without fractures. However, even with this small sample size, we observed a significant reduction in BQT scores after 6 months during treatment. Endocrine therapies, either tamoxifen (anecdotal reporting ( 12 )), or aromatase inhibitors may change the structure of hair ( 13 ), skin and nails. For the latter information is based on observations ( 14 ) rather than on systemic reporting from clinical trials. The opportunity to test bone health in relationship to the structure of fingernails is obviously appealing, but requires systematic prospective sample obtainment. Our pilot substudy was not successful in providing a sufficient degree of information on differential changes in the nails in the four cohorts of interest, because of several reasons: late planning during the conduct of the trial, shortage of funding, and especially, impossibility to guarantee available fingernails for many of the patients. Reasons for difficulties of retrieving suitable nails for testing included: nail biting, onichomycosis, nails not recovered from changes during adjuvant chemotherapy, and the increasing use of nail gel for artificial enhancement of nails. The average nail growth is reported at 0.1mm per day, meaning that a nail takes around six months to completely regenerate ( 15 ). In this substudy, patients had already been receiving endocrine therapies for 3 or more years before the first assessment, therefore, our study could not capture the effects of endocrine therapy on the BQT in the first 2.5 years. The current method for identification of osteoporosis is related to the measurement of bone mineral density (BMD) obtained by exposing of parts of the skeleton (usually lumbar spine, part of the hip inclusive the femur head and neck), to low level x-ray (DXA) scans. BMD does not directly provide information on risk for fractures because it is unable to detect bone fragility (related to structural deficiencies). The BQT method provides information on the chemical structure of the disulphide bonds in the fingernail allowing for the theoretical identification of fragility of nails and bone. The reduction of BQT observed in the patients of our small exploratory study during exposure to endocrine therapy, be it letrozole or tamoxifen is an important incentive for further investigation, which should include the collection of BMD measurements in order to compare the BQT and BMD. Current information on the use of adjuvant bisphosphonates to prevent osteoporosis-related bone events ( 16 ), and other types of breast cancer events ( 17 ) might require innovative approaches for testing bone strength and flexibility to allow tailoring bisphosphonates therapies for those patients who will benefit from them the most. A special effort for obtaining finger or toe nails from patients exposed to adjuvant therapies might allow a better choice of therapies aimed at the skeletal microenvironment, which currently includes not only bisphosphonates but also RANKL inhibitors ( 18 ). A simple, reproducible method for testing flexibility and strength of bone structure will be of major therapeutic relevance for planning treatment strategies for patients with breast cancer.  DISCUSSION From this pilot substudy, with only 13 eligible patients, no differences were detected in BQT scores between treatment and between patients with or without fractures. However, even with this small sample size, we observed a significant reduction in BQT scores after 6 months during treatment. Endocrine therapies, either tamoxifen (anecdotal reporting ( 12 )), or aromatase inhibitors may change the structure of hair ( 13 ), skin and nails. For the latter information is based on observations ( 14 ) rather than on systemic reporting from clinical trials. The opportunity to test bone health in relationship to the structure of fingernails is obviously appealing, but requires systematic prospective sample obtainment. Our pilot substudy was not successful in providing a sufficient degree of information on differential changes in the nails in the four cohorts of interest, because of several reasons: late planning during the conduct of the trial, shortage of funding, and especially, impossibility to guarantee available fingernails for many of the patients. Reasons for difficulties of retrieving suitable nails for testing included: nail biting, onichomycosis, nails not recovered from changes during adjuvant chemotherapy, and the increasing use of nail gel for artificial enhancement of nails. The average nail growth is reported at 0.1mm per day, meaning that a nail takes around six months to completely regenerate ( 15 ). In this substudy, patients had already been receiving endocrine therapies for 3 or more years before the first assessment, therefore, our study could not capture the effects of endocrine therapy on the BQT in the first 2.5 years. The current method for identification of osteoporosis is related to the measurement of bone mineral density (BMD) obtained by exposing of parts of the skeleton (usually lumbar spine, part of the hip inclusive the femur head and neck), to low level x-ray (DXA) scans. BMD does not directly provide information on risk for fractures because it is unable to detect bone fragility (related to structural deficiencies). The BQT method provides information on the chemical structure of the disulphide bonds in the fingernail allowing for the theoretical identification of fragility of nails and bone. The reduction of BQT observed in the patients of our small exploratory study during exposure to endocrine therapy, be it letrozole or tamoxifen is an important incentive for further investigation, which should include the collection of BMD measurements in order to compare the BQT and BMD. Current information on the use of adjuvant bisphosphonates to prevent osteoporosis-related bone events ( 16 ), and other types of breast cancer events ( 17 ) might require innovative approaches for testing bone strength and flexibility to allow tailoring bisphosphonates therapies for those patients who will benefit from them the most. A special effort for obtaining finger or toe nails from patients exposed to adjuvant therapies might allow a better choice of therapies aimed at the skeletal microenvironment, which currently includes not only bisphosphonates but also RANKL inhibitors ( 18 ). A simple, reproducible method for testing flexibility and strength of bone structure will be of major therapeutic relevance for planning treatment strategies for patients with breast cancer.  CONCLUSION The reduction of BQT scores observed in the patients of our small exploratory study during exposure to endocrine therapy is an important incentive for further investigation. We hope that the intriguing results from our small study will encourage investigators to conduct larger studies using this technique for women receiving bone-altering breast cancer treatments.  Supplementary Material Appendices 