Pharmacologic management of the older women undergoing surgery Surgical intervention for both emergency and elective surgeries will increase as women live longer and maintain active lifestyles. Older women with operable conditions tolerate elective gynecologic and other nonvascular surgery with acceptable morbidity and mortality. However, increased medical comorbidities with associated increase in polypharmacy and perioperative risks as women age make it important to a priori optimize medical conditions and medication management perioperatively. Other considerations include assessing functional and cognitive status as these may be impaired acutely with increase prevalence of drug use during surgical hospitalization. With aging and postmenopausal status, changes associated with aging appear to play a greater role than gender in pharmacologic responses. Surgical outcomes should be optimize to maintain and even improve patients’ quality of life.  Introduction The geriatric population, particularly women over 70, will represent a significant proportion of our surgical practice. Elective nonvascular surgery can be safely performed in women > 70 by minimizing factors that increase surgical morbidity. Minimally invasive surgical techniques are likely to decrease hospitalization and morbidity. While multiple factors contribute to the complexity of operating on the older patient, elderly women should not be denied elective surgery for conditions where surgery is the primary treatment.  Polypharmacy and Drug-related Problems DRPs are the most common iatrogenic events in hospitalized patients The arbitrary use of 5 drugs or more to define polypharmacy poorly stratifies risks but has been described as a risk factor for hospitalizations, nursing home placements, decrease functional status, and other drug-related problems (DRPs) Drug utilization review tools such as the Beers’ and McLeod’s criteria are useful in examining inappropriate prescribing prevalence and trends in North America but not accurate for use in other countries with different drug formularies nor in predicting patient outcomes.  Changes in Pharmacodynamics Associated With Aging Perioperatively, continue the medication if it is needed to control a disease process that would otherwise adversely affect the patient during the peri-operative period. Only beta blockers and statins have been shown to reduce surgical risks with perioperative use before noncardiac surgery. Age-related decreases in hepatic and renal function can impair drug elimination or conversion to active metabolite, resulting in toxicities or decrease efficacy.  Cognitive and Functional Assessments and Postoperative Delirium Preoperative establishment of baseline cognitive function and functional status is key to informed consent, determining extent of surgery, and optimal postoperative care. The presence of underlying cognitive impairment, general anesthesia, medication use, and alterations in fluid and electrolyte homeostasis increases postoperative morbidity such as delirium, falls, and functional dependence Anticholinergics and benzodiazepines use should be avoided in the elderly Severe chronic pain and postoperative pain management techniques may influence the risk of postoperative delirium more than other predictors (functional/cognitive impairments, alcohol intake, CNS medications, anesthesia technique, and depression)  Anesthetic and Analgesic Considerations Women are more likely to report pain, adverse effects of medications, and use more analgesia than men Patient-controlled analgesia and regional anesthesia are important options to enable elderly patients, particularly males, to access adequate analgesia given their lower likelihood to request. Sex differences in postoperative opioids response were not observed in elderly patients suggesting that menopause may mark the equalizing point between sexes.[ 58 ] Gender differences due to reporting bias, sex hormones, and body composition influence efficacy and adverse effects of analgesics 