A dietary intervention to elicit rapid and complex dietary changes for studies investigating the effects of diet on tissues collected during invasive surgical procedures  DISCUSSION Results of this small pilot study, although preliminary, do suggest that a relatively simple and minimally burdensome dietary intervention, consisting of only a single in-person counseling session, a set of sample menus and telephone follow-up, can elicit rapid and complex dietary changes that are maintained over a four-week study period. The sample menus and “Red-light/Green-light” food substitution lists guided all food choices, including food type and serving size, and thus this intervention program did not require nutrition education or behavior modification components. Men could make quick decisions about what to eat without investing time in learning about food and nutrition and without developing behavior change skills. In addition, by using telephone contacts instead of individual or group intervention sessions to deliver the intervention, eligible men who would otherwise not participate due to their distance from the study center could be successfully recruited. Furthermore, frequent telephone contacts allowed the study nutritionist to monitor and motivate compliance, thereby eliminating the need for multiple in-person contacts. There are several notable differences between the dietary intervention model described here and the many other successful dietary intervention programs described in the published literature. Most importantly, this intervention program was designed to elicit rapid and short-term dietary change, in contrast to the focus of most other dietary interventions on achieving more gradual but long-term dietary change. One consequence of this focus on short-term change was that the duration of the intervention did not allow use of nutrition education and behavioral modification components. These are clearly important to the success of long-term dietary interventions, but results of this pilot suggest that they may not be necessary to successfully effect short-term change. This program also differs from the published models for short-term (less than 16 weeks) dietary change interventions. Of the short-term interventions that have also used minimally burdensome intervention designs, the dietary goals have involved relatively simple behavior changes, such as increasing the number of servings of fruits and vegetables ( 9 – 12 ). None of these addressed a dietary pattern as complex as a low-fat/low-glycemic diet. There are several published short-term interventions that have targeted complex dietary changes; however, these programs are difficult to deliver and burdensome for participants, requiring extensive nutrition education, multiple, in-person dietary counseling sessions with a research nutritionist ( 13 – 21 ) or extensive self-monitoring (e.g., recording fat or intakes of specific foods daily) ( 13 – 15 , 17 – 20 ). Given these difficulties, it is not surprising that many short-term interventions that have targeted complex dietary changes simply provided foods to participants. ( 22 – 27 ) There are several important limitations to this pilot study. The study was very small and evaluated a unique population of men recently diagnosed with cancer. Generalizability will require evaluations in larger and more diverse populations. There was no assessment of baseline diet and thus, despite randomization, there may have been differences in diet between the two study arms at baseline. The large differences in post-randomization self-reported diet between study arms suggest that men were compliant with the dietary goals; however, it is well known that self-reported diet can be biased by an intervention ( 28 , 29 ). Nevertheless, the significant effect of the intervention on body weight is good evidence that the self-reported dietary changes attributable to the intervention did occur. Although not targeted by the intervention, weight loss is a consistently-observed effect of low-fat diet interventions ( 30 , 31 ) and thus weight loss can serve as an objective proxy measure of dietary change.  DISCUSSION Results of this small pilot study, although preliminary, do suggest that a relatively simple and minimally burdensome dietary intervention, consisting of only a single in-person counseling session, a set of sample menus and telephone follow-up, can elicit rapid and complex dietary changes that are maintained over a four-week study period. The sample menus and “Red-light/Green-light” food substitution lists guided all food choices, including food type and serving size, and thus this intervention program did not require nutrition education or behavior modification components. Men could make quick decisions about what to eat without investing time in learning about food and nutrition and without developing behavior change skills. In addition, by using telephone contacts instead of individual or group intervention sessions to deliver the intervention, eligible men who would otherwise not participate due to their distance from the study center could be successfully recruited. Furthermore, frequent telephone contacts allowed the study nutritionist to monitor and motivate compliance, thereby eliminating the need for multiple in-person contacts. There are several notable differences between the dietary intervention model described here and the many other successful dietary intervention programs described in the published literature. Most importantly, this intervention program was designed to elicit rapid and short-term dietary change, in contrast to the focus of most other dietary interventions on achieving more gradual but long-term dietary change. One consequence of this focus on short-term change was that the duration of the intervention did not allow use of nutrition education and behavioral modification components. These are clearly important to the success of long-term dietary interventions, but results of this pilot suggest that they may not be necessary to successfully effect short-term change. This program also differs from the published models for short-term (less than 16 weeks) dietary change interventions. Of the short-term interventions that have also used minimally burdensome intervention designs, the dietary goals have involved relatively simple behavior changes, such as increasing the number of servings of fruits and vegetables ( 9 – 12 ). None of these addressed a dietary pattern as complex as a low-fat/low-glycemic diet. There are several published short-term interventions that have targeted complex dietary changes; however, these programs are difficult to deliver and burdensome for participants, requiring extensive nutrition education, multiple, in-person dietary counseling sessions with a research nutritionist ( 13 – 21 ) or extensive self-monitoring (e.g., recording fat or intakes of specific foods daily) ( 13 – 15 , 17 – 20 ). Given these difficulties, it is not surprising that many short-term interventions that have targeted complex dietary changes simply provided foods to participants. ( 22 – 27 ) There are several important limitations to this pilot study. The study was very small and evaluated a unique population of men recently diagnosed with cancer. Generalizability will require evaluations in larger and more diverse populations. There was no assessment of baseline diet and thus, despite randomization, there may have been differences in diet between the two study arms at baseline. The large differences in post-randomization self-reported diet between study arms suggest that men were compliant with the dietary goals; however, it is well known that self-reported diet can be biased by an intervention ( 28 , 29 ). Nevertheless, the significant effect of the intervention on body weight is good evidence that the self-reported dietary changes attributable to the intervention did occur. Although not targeted by the intervention, weight loss is a consistently-observed effect of low-fat diet interventions ( 30 , 31 ) and thus weight loss can serve as an objective proxy measure of dietary change.  CONCLUSION Intervention studies in persons diagnosed with cancer who will receive surgical treatment offer a unique opportunity to study the mechanistic effects of diet in target tissues, and a new intervention program was developed for these studies. In a very small pilot study, this intervention elicited rapid, substantial and complex dietary changes during the short time period between diagnosis and treatment. This novel program may fill a gap in the existing dietary intervention modalities; it requires no nutrition education or behavioral change skills; it is minimally burdensome; it is feasible to deliver when a limited number of eligible study participants are geographically dispersed; and it can be delivered at relatively low cost. If proven effective in larger studies, there is much potential for this intervention approach. The general design of this intervention could be applied to other types of studies in which participants are recruited from a limited sample population and hypotheses address the short-term effects of dietary modification. For example, studies collecting difficult-to-obtain tissues from persons undergoing surgical treatment or invasive diagnostic procedures, such as colonoscopy, breast biopsy or even liposuction, could use this intervention program to study effects of dietary change on these tissues. Research nutritionists could also modify the dietary intervention goals by developing new sets of sample menus and appropriate “Red-Light/Green-Light” food lists. Further research to evaluate, modify and further test this intervention approach is well motivated. All materials used for this intervention are available from the authors upon request. 