Signal Transduction Molecules as Targets for Cancer Prevention Environmental and life-style aspects are major contributors to human carcinogenesis and, therefore, many human cancers may be preventable. Cancer is the end result of defects in cellular signaling processes that play a key role in the control of cell growth, survival, division, and differentiation. Therefore, identifying molecular and cellular targets critical in cancer development and prevention is an area of intensive research, driving the development of highly specific small-molecule inhibitors. A major idea today is that cancer may be prevented or treated by targeting the products of specific cancer-related genes, frequently encoding signaling proteins or transcription factors. Participants in these joint conferences discussed their latest findings in the identification of promising molecular targets and the development of agents directed against these targets with the goal of effectively transitioning these into the clinical setting.  Summary and Conclusions Clearly, preventing cancer is better than having to treat this devastating disease. The research presented at two meetings highlighted advances in the identification of appropriate molecular targets, as well as the development of drugs or the identification of natural products that may be effective either as chemopreventives or as cancer therapeutics. Advances in computational, targeted drug design and imaging should enable rapid development and testing of candidate agents in the clinic.  Figures Fig. 1 General schematic of effective cancer prevention by targeting signaling proteins and transcription factors. Cells receive extracellular signals through membrane receptors, and the signal is amplified through protein kinase cascades. Frequently, the signal initiates changes in the transcriptional activity of various transcription factors that bind to target gene sequences, resulting in diverse cellular responses. Fig. 2 Transitioning basic science to the clinic. The goal is to clearly identify promising molecular targets and develop effective anticancer agents that specifically target these molecules and that then can be rapidly transitioned from preclinical findings to the patient. 