Baseline Pain and Disability in the Investigational Vertebroplasty Efficacy and Safety Trial BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE Multiple case series of vertebroplasty outcomes have been published, though no large, placebo controlled trial has yet been performed. Our aim was to report baseline characteristics for the Investigational Vertebroplasty Efficacy and Safety Trial (INVEST), a randomized blinded controlled study of vertebroplasty. MATERIALS AND METHODS We compared baseline demographics, pain scores, and scores on the modified Roland-Morris Disability Scale (RMDS), a back pain specific metric, between 2 groups. One group included subjects enrolled at the lead INVEST site ( n = 27 to date). The second group consisted of eligible patients seen concurrently at the lead INVEST site, who declined enrollment ( n =70). Comparisons were made by using 2-sample t tests. RESULTS Mean ages were similar between groups, averaging approximately 74 years among study participants and 77 years among nonenrolled eligible patients ( P = .17). Approximately 75% of subjects were female in both groups. RMDS scores of enrolled patients at the lead site (18.0 ± 4.2) were not statistically different from those of eligible nonenrolled patients at the lead site (18.6 ± 3.6, P = .49). Pain scores in the enrolled subjects were measured as “average intensity over the prior 24 hours” with mean scores of 7.6 ±2.1 among enrolled patients at the lead site. Pain scores in eligible nonenrolled patients were measured as “pain at rest,” with mean score of 3.4 ± 3.3, and “pain with activity,” with mean score of 8.5 ± 2.0. CONCLUSIONS Patient demographics among subjects enrolled in the INVEST are similar to those in a cohort of eligible nonenrolled patients. Back pain specific disability was similar between subjects enrolled in the INVEST study and eligible nonenrolled patients at the lead site.  RESULTS Of the 972 patients screened at the lead site, 12% ( n = 119) were eligible for enrollment, with the most common reasons for exclusion being presence of tumor, infection, coagulopathy, and the absence of documented osteoporosis. Of the 119 meeting eligibility criteria, 27 (23%) patients approached for study participation enrolled in the INVEST study. Of the 92 eligible patients who declined enrollment at the lead site, we had demographic, RMDS scores, and pain information on 70 patients. To date, we have enrolled 125 patients in INVEST at 10 sites in 4 countries. Mean ages were similar across both comparison groups, averaging 73.7 years among enrolled participants and 76.6 years among nonenrolled patients ( P = .17, Table 1 ). Approximately 75% of patients were women in both groups, with no significant difference between groups ( P = .64). Enrolled patients at the lead site did not differ from eligible nonenrolled patients at the lead site in RMDS scores (mean = 18.0 ± 4.2 versus 18.6 ± 3.7, P = .51). Among the enrolled patients, the mean “average pain intensity during the prior 24 hours” was 7.6 ± 2.1 among patients enrolled at the lead site. Among eligible nonenrolled patients at the lead site, the mean pain at rest was 3.4 ± 3.3 and the mean pain with activity was 8.5 ± 2.0.  RESULTS Of the 972 patients screened at the lead site, 12% ( n = 119) were eligible for enrollment, with the most common reasons for exclusion being presence of tumor, infection, coagulopathy, and the absence of documented osteoporosis. Of the 119 meeting eligibility criteria, 27 (23%) patients approached for study participation enrolled in the INVEST study. Of the 92 eligible patients who declined enrollment at the lead site, we had demographic, RMDS scores, and pain information on 70 patients. To date, we have enrolled 125 patients in INVEST at 10 sites in 4 countries. Mean ages were similar across both comparison groups, averaging 73.7 years among enrolled participants and 76.6 years among nonenrolled patients ( P = .17, Table 1 ). Approximately 75% of patients were women in both groups, with no significant difference between groups ( P = .64). Enrolled patients at the lead site did not differ from eligible nonenrolled patients at the lead site in RMDS scores (mean = 18.0 ± 4.2 versus 18.6 ± 3.7, P = .51). Among the enrolled patients, the mean “average pain intensity during the prior 24 hours” was 7.6 ± 2.1 among patients enrolled at the lead site. Among eligible nonenrolled patients at the lead site, the mean pain at rest was 3.4 ± 3.3 and the mean pain with activity was 8.5 ± 2.0.  DISCUSSION Our data indicate that age, distribution of men versus women, and back pain related disability, as measured by the RMDS, were similar between enrolled and nonenrolled patients at the lead site in INVEST. Mean RMDS scores did not differ between groups, as judged by either a conventional test of statistical significance or by currently accepted definitions of clinically meaningful differences. 16 These data suggest that outcomes from INVEST, yet to be reported, likely will be generalizable to typical vertebroplasty patients who have baseline characteristics that would have allowed enrollment in INVEST. The modified RMDS was initially developed for the study of patients with low-back pain and sciatica. The original report of the RMDS compared pain severity descriptors with scores on this scale. 13 Pain that was “almost unbearable” or “very bad” was associated with RMDS mean scores of 14–15, with 95% confidence intervals ranging from 14 to 19. The mean score for enrolled patients in the INVEST trial currently is approximately 17–18, indicating both severe functional disability and pain levels. Unfortunately, we are unable to compare directly baseline pain scores across groups. Patients enrolled in the INVEST trial responded to an ordinal 0–10 pain question describing “average pain over the past 24 hours,” whereas nonenrolled patients responded to a question posed as “pain at rest” and “pain with activity.” This disparity concerning how pain questionsare posed to vertebroplasty patients has received little, if any, attention previously. Indeed, apart from studies published by the lead INVEST site in which specific pain questions about rest and activity are reported, 14 , 17 we were unable to find any previous vertebroplasty publication that describes exactly how pain-related questions are asked. Previous studies have shown that simply asking for pain at rest versus with activity will change the mean baseline pain by 4–5 points on a 10- point scale. 14 , 17 Further modifiers such as “average pain over the past 24 hours” as in the INVEST trial likely will modulate the reported pain level, compared with series that ask for worst pain. Unfortunately, given the dearth of detailed information concerning the pain measures used in previous publications, we cannot directly compare the INVEST baseline pain data with pain data in other studies. We surmise, however, that an “average” pain of approximately 7 of 10 indicates pain severity comparable with the level of 7–9 of 10 in prior studies. 1 – 9 We have previously reported baseline RMDS data from a consecutive group of vertebroplasty patients treated at the lead site for INVEST but entirely separate from the INVEST trial. 14 The mean RMDS score for this previously reported cohort was approximately18, similar to that of the overall enrolled cohort and nearly exactly the same as that of enrolled patients at the lead site. This finding lends further credence to the idea that patients enrolled in INVEST are at least as disabled by their back pain as most typical vertebroplasty patients. This study has several limitations. Although the comparison group of nonenrolled patients was treated at the lead INVEST site concurrent with the enrolled cohort, data collection schemes for the enrolled-versus-nonenrolled patients differed. Enrolled patients were interviewed with dedicated case report forms by a research coordinator. Nonenrolled patients were interviewed as part of clinical practice by a nurse dedicated to the vertebroplasty practice, with different questions used to assess pain. Another limitation is that RMDS scores were available for eligible nonenrolled patients only at the lead site. Despite these limitations, the data presented here indicate that the pain and disability experienced by enrolled INVEST patients mimicked that of nonenrolled eligible patients.  DISCUSSION Our data indicate that age, distribution of men versus women, and back pain related disability, as measured by the RMDS, were similar between enrolled and nonenrolled patients at the lead site in INVEST. Mean RMDS scores did not differ between groups, as judged by either a conventional test of statistical significance or by currently accepted definitions of clinically meaningful differences. 16 These data suggest that outcomes from INVEST, yet to be reported, likely will be generalizable to typical vertebroplasty patients who have baseline characteristics that would have allowed enrollment in INVEST. The modified RMDS was initially developed for the study of patients with low-back pain and sciatica. The original report of the RMDS compared pain severity descriptors with scores on this scale. 13 Pain that was “almost unbearable” or “very bad” was associated with RMDS mean scores of 14–15, with 95% confidence intervals ranging from 14 to 19. The mean score for enrolled patients in the INVEST trial currently is approximately 17–18, indicating both severe functional disability and pain levels. Unfortunately, we are unable to compare directly baseline pain scores across groups. Patients enrolled in the INVEST trial responded to an ordinal 0–10 pain question describing “average pain over the past 24 hours,” whereas nonenrolled patients responded to a question posed as “pain at rest” and “pain with activity.” This disparity concerning how pain questionsare posed to vertebroplasty patients has received little, if any, attention previously. Indeed, apart from studies published by the lead INVEST site in which specific pain questions about rest and activity are reported, 14 , 17 we were unable to find any previous vertebroplasty publication that describes exactly how pain-related questions are asked. Previous studies have shown that simply asking for pain at rest versus with activity will change the mean baseline pain by 4–5 points on a 10- point scale. 14 , 17 Further modifiers such as “average pain over the past 24 hours” as in the INVEST trial likely will modulate the reported pain level, compared with series that ask for worst pain. Unfortunately, given the dearth of detailed information concerning the pain measures used in previous publications, we cannot directly compare the INVEST baseline pain data with pain data in other studies. We surmise, however, that an “average” pain of approximately 7 of 10 indicates pain severity comparable with the level of 7–9 of 10 in prior studies. 1 – 9 We have previously reported baseline RMDS data from a consecutive group of vertebroplasty patients treated at the lead site for INVEST but entirely separate from the INVEST trial. 14 The mean RMDS score for this previously reported cohort was approximately18, similar to that of the overall enrolled cohort and nearly exactly the same as that of enrolled patients at the lead site. This finding lends further credence to the idea that patients enrolled in INVEST are at least as disabled by their back pain as most typical vertebroplasty patients. This study has several limitations. Although the comparison group of nonenrolled patients was treated at the lead INVEST site concurrent with the enrolled cohort, data collection schemes for the enrolled-versus-nonenrolled patients differed. Enrolled patients were interviewed with dedicated case report forms by a research coordinator. Nonenrolled patients were interviewed as part of clinical practice by a nurse dedicated to the vertebroplasty practice, with different questions used to assess pain. Another limitation is that RMDS scores were available for eligible nonenrolled patients only at the lead site. Despite these limitations, the data presented here indicate that the pain and disability experienced by enrolled INVEST patients mimicked that of nonenrolled eligible patients. 