Update of the Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable Preclinical Recommendations The initial Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR) recommendations published in 1999 were intended to improve the quality of preclinical studies of purported acute stroke therapies. Although recognized as reasonable, they have not been closely followed nor rigorously validated. Substantial advances have occurred regarding the appropriate quality and breadth of preclinical testing for candidate acute stroke therapies for better clinical translation. The updated STAIR preclinical recommendations reinforce the previous suggestions that reproducibly defining dose response and time windows with both histological and functional outcomes in multiple animal species with appropriate physiological monitoring is appropriate. The updated STAIR recommendations include: the fundamentals of good scientific inquiry should be followed by eliminating randomization and assessment bias, a priori defining inclusion/exclusion criteria, performing appropriate power and sample size calculations, and disclosing potential conflicts of interest. After initial evaluations in young, healthy male animals, further studies should be performed in females, aged animals, and animals with comorbid conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and hypercholesterolemia. Another consideration is the use of clinically relevant biomarkers in animal studies. Although the recommendations cannot be validated until effective therapies based on them emerge from clinical trials, it is hoped that adherence to them might enhance the chances for success.  Conclusion Although we believe the initial recommendations were useful in improving many features of preclinical testing, they have not yet been shown to predict whether any drug will improve outcome in pivotal efficacy phase III trials. It will not be possible to validate any guidelines until there is definitive, reproducible proof of efficacy in clinical studies. Meanwhile, these updated and amended STAIR preclinical recommendations may provide a basis for further thinking, careful discussions, and interlaboratory collaborations regarding how to best enhance the usefulness of preclinical testing of purported acute stroke therapies. However, it must be recognized that fulfilling them does not guarantee success in clinical development. Nonetheless, rigorous and complete preclinical testing should provide reassurance that there is potentially a greater chance for success in clinical trials, assuming that the clinical development program is also conducted according to currently accepted standards.  Tables Table 1 Initial STAIR Preclinical Recommendations Adequate dose-response curve Define the time window in a well-characterized model Blinded, physiologically controlled reproducible studies Histological and functional outcomes assessed acutely and long-term Initial rodent studies, then consider gyrencephalic species Permanent occlusion then transient in most cases Table 2 Recommendations for Ensuring Good Scientific Inquiry Sample size calculation The article should describe how the size of the experiment was planned. If a sample size calculation was performed, then this should be reported in detail, including the expected difference between groups, the expected variance, the planned analysis method, the desired statistical power, and the sample size thus calculated. For parametric data, variance should be reported as 95% confidence limits or standard deviations rather than as the standard error of the mean. Inclusion and exclusion criteria When the severity of ischemia has to reach a certain threshold for inclusion (for instance a prespecified decrease in perfusion detected with laser Doppler flowmetry, or the development of neurological impairment of a given severity), this should be stated clearly. Usually, these criteria should be applied before the allocation to experimental groups. If a prespecified lesion size is required for inclusion, then this should be detailed, as well as the corresponding exclusion criteria. Randomization The article should describe the method by which animals were allocated to experimental groups. If this allocation was by randomization, then the method of randomization (coin toss, computer-generated randomization schedules) should be stated. Picking animals “at random” from a cage is unlikely to provide adequate randomization. For comparisons between groups of genetically modified animals (transgenic, knockout), the method of allocation to for instance sham operation or focal ischaemia should be described. Allocation concealment The method of allocation concealment should be described. Allocation is concealed if the investigator responsible for the induction, maintenance, and reversal of ischaemia and for decisions regarding the care of (including the early sacrifice of) experimental animals has no knowledge of the experimental group to which an animal belongs. Allocation concealment might be achieved by having the experimental intervention administered by an independent investigator, or by having an independent investigator prepare drug individually and label it for each animal according to the randomization schedule as outlined. These considerations also apply to comparisons between groups of genetically modified animals, and if phenotypic differences (eg, coat coloring) prevent allocation concealment this should be stated. Reporting of animals excluded from analysis All randomized animals (both overall and by treatment group) should be accounted for in the data presented. Some animals may, for very good reasons, be excluded from analysis, but the circumstances under which this exclusion will occur should be determined in advance, and any exclusion should occur without knowledge of the experimental group to which the animal belongs. The criteria for exclusion and the number of animals excluded should be reported. Blinded assessment of outcome The assessment of outcome is blinded if the investigator responsible for measuring infarct volume, for scoring neurobehavioral outcome or for determining any other outcome measures has no knowledge of the experimental group to which an animal belongs. The method of blinding the assessment of outcome should be described. Where phenotypic differences prevent the blinded assessment of for instance neurobehavioral outcome, this should be stated. Reporting potential conflicts of interest and study funding Any relationship that could be perceived to introduce a potential conflict of interest, or the absence of such a relationship, should be disclosed in an acknowledgements section, along with information on study funding and for instance supply of drugs or of equipment. 