Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency OBJECTIVES Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency (LAD) is a rare primary immune disorder caused by defects of the CD18 ?-integrin molecule on immune cells. The condition usually presents in early infancy and is characterised by deep tissue infections, leukocytosis with impaired formation of pus and delayed wound healing. Allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) offers the possibility of curative therapy, and with patient numbers at any individual centre being limited, we surveyed the transplant experience at 14 centres worldwide. PATIENTS & METHODS The course of 36 children with a confirmed diagnosis of LAD who underwent HSCT between 1993 and 2007 was retrospectively analysed. Data was collected by the registries of the European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID)/European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT), and the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR) RESULTS At median followup of 62 months (extending to 14 years) overall survival was 75%. Myeloablative conditioning regimens were used in 28 patients, and reduced intensity conditioning (RIC) in 8 patients, with no deaths in this subgroup. Survival after matched family donor and unrelated donor transplants was similar, with 11/14 matched family donor and 12/14 unrelated donor recipients alive; mortality was greatest following haplo-identical transplants, where 4/8 children did not survive. Twenty seven transplant recipients are alive, with full donor engraftment in 17 cases, mixed multi-lineage chimerism in 7 patients, and mononuclear cell restricted chimerism in a further 3 cases. CONCLUSIONS HSCT offers long term benefit in LAD and should be considered as an early therapeutic option if a suitable HLA-matched stem cell donation is available. Reduced intensity conditioning was particularly safe, and mixed donor chimersim appears sufficient to prevent significant symptoms, although careful long term monitoring will be required for these patients.  PATIENTS AND METHODS Data Sources Patient data, transplant characteristics and outcomes were reported to the European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID)/European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) registry and the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR). Forteen centres treated between 1-9 patients each (median 1.5/centre). Included are patients documented as having reduced or absent expression of CD18 by flow cytometric analysis and transplanted after 1993. Excluded are patients with a clinical suspicion of LAD, but without proven reduction in CD18 expression. Although this is the largest series to date, patients treated under any one particular transplant regimen were small, limiting the power of any statistical analysis. Transplantation Thirty six patients underwent their first transplant for LAD between 1993 and 2007. Patients received bone marrow (n=27), peripheral blood progenitor cells (n=4) or umbilical cord blood grafts (n=5) from 14 HLA-matched family donors, 8 haploidentical donors and 14 unrelated donors ( Table 1A, 1B ). The median age at SCT was 9 months (range 2 months – 14 years). Most (n=28) patients received fully myeloablative regimens which combinations of Busulphan (16-20mg/kg), Cyclophosphamide (100-200mg/kg) and Etoposide (VP16, 900mg/m2). Additional serotherapy included Campath 1G, anti-leukocyte function antigen-1 (LFA-1), anti-CD2 antibody, anti-CD3 antibody, or anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG). The remaining 8 patients received reduced intensity conditioning (RIC) with combinations of Fludarabine (150mg/m2), Melphalan (140mg/m2), Treosulphan (42mg/m2), Campath 1H (1mg/kg) and rabbit ATG (10mg/kg). In the haploidentical setting T cell depletion was achieved by E-Rosetting or CD34+ stem cell selection form marrow or mobilised PBSC. Most patients received Cyclosporine either alone or in combination with Mycophenolate, Methotrexate and/or Prednisolone for graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. Chimerism post-SCT was monitored by a variety of techniques including fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) for sex mismatched grafts, PCR analysis using micro-satellite probes, and flow cytometry for CD18. 7 , 8 Six patients received a second SCT for graft failure (n=5) or secondary malignancy (EBV lymphoma, n=1) and 2 patients underwent a third procedure for graft failure or low level donor chimerism. All but one of these multiple grafts was in the haploidentical setting.  Data Sources Patient data, transplant characteristics and outcomes were reported to the European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID)/European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) registry and the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR). Forteen centres treated between 1-9 patients each (median 1.5/centre). Included are patients documented as having reduced or absent expression of CD18 by flow cytometric analysis and transplanted after 1993. Excluded are patients with a clinical suspicion of LAD, but without proven reduction in CD18 expression. Although this is the largest series to date, patients treated under any one particular transplant regimen were small, limiting the power of any statistical analysis.  Transplantation Thirty six patients underwent their first transplant for LAD between 1993 and 2007. Patients received bone marrow (n=27), peripheral blood progenitor cells (n=4) or umbilical cord blood grafts (n=5) from 14 HLA-matched family donors, 8 haploidentical donors and 14 unrelated donors ( Table 1A, 1B ). The median age at SCT was 9 months (range 2 months – 14 years). Most (n=28) patients received fully myeloablative regimens which combinations of Busulphan (16-20mg/kg), Cyclophosphamide (100-200mg/kg) and Etoposide (VP16, 900mg/m2). Additional serotherapy included Campath 1G, anti-leukocyte function antigen-1 (LFA-1), anti-CD2 antibody, anti-CD3 antibody, or anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG). The remaining 8 patients received reduced intensity conditioning (RIC) with combinations of Fludarabine (150mg/m2), Melphalan (140mg/m2), Treosulphan (42mg/m2), Campath 1H (1mg/kg) and rabbit ATG (10mg/kg). In the haploidentical setting T cell depletion was achieved by E-Rosetting or CD34+ stem cell selection form marrow or mobilised PBSC. Most patients received Cyclosporine either alone or in combination with Mycophenolate, Methotrexate and/or Prednisolone for graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. Chimerism post-SCT was monitored by a variety of techniques including fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) for sex mismatched grafts, PCR analysis using micro-satellite probes, and flow cytometry for CD18. 7 , 8 Six patients received a second SCT for graft failure (n=5) or secondary malignancy (EBV lymphoma, n=1) and 2 patients underwent a third procedure for graft failure or low level donor chimerism. All but one of these multiple grafts was in the haploidentical setting.  RESULTS In general, outcomes following HSCT for primary immunodeficiencies have improved over time. 7 We found long term survival following transplantation for LAD undertaken between 1993-2007 was around 75%, little changed to that reported for the period 1982-1993. 6 Previous transplant experience had suggested that non-identical, T cell depleted grafts, could be as successful as HLA-identical procedures in LAD, but our survey has found a high levels of primary graft failure, which resulted in secondary (or tertiary) grafting in all 8 haploidentical transplants. Consequently, only 4/8 (50%) children in this subgroup survived. The increased availability of matched unrelated adult and cord blood stem cell grafts has been an important change in recent years and survival following either matched family donor or unrelated donor transplantation was notably better. Thus 12/14 (86%) recipients of unrelated donor HSCT survived, and this was comparable to 11/14 (79%) of the matched family donor recipients. Nine patients (4 haploidentical, 3 sibling donor and 2 matched unrelated donor) did not survive following transplantation ( Table 2 ). All had received myeloablative conditioning and donor engraftment was established in seven patients, albeit after repeat procedures in five cases. Infection related deaths occurred in 5 cases, with 3 deaths linked to veno-occlusive disease and one case of secondary malignancy (EBV lymphoma). We noted that six deaths occurred in the first seven-year period of this analysis (1993-2000) compared to three deaths in the subsequent period (2001-2007). This probably reflects the reduced use of haploidentical donors in the second period, rather than any generalised improvements in transplantation procedures or supportive care in recent years. Complications that may be anticipated following allogeneic stem cell transplantation include GVHD, infections and the toxic side effects of chemotherapy. Nine patients developed GVHD at grade II or greater, including two cases of severe grade IV skin and gut GVHD (one MFD and the other a 1-antigen mismatched MUD). Viral reactivations of CMV, EBV, Adenovirus and Varicella Zoster were detected, and there were at least two significant cases of unexplained pneumonitis. Veno-occlusive disease in three cases followed Busulphan based conditioning, and contributed to the cause of death in these cases. Overall the use of RIC regimens appeared to be associated with reduced toxicity, with all 8 patients in this subgroup surviving, although two (patients no 2 and 22) have low level donor chimerism. With twenty seven surviving patients followed-up for a median of 62 months, full chimerism has been recorded in 17, with stable mixed chimerism in granulocytes and mononuclear cells being achieved in 7 patients ( Table 1 ). The latter included an umbilical cord blood graft recipient mismatched at 3-loci who has very low levels of chimerism in both lineages (~5%) but remains symptom-free. The remaining three patients have lymphoid engraftment (one full, two mixed) but no documented engraftment of donor granulocytes, and these patients also remain well but continue to receive close monitoring.  RESULTS In general, outcomes following HSCT for primary immunodeficiencies have improved over time. 7 We found long term survival following transplantation for LAD undertaken between 1993-2007 was around 75%, little changed to that reported for the period 1982-1993. 6 Previous transplant experience had suggested that non-identical, T cell depleted grafts, could be as successful as HLA-identical procedures in LAD, but our survey has found a high levels of primary graft failure, which resulted in secondary (or tertiary) grafting in all 8 haploidentical transplants. Consequently, only 4/8 (50%) children in this subgroup survived. The increased availability of matched unrelated adult and cord blood stem cell grafts has been an important change in recent years and survival following either matched family donor or unrelated donor transplantation was notably better. Thus 12/14 (86%) recipients of unrelated donor HSCT survived, and this was comparable to 11/14 (79%) of the matched family donor recipients. Nine patients (4 haploidentical, 3 sibling donor and 2 matched unrelated donor) did not survive following transplantation ( Table 2 ). All had received myeloablative conditioning and donor engraftment was established in seven patients, albeit after repeat procedures in five cases. Infection related deaths occurred in 5 cases, with 3 deaths linked to veno-occlusive disease and one case of secondary malignancy (EBV lymphoma). We noted that six deaths occurred in the first seven-year period of this analysis (1993-2000) compared to three deaths in the subsequent period (2001-2007). This probably reflects the reduced use of haploidentical donors in the second period, rather than any generalised improvements in transplantation procedures or supportive care in recent years. Complications that may be anticipated following allogeneic stem cell transplantation include GVHD, infections and the toxic side effects of chemotherapy. Nine patients developed GVHD at grade II or greater, including two cases of severe grade IV skin and gut GVHD (one MFD and the other a 1-antigen mismatched MUD). Viral reactivations of CMV, EBV, Adenovirus and Varicella Zoster were detected, and there were at least two significant cases of unexplained pneumonitis. Veno-occlusive disease in three cases followed Busulphan based conditioning, and contributed to the cause of death in these cases. Overall the use of RIC regimens appeared to be associated with reduced toxicity, with all 8 patients in this subgroup surviving, although two (patients no 2 and 22) have low level donor chimerism. With twenty seven surviving patients followed-up for a median of 62 months, full chimerism has been recorded in 17, with stable mixed chimerism in granulocytes and mononuclear cells being achieved in 7 patients ( Table 1 ). The latter included an umbilical cord blood graft recipient mismatched at 3-loci who has very low levels of chimerism in both lineages (~5%) but remains symptom-free. The remaining three patients have lymphoid engraftment (one full, two mixed) but no documented engraftment of donor granulocytes, and these patients also remain well but continue to receive close monitoring.  DISCUSSION We report the transplant experience for LAD for procedures undertaken at 14 centres worldwide over a 14 year period. There is general agreement that infants presenting with significant infections in the first weeks or months of life who have a diagnosis of LAD confirmed on the basis of CD18 expression should undergo early HSCT if a suitable HLA-matched family donor can be identified. In the absence of a HLA matched family donor, the ready availability of a parental haploidentical donor has obvious attractions and the previous experience of successful haploidentical transplantation in LAD had suggested that T cell depleted family mismatched grafts could be as successful as HLA-identical (T cell replete) procedures in LAD. It was postulated that this may relate to the reduced ability of the LAD host to mediate graft rejection. 5 ; 6 This observation has not been borne out in the current series, where all the haploidentical grafts were initially rejected despite full myeloablative conditioning. Secondary procedures were performed using either the same (2 cases) or alternative donors (6 cases), resulting in successful reconstitution in 4 patients. This experience is in line with that seen for other primary immune deficiencies treated using HLA mismatched donors. 7 In such settings the depletion of donor T cells necessary for preventing GVHD results in reduced graft potency, and increases the risk of graft failure and infective complications. 9 In more recent years, there has been increased availability of unrelated volunteer donors and umbilical cord stem cell donations, and this is reflected in our series which included 14 such procedures. Until now there have been only isolated reports describing the successful transplantation for LAD using matched unrelated adult donors 10 - 14 and umbilical cord blood grafts. 15 As unrelated donor transplants undertaken with conventional myeloablative conditioning can be associated with significant toxicity, especially in the context of pre-existing organ dysfunction, a number of these procedures were performed using modified, reduced intensity regimens. We have previously documented improved survival in children with primary immune deficiencies who underwent RIC procedures. 8 These transplants are generally less toxic and rely on intense immunosuppression to engineer host:donor tolerance sufficient for reliable donor engraftment. In the LAD setting the RIC regimens were well tolerated, and although a number of children have mixed chimerism, all remain alive and free of significant symptoms. The long term consequences of RIC pre-conditioning in these patients will be of particular interest considering that intact fertility and uncomplicated pregnancies have been reported in dogs with canine LAD (CLAD) following non-myeloablative SCT. 16 Interestingly, low levels of donor neutrophil engraftment as measured in peripheral blood appear sufficient for patients to remain symptom-free. The minimum level of functional CD18 expression on leukocytes required to prevent complications is not known. Somatic reversion events, leading to normal CD18 expression on a small fraction of peripheral blood T cells, have been reported in a LAD. 17 ; 18 Somatic mosaicism in patients with other inherited immunodeficiencies has been linked to milder phenotypes, 19 ; 20 but in LAD the reversion phenomena have been limited to CD8+ T cells, and it is unclear if small populations of CD18+ T cells played a role in patient survival into adulthood or if they arose as a consequence of longer term survival. 17 In addition, observations from animal studies are encouraging and suggest that low levels of functional, CD18 expressing, leucocytes can prevent disease. 21 Transplant studies in CLAD have indicated that less than 500 CD18+ donor neutrophils/microL in peripheral blood can reverse disease phenotype. 22 It should be noted that in LAD the levels of circulating donor neutrophils may not accurately reflect levels of true engraftment, as functional CD18+ cells may preferentially egress the circulation and mediate important beneficial effects at target sites such as the oral mucosa. Thus, in dogs selective accumulation of donor neutrophils was demonstrated in the oral mucosa resulting in significantly higher levels of donor chimerism in the saliva of animals compared to peripheral blood after transplantation. 22 Evidence from gene therapy studies in the CLAD model also supports the notion that low numbers of functional cells can prevent disease. The infusion of autologous haematopoietic stem cells transduced to express canine CD18 corrected 5-10% of circulating leukocytes and this was sufficient to mediate durable reversal of the disease. 23 Presently, a number of patients with mixed donor chimerism, including those with only mononuclear lineage engraftment remain free of significant disease. Further investigation of these patients may be warranted, including detailed lineage specific chimaerism in tissues (in the bone marrow and gingival tissues) and the exclusion of host mediated cellular or autoantibody responses against donor derived cells.  DISCUSSION We report the transplant experience for LAD for procedures undertaken at 14 centres worldwide over a 14 year period. There is general agreement that infants presenting with significant infections in the first weeks or months of life who have a diagnosis of LAD confirmed on the basis of CD18 expression should undergo early HSCT if a suitable HLA-matched family donor can be identified. In the absence of a HLA matched family donor, the ready availability of a parental haploidentical donor has obvious attractions and the previous experience of successful haploidentical transplantation in LAD had suggested that T cell depleted family mismatched grafts could be as successful as HLA-identical (T cell replete) procedures in LAD. It was postulated that this may relate to the reduced ability of the LAD host to mediate graft rejection. 5 ; 6 This observation has not been borne out in the current series, where all the haploidentical grafts were initially rejected despite full myeloablative conditioning. Secondary procedures were performed using either the same (2 cases) or alternative donors (6 cases), resulting in successful reconstitution in 4 patients. This experience is in line with that seen for other primary immune deficiencies treated using HLA mismatched donors. 7 In such settings the depletion of donor T cells necessary for preventing GVHD results in reduced graft potency, and increases the risk of graft failure and infective complications. 9 In more recent years, there has been increased availability of unrelated volunteer donors and umbilical cord stem cell donations, and this is reflected in our series which included 14 such procedures. Until now there have been only isolated reports describing the successful transplantation for LAD using matched unrelated adult donors 10 - 14 and umbilical cord blood grafts. 15 As unrelated donor transplants undertaken with conventional myeloablative conditioning can be associated with significant toxicity, especially in the context of pre-existing organ dysfunction, a number of these procedures were performed using modified, reduced intensity regimens. We have previously documented improved survival in children with primary immune deficiencies who underwent RIC procedures. 8 These transplants are generally less toxic and rely on intense immunosuppression to engineer host:donor tolerance sufficient for reliable donor engraftment. In the LAD setting the RIC regimens were well tolerated, and although a number of children have mixed chimerism, all remain alive and free of significant symptoms. The long term consequences of RIC pre-conditioning in these patients will be of particular interest considering that intact fertility and uncomplicated pregnancies have been reported in dogs with canine LAD (CLAD) following non-myeloablative SCT. 16 Interestingly, low levels of donor neutrophil engraftment as measured in peripheral blood appear sufficient for patients to remain symptom-free. The minimum level of functional CD18 expression on leukocytes required to prevent complications is not known. Somatic reversion events, leading to normal CD18 expression on a small fraction of peripheral blood T cells, have been reported in a LAD. 17 ; 18 Somatic mosaicism in patients with other inherited immunodeficiencies has been linked to milder phenotypes, 19 ; 20 but in LAD the reversion phenomena have been limited to CD8+ T cells, and it is unclear if small populations of CD18+ T cells played a role in patient survival into adulthood or if they arose as a consequence of longer term survival. 17 In addition, observations from animal studies are encouraging and suggest that low levels of functional, CD18 expressing, leucocytes can prevent disease. 21 Transplant studies in CLAD have indicated that less than 500 CD18+ donor neutrophils/microL in peripheral blood can reverse disease phenotype. 22 It should be noted that in LAD the levels of circulating donor neutrophils may not accurately reflect levels of true engraftment, as functional CD18+ cells may preferentially egress the circulation and mediate important beneficial effects at target sites such as the oral mucosa. Thus, in dogs selective accumulation of donor neutrophils was demonstrated in the oral mucosa resulting in significantly higher levels of donor chimerism in the saliva of animals compared to peripheral blood after transplantation. 22 Evidence from gene therapy studies in the CLAD model also supports the notion that low numbers of functional cells can prevent disease. The infusion of autologous haematopoietic stem cells transduced to express canine CD18 corrected 5-10% of circulating leukocytes and this was sufficient to mediate durable reversal of the disease. 23 Presently, a number of patients with mixed donor chimerism, including those with only mononuclear lineage engraftment remain free of significant disease. Further investigation of these patients may be warranted, including detailed lineage specific chimaerism in tissues (in the bone marrow and gingival tissues) and the exclusion of host mediated cellular or autoantibody responses against donor derived cells.  CONCLUSION LAD1 is a serious primary immune disorder that can be corrected by allogeneic HSCT. Matched family donor and unrelated donor procedures were equally successful and mixed chimerism in peripheral blood appears sufficient to keep patients free of significant symptoms. The study has highlighted the impressive safety profile of RIC regimens, and the greater availability of suitable unrelated donors in combination with tailored conditioning regimens should improve outcomes further. 