The immunologic aspects of poxvirus oncolytic therapy The concept of using replicating, oncolytic viruses in cancer therapy dates to the beginning of the 20th century. However, in the last few years an increasing number of pre-clinical and clinical trials have been carried out with promising preliminarily results. Novel, indeed, is the suggestion that viral oncolytic therapy might not operate exclusively through an oncolysis-mediated process but additionally requires the “assistance” of the host’s immune system. Originally, the host’s immune response was believed to play a predominantly obstructive role against viral replication, hence limiting the anti-tumor efficacy of viral vectors. Recent data, however, suggests that the immune response may also play a key role in promoting tumor destruction in association with the oncolytic process. In fact, immune effector pathways activated during oncolytic virus-induced tumor rejection seem to follow a similar pattern to those observed when the broader phenomenon of immune-mediated tissue-specific rejection occurs in other immune-related pathologies. We recently formulated the “Immunologic Constant of Rejection” hypothesis, emphasizing commonalties in transcriptional patterns observed when tissue-destruction occurs: whether with a favorable outcome, such as in tumor rejection and pathogen clearance; or a destructive one, such as in allograft rejection or autoimmunity. Here, we propose that a similar mechanism induces clearance of virally-infected tumors and that such a mechanism is primarily dependent on innate immune functions.  Conclusion In summary, it appears that oncolytic therapy with VACV is associated in experimental models with powerful activation of immune responses within the tumor microenvironment. The ultimate role of the immune response in determining tumor rejection compared with the direct oncolytic process needs to be further evaluated by immune-depletion experiments. However, the strong association between viral replication in cancer cells and activation of immune responses suggests that oncolytic viruses characterized by specific tropism for cancer cells may be exploited not only as therapeutic tools in the context of classical oncolytic therapy but also as adjuvant in the context of other immunotherapy strategies, including the active specific immunization where, we believe, the limit to successful tumor eradication is due to the lack of stimulation of vaccine-induced T-cells in the target tissue ( 53 ). This hypothesis needs to be further evaluated in future clinical trials that follow a systematic approach ( 72 ), but it is likely that oncolytic therapies will play a critical role in identifying important mechanisms leading to immune-mediated tissue-specific rejection. 