Allometric metabolic scaling and fetal and placental weight Background We tested the hypothesis that the fetal-placental relationship scales allometrically and identified modifying factors of that relationship. Materials and Methods Among women delivering after 34 weeks but prior to 43 weeks gestation, 24,601 participants in the Collaborative Perinatal Project (CPP) had complete data for placental gross proportion measures, specifically, placental weight (PW), disk shape, larger and smaller disk diameters and thickness, and umbilical cord length. The allometric metabolic equation was solved for ? and ? by rewriting PW = ? (BW)^? as ln (PW) = ln? + ? [ln(BW)]. ?? was then the dependent variable in regressions with p<0.05 significant. Results Mean ? was 0.78± 0.02 (range 0.66, 0.89), which is consistent with the scaling exponent 0.75 predicted by Kleiber's Law.. Gestational age, maternal age, maternal BMI, parity, smoking, socioeconomic status, infant sex, and changes in placental proportions each had independent and significant effects on ?. Conclusions We find an allometric scaling relation between the placental weight and the birth weight in the CPP cohort with an exponent approximately equal to 0.75, as predicted by Kleiber's Law. This implies that: 1) Placental weight is a justifiable proxy for fetal metabolic rate when other measures of fetal metabolic rate are not available; and 2) The allometric relationship between placental and birth weight is consistent with the hypothesis that the fetal-placental unit functions as a fractal supply limited system. Furthermore, our data suggest that the maternal and fetal variables we examined have at least part of their effects on the normal balance between placental weight and birth weight via effects on gross placental growth dimensions.  Materials and Methods Subjects were a subset of the National Collaborative Perinatal Project (NCPP). Details of the study have been described elsewhere [ 21 , 22 ] Briefly, from 1959 to 1965, women who attended prenatal care at 12 hospitals were invited to participate in the observational, prospective study. At entry, detailed demographic, socioeconomic and behavioral information was collected by in-person interview. A medical history, physical examination and blood sample were also obtained. In the following prenatal visits, women were repeatedly interviewed and physical findings were recorded. During labor and delivery, placental gross morphology was examined and samples were collected for histologic examination. The children were followed up to seven years of age. The data for the present analysis was derived from all liveborn singletons. To control for correlated observations the sample was restricted to only or first singleton live births to a single mother. Among 41,970 women who provided eligible singleton births, 36,017 contributed placenta data. The sample was further restricted to those with complete data on the six placental gross measures (described below), placental weight, and birth weight, of known gestational age between 34 weeks and 42 6/7 (less than 43) completed weeks (N=24,152). Gestational age was calculated from the last menstrual period in rounded weeks. The 34 week cut off was selected because gestations younger than this age were less likely to survive. Gestational lengths as great as 54 weeks were also reported; these were clearly in error and were also excluded. Finally, the lowest 0.5% of placental variables was excluded, as biologically implausible, leaving a final analytic sample of 24,061. There were no exclusions for diagnoses of diabetes, preeclampsia or other maternal medical conditions. Placental gross measures included placental disk shape, relative centrality of the umbilical cord insertion, estimated chorionic plate area, disk eccentricity, placental disk thickness, placental weight, and umbilical cord length, measured according to a standard protocol [ 20 , 23 ] Gestational age was calculated based on the last menstrual period in rounded weeks The analytic sample was restricted to those with complete data on the six placental gross measures, placental weight and birth weight, of gestational ages >= 34 weeks (younger infants having been unlikely to survive) and less than 43 completed weeks (given that gestations were assigned implausible gestational lengths up to 54 weeks, N=24,061). The original coding of placental measures and the recoding used for this analysis follow: Chorionic disk shape coding was based on the gross examination of the delivered placenta. Shapes included round-to-oval, and a variety of atypical shapes (e.g., bipartite, tripartite, succenturiate, membranous, crescent or “irregular”). For this analysis, the shape measure was recoded as a binary variable with “round-to-oval” as “0” and “other than round-to-oval” as “1”. Relative centrality of the umbilical cord insertion was calculated from two variables recorded in the original data set. The distance from the cord insertion to the closest placental margin was recorded to the nearest cm. The type of umbilical cord insertion was coded as membranous (velamentous), marginal or normal (inserted onto the chorionic disk). We combined these two variables into a single distance measure, by recoding velamentous cord insertions as negative values, cords inserted at the placental margin as “0” and progressively more central cords as “1” to “9” (overall scale range -13 to 13). For example, a cord inserted velamentously 5 cm from the nearest margin was scored “?5”, while a cord inserted on the chorionic plate 5 cm from the edge was scored “5”. Then this distance was divided by the mean radius, calculated as (largerdiameter + smaller diameter)/4. Estimated chorionic plate area was calculated as the area of an ellipse from two variables recorded in the original data set, the larger diameter and smaller diameter of the chorionic disc. These two measures, taken perpendicular to each other, were were recorded in cm. Disk eccentricity was calculated as the ratio of the larger and smaller diameters. Both the chorionic plate area and disk eccentricity could be cast as “interaction term”, specific mathematical formulations of the possible interactions between larger and smaller diameterswith specific anatomic interpretations. Placental thickness at the center of the chorionic disc was recorded in units of 0.1 cm, by piercing the disc with a knitting needle on which millimeter marks were inscribed. Placental weight (PW) was measured to the nearest 10 grams; this variable was converted to grams. The fetoplacental weight ratio was calculated as birth weight divided by the placental weight, and is a value generally considered to reflect a physiologic state of balance between fetal and placental growth. Umbilical cord length was analyzed as it was measured in the Labor and Delivery Room. Maternal characteristics were recorded at enrollment and throughout pregnancy by study interviewers. Maternal age was coded as age at (enrollment) in years, and maternal height was measured in inches. Maternal weight prior to pregnancy was self-reported in pounds. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated from maternal height and weight. Parity counted all delivered live born offspring and did not include miscarriages/early pregnancy losses. Socioeconomic status index was a combined score for education, occupation and family income as scaled by the US Bureau of the Census. [ 24 ] Mother's race was coded as a binary variable denoting African-American as “1” and all others as “0”; original data coded race as Caucasian, African American, and “other”, most of whom were Puerto Ricans (9.2 percent). Cigarette use was coded by maternal self report at enrollment as non-smoker (coded as <1 cigarette per day), or by the self-reported number of cigarettes smoked daily grouped as 1-9, 10-20, and >20 (greater than one pack per day). Fitting and applying the metabolic scaling equation Consistent with the usual techniques for allometric regression, Ahern's power-function relationship: [Equation 1.1] PW = ? ( BW ) ? . was recast into linear form by taking (natural) logarithms of the independent and dependent variables: [Equation 1.2] ln ( PW ) = ln ( ? ) + ? ln ( BW ) which was then fitted to the data by ordinary linear least-squares regression. Having determined ? for the fitted equation, it was then possible to calculate, for each baby (denoted by the subscript i), a “baby-specific” ? value, ?i: [Equation 1.3] ln ( ? i ) = ln ( PW i ) ? ? ln ( BW i ) which will tend to be slightly greater or less than the regression ? value, depending on whether that baby's placenta is heavier or lighter, respectively, than what would be expected based on the fitted allometric equation. For example, a baby whose ?? value was +0.2 would have a placenta that was about 22% heavier than expected, based on that baby's weight, according to the fitted allometric equation. (The 22% comes from the fact that e+0.2 = 1.22, approximately.) These ?? values (both raw and as logarithms) were used as the dependent variable in subsequent analyses. Testing for significant influences on ?<sub>?</sub> Multivariate regression were used to determine significant associations with ln(??). P<0.05 was considered significant throughout. Three analyses were run. Model 1included all placental variables; thus the point-estimate of effect for each placental variable is adjusted for the presence of the others, and is presented in Column 1 of Table 3 . Model 2 included all maternal and fetal variables; again, data presented reflect effects adjusted for the presence of the other maternal variables (Column 2, Table 3 ). Model 3 included all variables (placental, maternal and fetal, Column 3, Table 3 ).  Fitting and applying the metabolic scaling equation Consistent with the usual techniques for allometric regression, Ahern's power-function relationship: [Equation 1.1] PW = ? ( BW ) ? . was recast into linear form by taking (natural) logarithms of the independent and dependent variables: [Equation 1.2] ln ( PW ) = ln ( ? ) + ? ln ( BW ) which was then fitted to the data by ordinary linear least-squares regression. Having determined ? for the fitted equation, it was then possible to calculate, for each baby (denoted by the subscript i), a “baby-specific” ? value, ?i: [Equation 1.3] ln ( ? i ) = ln ( PW i ) ? ? ln ( BW i ) which will tend to be slightly greater or less than the regression ? value, depending on whether that baby's placenta is heavier or lighter, respectively, than what would be expected based on the fitted allometric equation. For example, a baby whose ?? value was +0.2 would have a placenta that was about 22% heavier than expected, based on that baby's weight, according to the fitted allometric equation. (The 22% comes from the fact that e+0.2 = 1.22, approximately.) These ?? values (both raw and as logarithms) were used as the dependent variable in subsequent analyses.  Testing for significant influences on ?<sub>?</sub> Multivariate regression were used to determine significant associations with ln(??). P<0.05 was considered significant throughout. Three analyses were run. Model 1included all placental variables; thus the point-estimate of effect for each placental variable is adjusted for the presence of the others, and is presented in Column 1 of Table 3 . Model 2 included all maternal and fetal variables; again, data presented reflect effects adjusted for the presence of the other maternal variables (Column 2, Table 3 ). Model 3 included all variables (placental, maternal and fetal, Column 3, Table 3 ).  Results Descriptive Statistics Population descriptors are presented in Table 1 and Table 2 . Solving for ?<sub>?</sub> and ? The mean (exponentiated) ? and ? were (respectively) 1.03± 0.17 (range 0.38, 2.42), and 0.78± 0.02 (range range 0.66- 0.89), the latter 104% of the allometric exponent predicted in a supply-limited fractal system, 0.75. [ 2 , 4 ] Placental gross growth dimension variables: effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 1) After adjustment for placental weight, ?? was greater in irregularly shaped placentas and increased as placental larger and smaller placental diameters, disk thickness and umbilical cord length increased. Chorionic plate area, in effect, a multiplicative interaction term of the larger and smaller diameters, was inversely correlated with ?, suggesting a negative effect on placental efficiency at extreme chorionic plate sizes. Thus, the placental dimensions of shape, chorionic plate (area and the larger and smaller diameters individually), disk thickness, and cord length had separate significant effects on the extent to which placental weight represents fetal metabolic rate. The placental gross growth dimensions accounted for 24% of ?? variance (r=0.49).). Analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree, but r was slightly higher (0.509, r2=0.26). Maternal and fetal factor effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 2) Higher doses of maternal smoking was associated with greater ??. Male infants had lower ?? than female infants. No difference in ?? was seen between Caucasians and African-Americans. ?? was positively correlated with birth length and inversely correlated with maternal BMI (r=0.035 and r=0.08, respectively). Gestational age also was inversely correlated with ?? All the maternal and fetal factors considered in this analysis accounted for 3.6% of ?? variance (r=0.19).). Again, analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree. Correlation (r=0.19) and r2 (0.03) were also unchanged. Do placental measures mediate effects of maternal and infant variables on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 3)? After adjustment for placental variables, increasing maternal age, parity and African-American race (not associated with ?? independent of the inclusion of placental variables, Column 1 ) were significantly associated with ??, indicating that these variables impact ?? via effects on one or more placental variables. In particular, the point-estimate of effect of African-American race increased 10-fold after inclusion of placental variables (0.002, p ns, v. 0.023, p<0.0001). The effect of birth length on ?? reversed sign and increased 5-fold (0.020, p<0.0001 v. ?0.011, p<0.0001). The effect of maternal smoking on ?? was little changed by inclusion of placental variables (0.022, p<0.0001 v. 0.017, p<0.0001). Again, analysis of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree.  Results Descriptive Statistics Population descriptors are presented in Table 1 and Table 2 . Solving for ?<sub>?</sub> and ? The mean (exponentiated) ? and ? were (respectively) 1.03± 0.17 (range 0.38, 2.42), and 0.78± 0.02 (range range 0.66- 0.89), the latter 104% of the allometric exponent predicted in a supply-limited fractal system, 0.75. [ 2 , 4 ] Placental gross growth dimension variables: effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 1) After adjustment for placental weight, ?? was greater in irregularly shaped placentas and increased as placental larger and smaller placental diameters, disk thickness and umbilical cord length increased. Chorionic plate area, in effect, a multiplicative interaction term of the larger and smaller diameters, was inversely correlated with ?, suggesting a negative effect on placental efficiency at extreme chorionic plate sizes. Thus, the placental dimensions of shape, chorionic plate (area and the larger and smaller diameters individually), disk thickness, and cord length had separate significant effects on the extent to which placental weight represents fetal metabolic rate. The placental gross growth dimensions accounted for 24% of ?? variance (r=0.49).). Analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree, but r was slightly higher (0.509, r2=0.26). Maternal and fetal factor effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 2) Higher doses of maternal smoking was associated with greater ??. Male infants had lower ?? than female infants. No difference in ?? was seen between Caucasians and African-Americans. ?? was positively correlated with birth length and inversely correlated with maternal BMI (r=0.035 and r=0.08, respectively). Gestational age also was inversely correlated with ?? All the maternal and fetal factors considered in this analysis accounted for 3.6% of ?? variance (r=0.19).). Again, analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree. Correlation (r=0.19) and r2 (0.03) were also unchanged. Do placental measures mediate effects of maternal and infant variables on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 3)? After adjustment for placental variables, increasing maternal age, parity and African-American race (not associated with ?? independent of the inclusion of placental variables, Column 1 ) were significantly associated with ??, indicating that these variables impact ?? via effects on one or more placental variables. In particular, the point-estimate of effect of African-American race increased 10-fold after inclusion of placental variables (0.002, p ns, v. 0.023, p<0.0001). The effect of birth length on ?? reversed sign and increased 5-fold (0.020, p<0.0001 v. ?0.011, p<0.0001). The effect of maternal smoking on ?? was little changed by inclusion of placental variables (0.022, p<0.0001 v. 0.017, p<0.0001). Again, analysis of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree.  Descriptive Statistics Population descriptors are presented in Table 1 and Table 2 .  Descriptive Statistics Population descriptors are presented in Table 1 and Table 2 .  Solving for ?<sub>?</sub> and ? The mean (exponentiated) ? and ? were (respectively) 1.03± 0.17 (range 0.38, 2.42), and 0.78± 0.02 (range range 0.66- 0.89), the latter 104% of the allometric exponent predicted in a supply-limited fractal system, 0.75. [ 2 , 4 ]  Solving for ?<sub>?</sub> and ? The mean (exponentiated) ? and ? were (respectively) 1.03± 0.17 (range 0.38, 2.42), and 0.78± 0.02 (range range 0.66- 0.89), the latter 104% of the allometric exponent predicted in a supply-limited fractal system, 0.75. [ 2 , 4 ]  Placental gross growth dimension variables: effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 1) After adjustment for placental weight, ?? was greater in irregularly shaped placentas and increased as placental larger and smaller placental diameters, disk thickness and umbilical cord length increased. Chorionic plate area, in effect, a multiplicative interaction term of the larger and smaller diameters, was inversely correlated with ?, suggesting a negative effect on placental efficiency at extreme chorionic plate sizes. Thus, the placental dimensions of shape, chorionic plate (area and the larger and smaller diameters individually), disk thickness, and cord length had separate significant effects on the extent to which placental weight represents fetal metabolic rate. The placental gross growth dimensions accounted for 24% of ?? variance (r=0.49).). Analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree, but r was slightly higher (0.509, r2=0.26).  Placental gross growth dimension variables: effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 1) After adjustment for placental weight, ?? was greater in irregularly shaped placentas and increased as placental larger and smaller placental diameters, disk thickness and umbilical cord length increased. Chorionic plate area, in effect, a multiplicative interaction term of the larger and smaller diameters, was inversely correlated with ?, suggesting a negative effect on placental efficiency at extreme chorionic plate sizes. Thus, the placental dimensions of shape, chorionic plate (area and the larger and smaller diameters individually), disk thickness, and cord length had separate significant effects on the extent to which placental weight represents fetal metabolic rate. The placental gross growth dimensions accounted for 24% of ?? variance (r=0.49).). Analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree, but r was slightly higher (0.509, r2=0.26).  Maternal and fetal factor effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 2) Higher doses of maternal smoking was associated with greater ??. Male infants had lower ?? than female infants. No difference in ?? was seen between Caucasians and African-Americans. ?? was positively correlated with birth length and inversely correlated with maternal BMI (r=0.035 and r=0.08, respectively). Gestational age also was inversely correlated with ?? All the maternal and fetal factors considered in this analysis accounted for 3.6% of ?? variance (r=0.19).). Again, analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree. Correlation (r=0.19) and r2 (0.03) were also unchanged.  Maternal and fetal factor effects on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 2) Higher doses of maternal smoking was associated with greater ??. Male infants had lower ?? than female infants. No difference in ?? was seen between Caucasians and African-Americans. ?? was positively correlated with birth length and inversely correlated with maternal BMI (r=0.035 and r=0.08, respectively). Gestational age also was inversely correlated with ?? All the maternal and fetal factors considered in this analysis accounted for 3.6% of ?? variance (r=0.19).). Again, analyses of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree. Correlation (r=0.19) and r2 (0.03) were also unchanged.  Do placental measures mediate effects of maternal and infant variables on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 3)? After adjustment for placental variables, increasing maternal age, parity and African-American race (not associated with ?? independent of the inclusion of placental variables, Column 1 ) were significantly associated with ??, indicating that these variables impact ?? via effects on one or more placental variables. In particular, the point-estimate of effect of African-American race increased 10-fold after inclusion of placental variables (0.002, p ns, v. 0.023, p<0.0001). The effect of birth length on ?? reversed sign and increased 5-fold (0.020, p<0.0001 v. ?0.011, p<0.0001). The effect of maternal smoking on ?? was little changed by inclusion of placental variables (0.022, p<0.0001 v. 0.017, p<0.0001). Again, analysis of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree.  Do placental measures mediate effects of maternal and infant variables on ?<sub>?</sub> (<xref rid="T3" ref-type="table">Table 3</xref>, Column 3)? After adjustment for placental variables, increasing maternal age, parity and African-American race (not associated with ?? independent of the inclusion of placental variables, Column 1 ) were significantly associated with ??, indicating that these variables impact ?? via effects on one or more placental variables. In particular, the point-estimate of effect of African-American race increased 10-fold after inclusion of placental variables (0.002, p ns, v. 0.023, p<0.0001). The effect of birth length on ?? reversed sign and increased 5-fold (0.020, p<0.0001 v. ?0.011, p<0.0001). The effect of maternal smoking on ?? was little changed by inclusion of placental variables (0.022, p<0.0001 v. 0.017, p<0.0001). Again, analysis of ln ?? (as expected) yielded slightly different point estimates of effect, but there were no changes in statistical significance, in terms of either presence or degree.  Discussion The allometric exponent, and the relationship of placental weight to birth weight Our results demonstrate that in this population predominantly delivered at term, placental weight scales to birth weight to the ¾ power, from which we suggest the following: Placental weight is a justifiable proxy for fetal metabolic rate when other measures of fetal metabolic rate are not available. The allometric relationship between placental and birth weight is consistent with the hypothesis that the fetal-placental unit functions as a fractal supply limited system. To our knowledge, only one other study of placental allometry has been carried out [ 25 ] that focused on the allometry of various placental compartments from 10-41 weeks gestation. This work supports our findings that there exist various fetal-placental allometric scaling relations different from a simple dimensional proportionality. We have recently developed a dynamical model of placental vascular growth [ 14 , 26 , 27 ] which relates the spatial shape of the placenta with the structure of the underlying vascular fractal. This model recapitulates many of the known variant placental shapes (bilobate, multilobate, irregular or “scalloped”) by a change of the fractal structure of the vasculature at a specific time instance. In a modern cohort with more precise chorionic plate measures than were collected in the CPP, we have confirmed that such placental shape variance is associated with changes in the allometric scaling relation of fetus and placenta. Specifically, deviations from spatially filling symmetric fractal vascular growth are associated with reduced placental vascular efficiency, that is, a smaller birth weight than predicted by the allometric scaling for the given placental weight [ 14 ] These findings are consistent with a connection between the allometric fetoplacental scaling and the fractal structure of the vascular supply system. We anticipate that future investigations may further improve these estimates of placental function by including other measures of placental growth, e.g., arborization density, enzyme activity (17 ? hydroxysteroid dihydrogenase), and microvillus transport capacity.) We explicitly included all CPP cases with complete placental data; we did not exclude cases of diabetes, preeclampsia or abruption, as one purpose of the present effort was to determine whether, as a general principle, placental weight scaled to birth weight. Deviations from a ¾ scale in the context of maternal medical conditions may help better understand how maternal diseases, via effects on placental growth and, by extension, placental function affect the fetus. Optimal transport and placental anatomy Placental arborization is an essentially random process of fractal growth influenced by permissive and restrictive genetic and environmental factors. Our results suggest that, in general terms, the relationship between placental structure and placental function (in terms of nutrient transport allowing fetal growth) fits an allometric scaling model. The apparent universality of scaling among living organisms has been tied to the idea that evolution also drives optimality of structure, such an “optimal structure” having no excess structures relative to its maximal function (e.g., O2 flux in the lungs, blood flow in the vascular tree, etc.) [ 11 ] Optimization theory has been used to analyze a number of biological relationships over the years, from feeding strategies to locomotor gaits (recently reviewed by [ 28 ]). In this light, our findings suggest that, in general, and in a predominantly term birth cohort, placental structure is optimized. Likewise, in this light, our findings that changes in placental shape and placental dimensions—independent of their associations with placental weight—affect the balance between placental weight and birth weight can be interpreted as those changes in shape and dimension reflecting deviations from optimal placental structure. We speculate that these changes in placental shape and dimension are the physical manifestations of altered placental growth necessitated by the intrauterine environment. Using more precise measures of the chorionic shape, we have demonstrated that the radial standard deviation from the umbilical cord insertion is significantly correlated with ?, [ 14 , 26 ] further albeit indirect evidence that abnormal chorionic surface perimeters, the “errors in outline” acknowledged by Drs Benirschke and Kaufmann, [ 29 ] reflect a placental architecture in which function (of nutrient and oxygen transport) is no longer maximized. Influences on placental-fetal scaling Placental gross growth measures and several maternal characteristics influence placental-fetal scaling. An increase in ? implies a larger placenta for a given birth weight, and a lower fetoplacental weight ratio, and a smaller birth weight for any given placental weight. The “optimal” result of placental growth should be to yield greater fetal nutrient transfer and a larger baby, rather than a larger placenta. Our data suggest that the maternal and fetal variables we examined have at least part of their effects on the normal balance between placental weight and birth weight via effects on gross placental growth dimensions. As noted above, the fact that placental growth parameters also affect ?? independent of placental weight is consistent with our hypothesis that early gestational constraints that yield variant shapes and dimensions of the mature arborized placental villous tree have a permanent effect on the delivered birth weight. Gestational age also showed a significant effect on scaling, despite the admittedly problematic estimation of gestational age by last menstrual period in this cohort. Gestational age should not, in and of itself, affect the ¾ power relationship between placental weight and birth weight. That there is a significant association of even poorly measured gestational age on the scaling relationship suggests that the pathology(ies) that underlie shortened gestational lengths may have (chronic) effects on placental vascular/fractal structure. This is consistent with many studies that have associated chronic placental pathologies with preterm birth. [ 30 - 34 ] Should the fetoplacental weight ratio calculation be modified to scale placental weight to the ¾ power? The ratio of birth to placental weight is the common yardstick used in clinical assessment of the appropriateness of placental function (in terms of providing the fetus with nutrients and allowing fetal growth) to the placental mass. Our data suggest that the relationship between birthweight as a measure of placental function and placental weight is not linear but instead scales to the ¾ power predicted by both flow and fractal theories. While this calculation is more cumbersome, deviations from ranges presented in Table 4 may be most clinical precise as they would identify placentas with truly altered flow patterns or fractal structure. Importantly, instead of a range of feto-placental weight ratios, our data suggest that, at least at term, the fetoplacental weight ratio, appropriately scaled, should be 1. In summary, data from the Collaborative Perinatal Project demonstrate that placental weight and birth weight in the mid-late third trimester scale consistent with allometric scaling power laws. We hypothesize that maternal and/or fetal pathologies (e.g., preeclampsia) known to modify either branch calibers or the branching structure per se will yield “suboptimal” placentas, in terms of birth weight. Better characterization of the branching growth of the placenta may be facilitated by allometric modeling, to develop computer models of placental structure that reflect placental function, and potentially to provide a feasible model for branching growth of other fetal viscera.  Discussion The allometric exponent, and the relationship of placental weight to birth weight Our results demonstrate that in this population predominantly delivered at term, placental weight scales to birth weight to the ¾ power, from which we suggest the following: Placental weight is a justifiable proxy for fetal metabolic rate when other measures of fetal metabolic rate are not available. The allometric relationship between placental and birth weight is consistent with the hypothesis that the fetal-placental unit functions as a fractal supply limited system. To our knowledge, only one other study of placental allometry has been carried out [ 25 ] that focused on the allometry of various placental compartments from 10-41 weeks gestation. This work supports our findings that there exist various fetal-placental allometric scaling relations different from a simple dimensional proportionality. We have recently developed a dynamical model of placental vascular growth [ 14 , 26 , 27 ] which relates the spatial shape of the placenta with the structure of the underlying vascular fractal. This model recapitulates many of the known variant placental shapes (bilobate, multilobate, irregular or “scalloped”) by a change of the fractal structure of the vasculature at a specific time instance. In a modern cohort with more precise chorionic plate measures than were collected in the CPP, we have confirmed that such placental shape variance is associated with changes in the allometric scaling relation of fetus and placenta. Specifically, deviations from spatially filling symmetric fractal vascular growth are associated with reduced placental vascular efficiency, that is, a smaller birth weight than predicted by the allometric scaling for the given placental weight [ 14 ] These findings are consistent with a connection between the allometric fetoplacental scaling and the fractal structure of the vascular supply system. We anticipate that future investigations may further improve these estimates of placental function by including other measures of placental growth, e.g., arborization density, enzyme activity (17 ? hydroxysteroid dihydrogenase), and microvillus transport capacity.) We explicitly included all CPP cases with complete placental data; we did not exclude cases of diabetes, preeclampsia or abruption, as one purpose of the present effort was to determine whether, as a general principle, placental weight scaled to birth weight. Deviations from a ¾ scale in the context of maternal medical conditions may help better understand how maternal diseases, via effects on placental growth and, by extension, placental function affect the fetus. Optimal transport and placental anatomy Placental arborization is an essentially random process of fractal growth influenced by permissive and restrictive genetic and environmental factors. Our results suggest that, in general terms, the relationship between placental structure and placental function (in terms of nutrient transport allowing fetal growth) fits an allometric scaling model. The apparent universality of scaling among living organisms has been tied to the idea that evolution also drives optimality of structure, such an “optimal structure” having no excess structures relative to its maximal function (e.g., O2 flux in the lungs, blood flow in the vascular tree, etc.) [ 11 ] Optimization theory has been used to analyze a number of biological relationships over the years, from feeding strategies to locomotor gaits (recently reviewed by [ 28 ]). In this light, our findings suggest that, in general, and in a predominantly term birth cohort, placental structure is optimized. Likewise, in this light, our findings that changes in placental shape and placental dimensions—independent of their associations with placental weight—affect the balance between placental weight and birth weight can be interpreted as those changes in shape and dimension reflecting deviations from optimal placental structure. We speculate that these changes in placental shape and dimension are the physical manifestations of altered placental growth necessitated by the intrauterine environment. Using more precise measures of the chorionic shape, we have demonstrated that the radial standard deviation from the umbilical cord insertion is significantly correlated with ?, [ 14 , 26 ] further albeit indirect evidence that abnormal chorionic surface perimeters, the “errors in outline” acknowledged by Drs Benirschke and Kaufmann, [ 29 ] reflect a placental architecture in which function (of nutrient and oxygen transport) is no longer maximized. Influences on placental-fetal scaling Placental gross growth measures and several maternal characteristics influence placental-fetal scaling. An increase in ? implies a larger placenta for a given birth weight, and a lower fetoplacental weight ratio, and a smaller birth weight for any given placental weight. The “optimal” result of placental growth should be to yield greater fetal nutrient transfer and a larger baby, rather than a larger placenta. Our data suggest that the maternal and fetal variables we examined have at least part of their effects on the normal balance between placental weight and birth weight via effects on gross placental growth dimensions. As noted above, the fact that placental growth parameters also affect ?? independent of placental weight is consistent with our hypothesis that early gestational constraints that yield variant shapes and dimensions of the mature arborized placental villous tree have a permanent effect on the delivered birth weight. Gestational age also showed a significant effect on scaling, despite the admittedly problematic estimation of gestational age by last menstrual period in this cohort. Gestational age should not, in and of itself, affect the ¾ power relationship between placental weight and birth weight. That there is a significant association of even poorly measured gestational age on the scaling relationship suggests that the pathology(ies) that underlie shortened gestational lengths may have (chronic) effects on placental vascular/fractal structure. This is consistent with many studies that have associated chronic placental pathologies with preterm birth. [ 30 - 34 ] Should the fetoplacental weight ratio calculation be modified to scale placental weight to the ¾ power? The ratio of birth to placental weight is the common yardstick used in clinical assessment of the appropriateness of placental function (in terms of providing the fetus with nutrients and allowing fetal growth) to the placental mass. Our data suggest that the relationship between birthweight as a measure of placental function and placental weight is not linear but instead scales to the ¾ power predicted by both flow and fractal theories. While this calculation is more cumbersome, deviations from ranges presented in Table 4 may be most clinical precise as they would identify placentas with truly altered flow patterns or fractal structure. Importantly, instead of a range of feto-placental weight ratios, our data suggest that, at least at term, the fetoplacental weight ratio, appropriately scaled, should be 1. In summary, data from the Collaborative Perinatal Project demonstrate that placental weight and birth weight in the mid-late third trimester scale consistent with allometric scaling power laws. We hypothesize that maternal and/or fetal pathologies (e.g., preeclampsia) known to modify either branch calibers or the branching structure per se will yield “suboptimal” placentas, in terms of birth weight. Better characterization of the branching growth of the placenta may be facilitated by allometric modeling, to develop computer models of placental structure that reflect placental function, and potentially to provide a feasible model for branching growth of other fetal viscera.  The allometric exponent, and the relationship of placental weight to birth weight Our results demonstrate that in this population predominantly delivered at term, placental weight scales to birth weight to the ¾ power, from which we suggest the following: Placental weight is a justifiable proxy for fetal metabolic rate when other measures of fetal metabolic rate are not available. The allometric relationship between placental and birth weight is consistent with the hypothesis that the fetal-placental unit functions as a fractal supply limited system. To our knowledge, only one other study of placental allometry has been carried out [ 25 ] that focused on the allometry of various placental compartments from 10-41 weeks gestation. This work supports our findings that there exist various fetal-placental allometric scaling relations different from a simple dimensional proportionality. We have recently developed a dynamical model of placental vascular growth [ 14 , 26 , 27 ] which relates the spatial shape of the placenta with the structure of the underlying vascular fractal. This model recapitulates many of the known variant placental shapes (bilobate, multilobate, irregular or “scalloped”) by a change of the fractal structure of the vasculature at a specific time instance. In a modern cohort with more precise chorionic plate measures than were collected in the CPP, we have confirmed that such placental shape variance is associated with changes in the allometric scaling relation of fetus and placenta. Specifically, deviations from spatially filling symmetric fractal vascular growth are associated with reduced placental vascular efficiency, that is, a smaller birth weight than predicted by the allometric scaling for the given placental weight [ 14 ] These findings are consistent with a connection between the allometric fetoplacental scaling and the fractal structure of the vascular supply system. We anticipate that future investigations may further improve these estimates of placental function by including other measures of placental growth, e.g., arborization density, enzyme activity (17 ? hydroxysteroid dihydrogenase), and microvillus transport capacity.) We explicitly included all CPP cases with complete placental data; we did not exclude cases of diabetes, preeclampsia or abruption, as one purpose of the present effort was to determine whether, as a general principle, placental weight scaled to birth weight. Deviations from a ¾ scale in the context of maternal medical conditions may help better understand how maternal diseases, via effects on placental growth and, by extension, placental function affect the fetus.  The allometric exponent, and the relationship of placental weight to birth weight Our results demonstrate that in this population predominantly delivered at term, placental weight scales to birth weight to the ¾ power, from which we suggest the following: Placental weight is a justifiable proxy for fetal metabolic rate when other measures of fetal metabolic rate are not available. The allometric relationship between placental and birth weight is consistent with the hypothesis that the fetal-placental unit functions as a fractal supply limited system. To our knowledge, only one other study of placental allometry has been carried out [ 25 ] that focused on the allometry of various placental compartments from 10-41 weeks gestation. This work supports our findings that there exist various fetal-placental allometric scaling relations different from a simple dimensional proportionality. We have recently developed a dynamical model of placental vascular growth [ 14 , 26 , 27 ] which relates the spatial shape of the placenta with the structure of the underlying vascular fractal. This model recapitulates many of the known variant placental shapes (bilobate, multilobate, irregular or “scalloped”) by a change of the fractal structure of the vasculature at a specific time instance. In a modern cohort with more precise chorionic plate measures than were collected in the CPP, we have confirmed that such placental shape variance is associated with changes in the allometric scaling relation of fetus and placenta. Specifically, deviations from spatially filling symmetric fractal vascular growth are associated with reduced placental vascular efficiency, that is, a smaller birth weight than predicted by the allometric scaling for the given placental weight [ 14 ] These findings are consistent with a connection between the allometric fetoplacental scaling and the fractal structure of the vascular supply system. We anticipate that future investigations may further improve these estimates of placental function by including other measures of placental growth, e.g., arborization density, enzyme activity (17 ? hydroxysteroid dihydrogenase), and microvillus transport capacity.) We explicitly included all CPP cases with complete placental data; we did not exclude cases of diabetes, preeclampsia or abruption, as one purpose of the present effort was to determine whether, as a general principle, placental weight scaled to birth weight. Deviations from a ¾ scale in the context of maternal medical conditions may help better understand how maternal diseases, via effects on placental growth and, by extension, placental function affect the fetus.  Optimal transport and placental anatomy Placental arborization is an essentially random process of fractal growth influenced by permissive and restrictive genetic and environmental factors. Our results suggest that, in general terms, the relationship between placental structure and placental function (in terms of nutrient transport allowing fetal growth) fits an allometric scaling model. The apparent universality of scaling among living organisms has been tied to the idea that evolution also drives optimality of structure, such an “optimal structure” having no excess structures relative to its maximal function (e.g., O2 flux in the lungs, blood flow in the vascular tree, etc.) [ 11 ] Optimization theory has been used to analyze a number of biological relationships over the years, from feeding strategies to locomotor gaits (recently reviewed by [ 28 ]). In this light, our findings suggest that, in general, and in a predominantly term birth cohort, placental structure is optimized. Likewise, in this light, our findings that changes in placental shape and placental dimensions—independent of their associations with placental weight—affect the balance between placental weight and birth weight can be interpreted as those changes in shape and dimension reflecting deviations from optimal placental structure. We speculate that these changes in placental shape and dimension are the physical manifestations of altered placental growth necessitated by the intrauterine environment. Using more precise measures of the chorionic shape, we have demonstrated that the radial standard deviation from the umbilical cord insertion is significantly correlated with ?, [ 14 , 26 ] further albeit indirect evidence that abnormal chorionic surface perimeters, the “errors in outline” acknowledged by Drs Benirschke and Kaufmann, [ 29 ] reflect a placental architecture in which function (of nutrient and oxygen transport) is no longer maximized.  Optimal transport and placental anatomy Placental arborization is an essentially random process of fractal growth influenced by permissive and restrictive genetic and environmental factors. Our results suggest that, in general terms, the relationship between placental structure and placental function (in terms of nutrient transport allowing fetal growth) fits an allometric scaling model. The apparent universality of scaling among living organisms has been tied to the idea that evolution also drives optimality of structure, such an “optimal structure” having no excess structures relative to its maximal function (e.g., O2 flux in the lungs, blood flow in the vascular tree, etc.) [ 11 ] Optimization theory has been used to analyze a number of biological relationships over the years, from feeding strategies to locomotor gaits (recently reviewed by [ 28 ]). In this light, our findings suggest that, in general, and in a predominantly term birth cohort, placental structure is optimized. Likewise, in this light, our findings that changes in placental shape and placental dimensions—independent of their associations with placental weight—affect the balance between placental weight and birth weight can be interpreted as those changes in shape and dimension reflecting deviations from optimal placental structure. We speculate that these changes in placental shape and dimension are the physical manifestations of altered placental growth necessitated by the intrauterine environment. Using more precise measures of the chorionic shape, we have demonstrated that the radial standard deviation from the umbilical cord insertion is significantly correlated with ?, [ 14 , 26 ] further albeit indirect evidence that abnormal chorionic surface perimeters, the “errors in outline” acknowledged by Drs Benirschke and Kaufmann, [ 29 ] reflect a placental architecture in which function (of nutrient and oxygen transport) is no longer maximized.  Influences on placental-fetal scaling Placental gross growth measures and several maternal characteristics influence placental-fetal scaling. An increase in ? implies a larger placenta for a given birth weight, and a lower fetoplacental weight ratio, and a smaller birth weight for any given placental weight. The “optimal” result of placental growth should be to yield greater fetal nutrient transfer and a larger baby, rather than a larger placenta. Our data suggest that the maternal and fetal variables we examined have at least part of their effects on the normal balance between placental weight and birth weight via effects on gross placental growth dimensions. As noted above, the fact that placental growth parameters also affect ?? independent of placental weight is consistent with our hypothesis that early gestational constraints that yield variant shapes and dimensions of the mature arborized placental villous tree have a permanent effect on the delivered birth weight. Gestational age also showed a significant effect on scaling, despite the admittedly problematic estimation of gestational age by last menstrual period in this cohort. Gestational age should not, in and of itself, affect the ¾ power relationship between placental weight and birth weight. That there is a significant association of even poorly measured gestational age on the scaling relationship suggests that the pathology(ies) that underlie shortened gestational lengths may have (chronic) effects on placental vascular/fractal structure. This is consistent with many studies that have associated chronic placental pathologies with preterm birth. [ 30 - 34 ]  Influences on placental-fetal scaling Placental gross growth measures and several maternal characteristics influence placental-fetal scaling. An increase in ? implies a larger placenta for a given birth weight, and a lower fetoplacental weight ratio, and a smaller birth weight for any given placental weight. The “optimal” result of placental growth should be to yield greater fetal nutrient transfer and a larger baby, rather than a larger placenta. Our data suggest that the maternal and fetal variables we examined have at least part of their effects on the normal balance between placental weight and birth weight via effects on gross placental growth dimensions. As noted above, the fact that placental growth parameters also affect ?? independent of placental weight is consistent with our hypothesis that early gestational constraints that yield variant shapes and dimensions of the mature arborized placental villous tree have a permanent effect on the delivered birth weight. Gestational age also showed a significant effect on scaling, despite the admittedly problematic estimation of gestational age by last menstrual period in this cohort. Gestational age should not, in and of itself, affect the ¾ power relationship between placental weight and birth weight. That there is a significant association of even poorly measured gestational age on the scaling relationship suggests that the pathology(ies) that underlie shortened gestational lengths may have (chronic) effects on placental vascular/fractal structure. This is consistent with many studies that have associated chronic placental pathologies with preterm birth. [ 30 - 34 ]  Should the fetoplacental weight ratio calculation be modified to scale placental weight to the ¾ power? The ratio of birth to placental weight is the common yardstick used in clinical assessment of the appropriateness of placental function (in terms of providing the fetus with nutrients and allowing fetal growth) to the placental mass. Our data suggest that the relationship between birthweight as a measure of placental function and placental weight is not linear but instead scales to the ¾ power predicted by both flow and fractal theories. While this calculation is more cumbersome, deviations from ranges presented in Table 4 may be most clinical precise as they would identify placentas with truly altered flow patterns or fractal structure. Importantly, instead of a range of feto-placental weight ratios, our data suggest that, at least at term, the fetoplacental weight ratio, appropriately scaled, should be 1. In summary, data from the Collaborative Perinatal Project demonstrate that placental weight and birth weight in the mid-late third trimester scale consistent with allometric scaling power laws. We hypothesize that maternal and/or fetal pathologies (e.g., preeclampsia) known to modify either branch calibers or the branching structure per se will yield “suboptimal” placentas, in terms of birth weight. Better characterization of the branching growth of the placenta may be facilitated by allometric modeling, to develop computer models of placental structure that reflect placental function, and potentially to provide a feasible model for branching growth of other fetal viscera.  Should the fetoplacental weight ratio calculation be modified to scale placental weight to the ¾ power? The ratio of birth to placental weight is the common yardstick used in clinical assessment of the appropriateness of placental function (in terms of providing the fetus with nutrients and allowing fetal growth) to the placental mass. Our data suggest that the relationship between birthweight as a measure of placental function and placental weight is not linear but instead scales to the ¾ power predicted by both flow and fractal theories. While this calculation is more cumbersome, deviations from ranges presented in Table 4 may be most clinical precise as they would identify placentas with truly altered flow patterns or fractal structure. Importantly, instead of a range of feto-placental weight ratios, our data suggest that, at least at term, the fetoplacental weight ratio, appropriately scaled, should be 1. In summary, data from the Collaborative Perinatal Project demonstrate that placental weight and birth weight in the mid-late third trimester scale consistent with allometric scaling power laws. We hypothesize that maternal and/or fetal pathologies (e.g., preeclampsia) known to modify either branch calibers or the branching structure per se will yield “suboptimal” placentas, in terms of birth weight. Better characterization of the branching growth of the placenta may be facilitated by allometric modeling, to develop computer models of placental structure that reflect placental function, and potentially to provide a feasible model for branching growth of other fetal viscera. 