Memory T cells need CD28 costimulation to remember The activation and expansion of naïve T cells require costimulatory signals provided by CD28 and TNF family members. In contrast, for many years it was believed that memory T cells do not require CD28 costimulation for expansion during secondary responses. This was based on in vitro experiments that suggested the re-activation of memory T cells is somewhat independent of costimulation. Recent in vivo evidence, however, has challenged this and shown that both CD4+ and CD8+ memory T cells require CD28 costimulation for maximal expansion and pathogen clearance. This requirement has important implications for host immunity, vaccine development and immunotherapeutics.  6. Implications for memory immune responses to pathogens and tumors The finding that CD28 costimulation is critical for secondary T cell responses has important implications for immunity against pathogens and tumors. T cell responses directly, but also secondary B cell responses indirectly, may ultimately be affected by the absence or by reduced CD28 costimulation of memory T cells. One of the mechanisms used by viruses, such as measles, Varicellazoster, and HIV-1, to evade immune responses, is the suppression of DC maturation and inhibition of CD28 costimulatory ligands, B7-1 and B7-2 upregulation [ 92 – 95 ] (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Infection with these viruses may lead to reduced quality of memory T cells generated, and to ineffective secondary responses upon re-exposure to the pathogens (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Furthermore, as these viruses inhibit expression of costimulatory molecules, vaccines that are designed to target such pathogens by eliciting T cell memory, may not be effective. Based on the previously presented studies [ 72 , 82 , 83 ], one could even predict that the absence of costimulation during reactivation of memory may even tolerize the responding memory T cell. Similar to viruses, T cell immunity is important for tumor immune surveillance. Tumors utilize different mechanisms to evade CD8+ T cell responses, such as: the release of anti-inflammatory cytokines, exhaustion of tumor associated antigen specific CD8+ T cells by chronic stimulation, inhibition of costimulatory molecules that activate the immune response or upregulation of molecules with inhibitory function [ 96 ]. Specifically, expression of the PD-1 ligand B7-H1, have been found to be increased in a wide variety tumor cell lines derived from cancerous tissues, ranging from ovarian cancer to lung cancer, but not on normal tissues [ 38 ]. Also many studies suggested that DCs may be retained in an immature state, thus not express enough CD80 and CD86 to stimulate the CD28 receptor on intra-tumor T cells [ 97 , 98 ] (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Furthemore, animal studies have demonstrated that induced expression of B7-1 and B7-2 on carcinoma tumor cells rendered tumors susceptible to rejection [ 99 ]. The same approach was used to show that expression of B7 h also provided costimulation and promoted the rejection of fibrosarcomas and plasmacytomas by CD8+ T cells [ 100 , 101 ]. However, another set of studies showed that when tumors were poorly immunogenic, induced expression of B7-1 or B7-2 alone was not sufficient to augment the immune response against the tumors [ 102 ]. B7-1-transfected autologous tumor cells were tested in phase I trials of metastatic renal cell carcinoma [ 103 ], adenocarcinoma [ 104 ] and acute myeloid leukemia [ 105 ]. In some patients, tumor vaccination stabilized the disease or considerably reduced the metastatic lesions. In designing efficient tumor vaccines, one has to keep in mind that overexpression of B7 molecules on tumor cells may promote more interactions with CTLA-4 which has a higher affinity for B7 than CD28, and therefore inhibition rather than activation of T cells may result. The recent data on the effect the lack of costimulation during primary immune responses has on the quality of memory T cells, may also explain why providing costimulation fails in patients with preexisting tumor loads. Specific blockade of CTLA-4 signals, while leaving TCR and CD28 signals intact, is a very attractive approach for tumor immunotherapy. In animal studies, administration of antibodies that block CTLA-4 interactions with B7-1 and B7-2 resulted in the rejection of colon carcinoma and fibrosarcoma, including preestablished tumors [ 106 ]. Furthermore, this rejection was accompanied by a long-lasting immunity to a secondary exposure to tumor cells in the absence of additional treatment [ 106 ]. This work proved in principle that CTLA-4 blockade could enhance tumor-elicited weak immune responses to a level that could mediate tumor injection. Subsequent work showed that anti-CTLA-4 monotherapy could also promote the rejection of other transplantable tumors, including prostatic carcinoma, lymphoma, renal cell carcinoma, and colon carcinoma [ 107 ]. However, this approach does not seem to be effective for poorly immunogenic tumors, indicating that the threshold of TCR activation is a critical parameter for immunotherapy to be effective. Recurrent tumors following therapy would entail memory tumor-specific T cells being reactivated. In this case, immature dendritic cells would fail to induce-maximal T cell responses against tumors. Although the role of CD28 costimulation in secondary T cell responses against tumors is currently speculative, its potential is more obvious in the case where tumor specific vaccines are employed. In this scenario, the lack of CD80/CD86 expressing intra-tumor dendritic cells, would affect the T cell recall response against the tumor and reduce the efficiency of potential vaccines.  6. Implications for memory immune responses to pathogens and tumors The finding that CD28 costimulation is critical for secondary T cell responses has important implications for immunity against pathogens and tumors. T cell responses directly, but also secondary B cell responses indirectly, may ultimately be affected by the absence or by reduced CD28 costimulation of memory T cells. One of the mechanisms used by viruses, such as measles, Varicellazoster, and HIV-1, to evade immune responses, is the suppression of DC maturation and inhibition of CD28 costimulatory ligands, B7-1 and B7-2 upregulation [ 92 – 95 ] (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Infection with these viruses may lead to reduced quality of memory T cells generated, and to ineffective secondary responses upon re-exposure to the pathogens (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Furthermore, as these viruses inhibit expression of costimulatory molecules, vaccines that are designed to target such pathogens by eliciting T cell memory, may not be effective. Based on the previously presented studies [ 72 , 82 , 83 ], one could even predict that the absence of costimulation during reactivation of memory may even tolerize the responding memory T cell. Similar to viruses, T cell immunity is important for tumor immune surveillance. Tumors utilize different mechanisms to evade CD8+ T cell responses, such as: the release of anti-inflammatory cytokines, exhaustion of tumor associated antigen specific CD8+ T cells by chronic stimulation, inhibition of costimulatory molecules that activate the immune response or upregulation of molecules with inhibitory function [ 96 ]. Specifically, expression of the PD-1 ligand B7-H1, have been found to be increased in a wide variety tumor cell lines derived from cancerous tissues, ranging from ovarian cancer to lung cancer, but not on normal tissues [ 38 ]. Also many studies suggested that DCs may be retained in an immature state, thus not express enough CD80 and CD86 to stimulate the CD28 receptor on intra-tumor T cells [ 97 , 98 ] (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Furthemore, animal studies have demonstrated that induced expression of B7-1 and B7-2 on carcinoma tumor cells rendered tumors susceptible to rejection [ 99 ]. The same approach was used to show that expression of B7 h also provided costimulation and promoted the rejection of fibrosarcomas and plasmacytomas by CD8+ T cells [ 100 , 101 ]. However, another set of studies showed that when tumors were poorly immunogenic, induced expression of B7-1 or B7-2 alone was not sufficient to augment the immune response against the tumors [ 102 ]. B7-1-transfected autologous tumor cells were tested in phase I trials of metastatic renal cell carcinoma [ 103 ], adenocarcinoma [ 104 ] and acute myeloid leukemia [ 105 ]. In some patients, tumor vaccination stabilized the disease or considerably reduced the metastatic lesions. In designing efficient tumor vaccines, one has to keep in mind that overexpression of B7 molecules on tumor cells may promote more interactions with CTLA-4 which has a higher affinity for B7 than CD28, and therefore inhibition rather than activation of T cells may result. The recent data on the effect the lack of costimulation during primary immune responses has on the quality of memory T cells, may also explain why providing costimulation fails in patients with preexisting tumor loads. Specific blockade of CTLA-4 signals, while leaving TCR and CD28 signals intact, is a very attractive approach for tumor immunotherapy. In animal studies, administration of antibodies that block CTLA-4 interactions with B7-1 and B7-2 resulted in the rejection of colon carcinoma and fibrosarcoma, including preestablished tumors [ 106 ]. Furthermore, this rejection was accompanied by a long-lasting immunity to a secondary exposure to tumor cells in the absence of additional treatment [ 106 ]. This work proved in principle that CTLA-4 blockade could enhance tumor-elicited weak immune responses to a level that could mediate tumor injection. Subsequent work showed that anti-CTLA-4 monotherapy could also promote the rejection of other transplantable tumors, including prostatic carcinoma, lymphoma, renal cell carcinoma, and colon carcinoma [ 107 ]. However, this approach does not seem to be effective for poorly immunogenic tumors, indicating that the threshold of TCR activation is a critical parameter for immunotherapy to be effective. Recurrent tumors following therapy would entail memory tumor-specific T cells being reactivated. In this case, immature dendritic cells would fail to induce-maximal T cell responses against tumors. Although the role of CD28 costimulation in secondary T cell responses against tumors is currently speculative, its potential is more obvious in the case where tumor specific vaccines are employed. In this scenario, the lack of CD80/CD86 expressing intra-tumor dendritic cells, would affect the T cell recall response against the tumor and reduce the efficiency of potential vaccines.  7. The CD28 requirement of memory T cell and ageing The decreased capacity of elderly to mount efficient primary immune responses has been extensively documented [ 108 – 110 ]. However, little is known about the impact of ageing on established memory T cell pools. Animal studies on memory CD8+ T cell response to respiratory virus infections in aged mice revealed that there is a significant reduction of effector memory cells over time, which may reduce the immediate response of memory T cells to secondary challenge [ 111 ]. In humans, reduced antibody recall responses to influenza virus have been demonstrated in vaccinated elderly [ 112 , 113 ]. One potential reason for decreasing efficacy of the vaccination is accumulation of senescent CD28 null T cells [ 114 ]. Increased numbers of CD28 null T cells inversely correlate with the number of functionally active (granzyme positive) CD8+ central memory T cells in vaccinated aged individuals [ 115 ]. This T cell senescence may affect recall responses to pathogens after vaccination. More relevant to our discussion here is the potential dysfunction of DC with ageing. T regulatory cells (Tregs) have been described to downregulate costimulatory molecules such as CD40 and CD86 on the surface of dendritic cells [ 116 , 117 ]. The accumulation in the lymphoid organs of old mice of Tregs expressing an effector/memory phenotype, induces the downregulation of expression of CD40 and CD86 costimulatory molecules by dendritic cells, and this can be another mechanism of reducing immune responses during ageing [ 118 ]. It has been recently reported that bone-marrow-derived dendritic cells from aged mice are less effective than their young counterparts in inducing the regression of B16-ovalbumin melanomas [ 119 ]. Aged DC had an impaired ability to stimulate CD8+ T-cell proliferation and migrate to the lymph nodes and when tested in vivo , DC from aged animals did not induce tumor reduction [ 119 ]. Overall, these studies suggest that during ageing there is a decrease in costimulatory signaling by DC. Since memory T cells require CD28 costimulation such an impairment of DC in ageing would affect recall responses and reduce the efficacy of vaccinations as well as immune responses to tumors.  7. The CD28 requirement of memory T cell and ageing The decreased capacity of elderly to mount efficient primary immune responses has been extensively documented [ 108 – 110 ]. However, little is known about the impact of ageing on established memory T cell pools. Animal studies on memory CD8+ T cell response to respiratory virus infections in aged mice revealed that there is a significant reduction of effector memory cells over time, which may reduce the immediate response of memory T cells to secondary challenge [ 111 ]. In humans, reduced antibody recall responses to influenza virus have been demonstrated in vaccinated elderly [ 112 , 113 ]. One potential reason for decreasing efficacy of the vaccination is accumulation of senescent CD28 null T cells [ 114 ]. Increased numbers of CD28 null T cells inversely correlate with the number of functionally active (granzyme positive) CD8+ central memory T cells in vaccinated aged individuals [ 115 ]. This T cell senescence may affect recall responses to pathogens after vaccination. More relevant to our discussion here is the potential dysfunction of DC with ageing. T regulatory cells (Tregs) have been described to downregulate costimulatory molecules such as CD40 and CD86 on the surface of dendritic cells [ 116 , 117 ]. The accumulation in the lymphoid organs of old mice of Tregs expressing an effector/memory phenotype, induces the downregulation of expression of CD40 and CD86 costimulatory molecules by dendritic cells, and this can be another mechanism of reducing immune responses during ageing [ 118 ]. It has been recently reported that bone-marrow-derived dendritic cells from aged mice are less effective than their young counterparts in inducing the regression of B16-ovalbumin melanomas [ 119 ]. Aged DC had an impaired ability to stimulate CD8+ T-cell proliferation and migrate to the lymph nodes and when tested in vivo , DC from aged animals did not induce tumor reduction [ 119 ]. Overall, these studies suggest that during ageing there is a decrease in costimulatory signaling by DC. Since memory T cells require CD28 costimulation such an impairment of DC in ageing would affect recall responses and reduce the efficacy of vaccinations as well as immune responses to tumors.  8. Implication of costimulation blockade in autoimmune diseases and transplantation In contrast to vaccine development or tumor therapeutic, where the enhancement of CD28 costimulation or blockade of co-inhibitory molecules could prove beneficial to the host, in autoimmunity and transplantation the presence of costimulation may be responsible for inducing undesired immune responses. Therefore, in both autoimmune disease and transplantation, the goal is to dampen reactive immune responses against either self- or allograft tissue, respectively. Some successes in autoimmune disease have been observed with treatment using CTLA4-Ig which binds B7-1/B7-2 and prevents CD28 costimulation (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Studies in which patients with Psoriasis vulgaris [ 120 ] and rheumatoid arthritis [ 121 ] were treated with the soluble fusion protein CTLA4-Ig, showed evidence of efficacy. Blocking costimulation has also been employed in transplantation. Organ rejection after transplantation is mediated by activation of host immune cells against grafted tissues. Inhibition of costimulation using CTLA4-Ig (Abatacept) [ 122 , 123 ] or a variant of it with higher affinity for CD80/CD86 (Belatacept) [ 124 ] has demonstrated some efficiency in prolonging transplant rejection [ 125 ]. However, blocking B7-1 and B7-2 with CTLA4-Ig may impair CD28 signaling, which we believe is essential for the reactivation of memory T cells [ 72 , 82 , 83 ], leaving open the possibility for more infection or vaccine induced memory responses failure. Patients undergoing transplantation are also treated with immunosuppressants and their immune system is overall suppressed. Therefore, it would be hard to discern whether blocking costimulation affects memory immune responses in immunosuppressed patients that become infected with pathogens. In the light of the latest findings [ 72 , 82 , 83 ], recall responses to pathogens would be diminished in the absence of costimulation, and this potential side effect we believe deserves further investigation in autoimmunity and transplantation costimulation blockade therapies. The observation that memory T cell responses require CD28 costimulation to elicit optimal secondary responses raises important questions on how one can circumvent this potential problem. Some studies have suggested that TNF family members can replace CD28 costimulation in primary responses [ 126 , 58 , 127 ] and this may be also true for memory T cell responses. Indeed, CD137 (4-1BB) has been proposed to replace CD28 signaling [ 128 ] and other members of the TNF receptor superfamily (CD27, OX40) have already been described to play a role in the generation of T cells memory and in the secondary immune responses [ 126 , 129 , 130 ]. Furthermore it may be possible to devise strategies that elicit CD28 independent memory T cells. Understanding the requirement of CD28 signaling and devising strategies to overcome this problem in vivo , may lead to enhanced immunity against immune evading pathogens and tumors as well as to increased efficacy of vaccines in the elderly.  8. Implication of costimulation blockade in autoimmune diseases and transplantation In contrast to vaccine development or tumor therapeutic, where the enhancement of CD28 costimulation or blockade of co-inhibitory molecules could prove beneficial to the host, in autoimmunity and transplantation the presence of costimulation may be responsible for inducing undesired immune responses. Therefore, in both autoimmune disease and transplantation, the goal is to dampen reactive immune responses against either self- or allograft tissue, respectively. Some successes in autoimmune disease have been observed with treatment using CTLA4-Ig which binds B7-1/B7-2 and prevents CD28 costimulation (illustrated in Fig. 2 ). Studies in which patients with Psoriasis vulgaris [ 120 ] and rheumatoid arthritis [ 121 ] were treated with the soluble fusion protein CTLA4-Ig, showed evidence of efficacy. Blocking costimulation has also been employed in transplantation. Organ rejection after transplantation is mediated by activation of host immune cells against grafted tissues. Inhibition of costimulation using CTLA4-Ig (Abatacept) [ 122 , 123 ] or a variant of it with higher affinity for CD80/CD86 (Belatacept) [ 124 ] has demonstrated some efficiency in prolonging transplant rejection [ 125 ]. However, blocking B7-1 and B7-2 with CTLA4-Ig may impair CD28 signaling, which we believe is essential for the reactivation of memory T cells [ 72 , 82 , 83 ], leaving open the possibility for more infection or vaccine induced memory responses failure. Patients undergoing transplantation are also treated with immunosuppressants and their immune system is overall suppressed. Therefore, it would be hard to discern whether blocking costimulation affects memory immune responses in immunosuppressed patients that become infected with pathogens. In the light of the latest findings [ 72 , 82 , 83 ], recall responses to pathogens would be diminished in the absence of costimulation, and this potential side effect we believe deserves further investigation in autoimmunity and transplantation costimulation blockade therapies. The observation that memory T cell responses require CD28 costimulation to elicit optimal secondary responses raises important questions on how one can circumvent this potential problem. Some studies have suggested that TNF family members can replace CD28 costimulation in primary responses [ 126 , 58 , 127 ] and this may be also true for memory T cell responses. Indeed, CD137 (4-1BB) has been proposed to replace CD28 signaling [ 128 ] and other members of the TNF receptor superfamily (CD27, OX40) have already been described to play a role in the generation of T cells memory and in the secondary immune responses [ 126 , 129 , 130 ]. Furthermore it may be possible to devise strategies that elicit CD28 independent memory T cells. Understanding the requirement of CD28 signaling and devising strategies to overcome this problem in vivo , may lead to enhanced immunity against immune evading pathogens and tumors as well as to increased efficacy of vaccines in the elderly.  Figures Fig. 1 The effect of CD28 costimulation on the quality and expansion of memory T cells. Activation of naïve T cells by APCs such as DC expressing MHC/peptide complexes and CD28 ligands, leads to intense proliferation and clonal expansion. Memory T cells generated after a primary response expand rapidly upon re-encountering antigen and CD28 costimulation. When memory cells re-encounter antigen without sufficient CD28 costimulation, they fail to fully expand and clear pathogens. If naïve T cells are activated by APCs in the absence of CD28 costimulation, there is limited clonal expansion or even anergy. The resulting memory population is normal in terms of quantity but quality is affected and these memory cells do not re-expand optimally upon antigen re-encounter. Fig. 2 Pathogens, tumors and immunotherapeutics can impair memory T cell activation. In contrast to a healthy immune response in which memory T cells receive both signal 1 and signal 2 (costimulation), the immune response against some viruses or tumors or during ageing may be impaired due to downregulation of costimulatory ligands. Blocking costimulation, although beneficial in autoimmunity and transplantation for diminishing the activation of auto- and alloantigen specific responses, may impair the memory T cell responses induced by previous vaccinations infections.  Figures Fig. 1 The effect of CD28 costimulation on the quality and expansion of memory T cells. Activation of naïve T cells by APCs such as DC expressing MHC/peptide complexes and CD28 ligands, leads to intense proliferation and clonal expansion. Memory T cells generated after a primary response expand rapidly upon re-encountering antigen and CD28 costimulation. When memory cells re-encounter antigen without sufficient CD28 costimulation, they fail to fully expand and clear pathogens. If naïve T cells are activated by APCs in the absence of CD28 costimulation, there is limited clonal expansion or even anergy. The resulting memory population is normal in terms of quantity but quality is affected and these memory cells do not re-expand optimally upon antigen re-encounter. Fig. 2 Pathogens, tumors and immunotherapeutics can impair memory T cell activation. In contrast to a healthy immune response in which memory T cells receive both signal 1 and signal 2 (costimulation), the immune response against some viruses or tumors or during ageing may be impaired due to downregulation of costimulatory ligands. Blocking costimulation, although beneficial in autoimmunity and transplantation for diminishing the activation of auto- and alloantigen specific responses, may impair the memory T cell responses induced by previous vaccinations infections. 