Impairment in Reactivation of a Latency Associated Transcript (LAT)-Deficient HSV-2 is Not Solely Dependent on the Latent Viral Load or the Number of CD8 +T Cells Infiltrating the Ganglia The HSV latency-associated transcript (LAT) is abundantly expressed during virus latency. Previous studies have shown that the latent viral load and CD8+T cells in ganglia influence the rate of reactivation of HSV. While LAT is important for efficient reactivation and establishment of latency, it is uncertain how LAT affects either the HSV latent viral load or CD8+T cell infiltration of ganglia. We infected mice with LAT-deficient or LAT-restored HSV-2 at a wide range of inocula. We found that the reduced rate of spontaneous ex-vivo reactivation of the LAT-deficient virus was not associated with a higher number of CD8+T cells in the ganglia. Reactivation rates were lower for LAT-deficient than LAT restored HSV-2 even when the latent viral loads were similar, indicating that differences in reactivation were not solely dependent on the latent viral load. Therefore, LAT likely has additional functions important for reactivation.  Introduction Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and 2 (HSV-2) causes a wide range of human diseases during both primary and recurrent infections. Primary infection with HSV-1 usually results in orolabial herpes, while HSV-2 frequently causes genital herpes. HSV is also a cause of severe disease including encephalitis, neonatal herpes, and disseminated disease in severely immunocompromised individuals. After primary infection, HSV establishes a lifelong latent infection in sensory or cranial nerve ganglia. HSV-1 usually establishes latency in trigeminal ganglia and HSV-2 is usually latent in sacral ganglia. Latent HSV can reactivate resulting in recurrent episodes of cold sores in the orofacial area due to HSV-1 or genital herpes due to HSV-2. The number of HSV genomes in latently infected sensory ganglia, the latent viral load, is one of the most important determinants of the reactivation rate of HSV from latency in the guinea pig genital ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ; Lekstrom-Himes, Pesnicak, and Straus, 1998 ) and mouse ocular ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Sawtell et al., 2001 ) models. In mice, the number of neurons harboring latent HSV is more important than the HSV genome copy number per neuron for determining the rate of reactivation ( Sawtell, 1997 ; Sawtell, 1998 ); both factors contribute to the total latent viral load ( Hoshino et al., 2008 ). The level of virus replication at the site of infection, the titer of the inocula, and the severity of disease during primary infection also correlate with the latent viral load ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ; Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Jones, Taylor, and Knipe, 2000 ; Sawtell et al., 2001 ). The HSV latency-associated transcript (LAT) is the only viral gene abundantly expressed during latency in human and experimentally infected animals. LAT is important for efficient reactivation from latency in-vivo and ex-vivo based on comparing LAT-deficient mutants with wild-type or LAT-revertant viruses in mice, guinea pigs, and rabbits ( Block et al., 1990 ; Bloom et al., 1994 ; Cook et al., 1991 ; Devi-Rao et al., 1997 ; Hill et al., 1990 ; Krause et al., 1995 ; Leib et al., 1989 ; Perng et al., 1994 ; Trousdale et al., 1991 ). While initial papers suggested that HSV-1 and HSV-2 LAT are dispensable for establishment of latency in mice, rabbits and guinea pigs ( Bloom et al., 1994 ; Devi-Rao et al., 1994 ; Hill et al., 1990 ; Krause et al., 1995 ; Leib et al., 1989 ; Sedarati et al., 1989 ; Steiner et al., 1989 ), more recent papers showed that HSV-1 LAT is necessary for efficient establishment of latency in mice and rabbits ( Perng et al., 2000b ; Sawtell, 1997 ; Sawtell and Thompson, 1992 ; Thompson and Sawtell, 1997 ; Thompson and Sawtell, 2001 ). LAT might promote more efficient establishment of latency and result in higher rates of reactivation rates solely by resulting in a higher latent viral load; therefore, LAT might not play a direct role on reactivation. Several studies showed no difference in the latent viral load in animals infected with LAT-positive or LAT-deficient HSV-1 using dot blots, Southern blots, or PCR to quantify the latent viral load ( Bloom et al., 1994 ; Chen et al., 2002 ; Devi-Rao et al., 1994 ; Hill et al., 1990 ; Leib et al., 1989 ; O'Neil et al., 2004 ); Yoshikawa et al (1996) showed similar latent viral loads in animals infected with LAT-positive and LAT-deficient HSV-2 using PCR. Sawtell and Thompson ( Thompson and Sawtell, 1997 ) found that compared with wild-type HSV-1, LAT-deficient HSV-1 results in a lower number of HSV-infected neurons, but a similar number of HSV genome copies in TG neurons in mice using PCR of fixed dissociated neurons. Perng et al ( Perng et al., 2000b ) used HSV expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) under the LAT promoter and found that the number of EGFP-positive neurons in rabbits latently infected with LAT-deficient HSV was about 60% less than in of animals infected with LAT-positive HSV-1. The discrepancy in the results of the effect of LAT on latent viral load in different studies may be due to differences in assays and levels of sensitivity. In addition to affecting the latent viral load, LAT might also affect the cellular immune response to HSV to regulate reactivation. Liu at al. ( Liu et al., 2000 ) found that blocking CD8+T cell function with a monoclonal antibody enhanced the ex-vivo reactivation rates of HSV in dissociated mouse ganglia. Other studies showed that primary HSV-specific CD8+T cells ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ) or clonal HSV gB specific CD8+T cells ( Khanna et al., 2003 ) can infiltrate latently infected mouse ganglia and block reactivation from latency. IFN-? blocks reactivation of HSV ( Liu et al., 2001 ) and cytolytic granules released from CD8+T cells cleave an HSV immediate-early protein without killing infected neurons ( Knickelbein et al., 2008 ). HSV-specific T cells are also present in human trigeminal ganglia latently infected with HSV ( Verjans et al., 2007 ). Therefore, LAT might modulate reactivation by controlling the infiltrating CD8+T cells in latently infected ganglia. Two studies, however, showed no significant differences in levels of IFN-? or TNF-? RNA in TG latently infected with LAT-positive or LAT-negative HSV-1 ( Carr et al., 1998 ; Chen et al., 2000 ) To further study the effect of LAT on latency and reactivation, we infected mice with either LAT? or LAT-revertant (LATR) HSV-2 at a wide range of infectious doses. After establishing a latent infection, TGs from groups of mice were pooled, and we compared the latent viral load, the rate of reactivation, and the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the pooled ganglia  Material and Methods Viruses and animal studies LAT-deficient (LAT?) HSV-2 was constructed from strain 333 and characterized in guinea pigs ( Krause et al., 1995 ) and mice ( Wang et al., 2001 ). The virus is deleted for the 624 kb Not I-Not I fragment of the promotor region of LAT. A rescued virus, LATR HSV2, in which the deletion in the promoter of LAT was restored, was described previously ( Krause et al., 1995 ). LAT RNA is detected in guinea pig ganglia latently infected with the rescued virus (LATR HSV2), but not with the LAT promoter mutant (LAT? HSV-2) ( Krause et al., 1995 ), and we were unable to detect LAT RNA in ganglia of mice latently infected with LAT? HSV-2 by PCR (data not shown). Both viruses were propagated and titrated in Vero cells. Eight to 11 week old DBA2 mice were anesthetized (0.12mg of xylazine and 1.2mg of ketamine per mouse) and inoculated with either LAT? or LATR HSV-2 onto both corneas without scarification, with a range of inocula from 1.1×104 to 8×105 pfu/mouse. Human IgG (0.5 ml, 1:8 dilution in PBS, Gammagard, Baxter, Deerfield, IL) was injected intraperitoneally into each mouse one day after infection, so that most animals would survive the acute infection and undergo latent infection ( Dalai et al., 2002 ). Twenty-seven days after IgG treatment, 8 mice per group were sacrificed and their trigeminal ganglia (TG) were harvested. Ganglia from each group of mice were pooled, and dispersed into single cell suspensions using collagenase type I (3 mg/ml for 1.5h, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Aliquots equivalent to 1 TG were analyzed by real-time PCR to measure the latent viral load, or studied by flow cytometry to quantify numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells. The expression of LAT RNA from mouse TG infected with LATR HSV-2 was confirmed using real-time RT-PCR, but no expression was detected from TG infected with LAT? HSV-2 (data not shown). Quantitative real-time PCR The latent viral load was determined using quantitative real-time PCR as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ). To measure acute viral load, four mice infected with either LAT? or LATR HSV-2 at each time point (day 3, 7, and 14 after infection) were sacrificed and both TG from each animal were pooled and frozen at ?80°C. Aliquots of TG suspensions equivalent to one TG were divided into two tubes. DNA was isolated from each sample using the Puregene DNA isolation kit (Gentra Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota) and the number of copies of latent HSV-2 DNA genomes in each sample were quantified by real-time PCR using the Taqman System (ABI 7700 Sequence Detector; PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with primers and probes specific for HSV-2 gD ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ). Each reaction included 100 ng of ganglion DNA. A standard curve for the assay was generated using known copy numbers of a plasmid containing the HSV-2 gD coding region diluted in salmon sperm DNA. The limit of detection for the PCR assay was ~4 copies per reaction. The latent viral load in infected ganglia was calculated from the mean of at least 3 reactions. At least 2 independent PCR assays were performed to determine the latent viral load in dissociated ganglia, and the results shown were the average of the assays. Flow cytometry and depletion of virus-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells from TG single cell suspensions Flow cytometry analyses were performed as previously reported ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ). Aliquots of TG suspensions equivalent to one latently infected TG were passed through cell strainers, stained with fluorescence isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-CD8 and peridinin chlorophyll-conjugated anti-CD45 (a pan-leukocyte marker) monoclonal antibodies (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA), examined on a FACSCaliber cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ), and analyzed using FlowJo software (Version 4.5.9, Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR). The numbers of CD8+T cells were normalized in each group of mice based on the numbers of CD45-negative cells. To deplete CD8+ cells from TG suspensions, aliquots of cells equivalent to 8 TGs were incubated with CD8-immunomagnetic beads (Dynal Biotech, Norway) for 5 cycles of depletions using 6 to 10 beads per cell as previously described ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Analysis by flow cytometry indicated that over 90% of CD8+ cells were removed from dissociated TG cells when cells were compared before and after depletion. HSV-2 reactivation ex vivo Reactivation of latent HSV-2 from infected TG cell suspension cultures was quantified as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Every other day media from TG cell suspensions, cultured in Iscove's Dulbecco-modified medium supplemented with 10% of FBS and 10U/ml of IL-2 in 96-well flat bottom culture plates at a density of 0.25 TG/well, was removed and added to Vero cell monolayers. Vero cells were stained with crystal violet after 2 days and examined microscopically for cytopathic effects (CPE). Analyses were performed using reactivation rates of CD8-depleted cultures, to eliminate the influence of CD8+T cells on reactivation. Calculation of the rate of ex vivo reactivation of HSV from latency The reactivation rates of HSV ex-vivo in tissue cultures were determined as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). When r is the reactivation rate of HSV per TG per day, r is approximated from the slope of a linear regression line obtained when the cumulative reactivation events in ex vivo TG cultures are plotted on the y-axis with days in culture on the x-axis. Statistical analysis was done using JMP 5.01 software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).  Viruses and animal studies LAT-deficient (LAT?) HSV-2 was constructed from strain 333 and characterized in guinea pigs ( Krause et al., 1995 ) and mice ( Wang et al., 2001 ). The virus is deleted for the 624 kb Not I-Not I fragment of the promotor region of LAT. A rescued virus, LATR HSV2, in which the deletion in the promoter of LAT was restored, was described previously ( Krause et al., 1995 ). LAT RNA is detected in guinea pig ganglia latently infected with the rescued virus (LATR HSV2), but not with the LAT promoter mutant (LAT? HSV-2) ( Krause et al., 1995 ), and we were unable to detect LAT RNA in ganglia of mice latently infected with LAT? HSV-2 by PCR (data not shown). Both viruses were propagated and titrated in Vero cells. Eight to 11 week old DBA2 mice were anesthetized (0.12mg of xylazine and 1.2mg of ketamine per mouse) and inoculated with either LAT? or LATR HSV-2 onto both corneas without scarification, with a range of inocula from 1.1×104 to 8×105 pfu/mouse. Human IgG (0.5 ml, 1:8 dilution in PBS, Gammagard, Baxter, Deerfield, IL) was injected intraperitoneally into each mouse one day after infection, so that most animals would survive the acute infection and undergo latent infection ( Dalai et al., 2002 ). Twenty-seven days after IgG treatment, 8 mice per group were sacrificed and their trigeminal ganglia (TG) were harvested. Ganglia from each group of mice were pooled, and dispersed into single cell suspensions using collagenase type I (3 mg/ml for 1.5h, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Aliquots equivalent to 1 TG were analyzed by real-time PCR to measure the latent viral load, or studied by flow cytometry to quantify numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells. The expression of LAT RNA from mouse TG infected with LATR HSV-2 was confirmed using real-time RT-PCR, but no expression was detected from TG infected with LAT? HSV-2 (data not shown).  Quantitative real-time PCR The latent viral load was determined using quantitative real-time PCR as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ). To measure acute viral load, four mice infected with either LAT? or LATR HSV-2 at each time point (day 3, 7, and 14 after infection) were sacrificed and both TG from each animal were pooled and frozen at ?80°C. Aliquots of TG suspensions equivalent to one TG were divided into two tubes. DNA was isolated from each sample using the Puregene DNA isolation kit (Gentra Systems, Minneapolis, Minnesota) and the number of copies of latent HSV-2 DNA genomes in each sample were quantified by real-time PCR using the Taqman System (ABI 7700 Sequence Detector; PE Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with primers and probes specific for HSV-2 gD ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ). Each reaction included 100 ng of ganglion DNA. A standard curve for the assay was generated using known copy numbers of a plasmid containing the HSV-2 gD coding region diluted in salmon sperm DNA. The limit of detection for the PCR assay was ~4 copies per reaction. The latent viral load in infected ganglia was calculated from the mean of at least 3 reactions. At least 2 independent PCR assays were performed to determine the latent viral load in dissociated ganglia, and the results shown were the average of the assays.  Flow cytometry and depletion of virus-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells from TG single cell suspensions Flow cytometry analyses were performed as previously reported ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ). Aliquots of TG suspensions equivalent to one latently infected TG were passed through cell strainers, stained with fluorescence isothiocyanate-conjugated anti-CD8 and peridinin chlorophyll-conjugated anti-CD45 (a pan-leukocyte marker) monoclonal antibodies (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA), examined on a FACSCaliber cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ), and analyzed using FlowJo software (Version 4.5.9, Tree Star Inc., Ashland, OR). The numbers of CD8+T cells were normalized in each group of mice based on the numbers of CD45-negative cells. To deplete CD8+ cells from TG suspensions, aliquots of cells equivalent to 8 TGs were incubated with CD8-immunomagnetic beads (Dynal Biotech, Norway) for 5 cycles of depletions using 6 to 10 beads per cell as previously described ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Analysis by flow cytometry indicated that over 90% of CD8+ cells were removed from dissociated TG cells when cells were compared before and after depletion.  HSV-2 reactivation ex vivo Reactivation of latent HSV-2 from infected TG cell suspension cultures was quantified as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Every other day media from TG cell suspensions, cultured in Iscove's Dulbecco-modified medium supplemented with 10% of FBS and 10U/ml of IL-2 in 96-well flat bottom culture plates at a density of 0.25 TG/well, was removed and added to Vero cell monolayers. Vero cells were stained with crystal violet after 2 days and examined microscopically for cytopathic effects (CPE). Analyses were performed using reactivation rates of CD8-depleted cultures, to eliminate the influence of CD8+T cells on reactivation.  Calculation of the rate of ex vivo reactivation of HSV from latency The reactivation rates of HSV ex-vivo in tissue cultures were determined as described previously ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). When r is the reactivation rate of HSV per TG per day, r is approximated from the slope of a linear regression line obtained when the cumulative reactivation events in ex vivo TG cultures are plotted on the y-axis with days in culture on the x-axis. Statistical analysis was done using JMP 5.01 software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).  Figures Figure 1 LAT-deletion mutant (LAT?) HSV-2 has a reduced ex vivo reactivation rate compared with LATR (LAT rescued) HSV-2. Ten mice were inoculated with 4×104 pfu of either LAT? HSV-2 or LATR HSV-2 onto unscarified corneas. All mice were given intravenous immunoglobulin to enhance their survival. Twenty-eight days after infection, mice were sacrificed and both TG from 10 mice were pooled and cultured in 80 wells of 96-well plates. The number of reactivated wells are shown on the y-axis, and the day of culture are shown on the x-axis Figure 2 The number of CD8+T cells infiltrating LAT? HSV-2 latently infected TG is reduced compared with LATR HSV-2 infected TG. (A) Mice were infected with various doses of HSV-2. After 4 weeks, mice were sacrificed and cells from TG from each group were pooled. The numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in each TG pool were quantified using flow cytometry and are shown in each panel. Closed bars indicate LATR HSV-2 and open bars represent LAT? HSV-2. The dose of HSV-2 is shown at the bottom of each panel. (B) Data from the 4 experiments shown in (A) were pooled. Closed squares indicate LATR HSV-2 and open squares represent LAT? HSV-2. Thin and thick lines represent linear regression analyses for LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2, respectively. The equations and R-values for each line are shown in the panel. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was performed using log10 (dose of inoculum) as covariate and found common DELTA=0.98 (p=0.477). Figure 3 LAT? HSV-2 reactivates at significantly lower rate than LATR HSV-2 in CD8+T cell depleted cultures. (A) Mice were infected with various doses of HSV-2. After 4 weeks, mice were sacrificed and TG cells from each group were pooled. The CD8+T cells were removed from each pooled group, and the reactivation rates were quantified using the remaining cells. Closed bars indicate LATR HSV-2 and open bars represent LAT? HSV-2. The dose of HSV-2 is shown at the bottom of each panel. Dashed line indicates the limit of detection for reactivation. ND indicates not done. For pooled TGs that did not reactivate, reactivation rates were assigned as half of the limit of detection for statistical purposes. (B) Data from the 4 experiments in (A) were pooled. Closed squares indicate LATR HSV-2 and open squares represent LAT? HSV-2. Thin and thick lines indicate linear regression analyses for LAT? and LATR HSV-2, respectively. The equations and R-values for each line are shown. ANCOVA was done using log10 (dose of inoculum) as covariate and found common DELTA=0.41 (p=0.185). Figure 4 The latent viral load is lower for TG from mice infected on unscarified corneas with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 for low doses of inocula. (A) Mice were infected with various doses of HSV-2 and after 4 weeks, mice were sacrificed and cells from TG from each group were pooled. The latent viral load in cells from each TG pool was quantified by real-time PCR using 100 ng of ganglion DNA. Closed bars indicate LATR HSV-2 and open bars represent LAT? HSV-2. Dashed lines indicate the limit of detection for real-time PCR. ND indicates not done. (B) Data from the 4 experiments in (A) were pooled. Closed squares indicate LATR HSV-2 and open squares represent LAT? HSV-2. Thin and thick lines indicate linear regression analysis for LAT? and LATR HSV-2, respectively. The equations and R-values for each line are shown. ANCOVA was done using log10 (dose of inoculum) as covariate and found common DELTA=0.89 (p=0.207). Figure 5 The viral load during acute infection is similar in TG from DBA2 mice acutely infected with LAT? HSV-2 compared to LATR HSV-2. Mice were infected with 1×105 pfu of either LAT? or LATR HSV-2. Closed and open symbols represent LATR HSV-2 and LAT?HSV-2, respectively. P-values at each time point are shown. Figure 6 Correlation of the HSV-2 latent viral load with the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 or LATR HSV-2. Data from experiments shown in Figures 2 , 3 and 4 were used to generate the plots. Closed squares indicate pooled TG from mice infected with LATR HSV-2 and open squares represent TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2. Thin and thick lines indicate linear regression analysis for LAT? and LATR HSV-2, respectively. The equations and R-values for each line are shown in the panel. ANCOVA was done using log10 (latent viral load) as covariate and found common DELAT=1.02 (p=0.90) Figure 7 Correlation of the HSV-2 latent viral load with the CD8-depleted reactivation rate in mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 or LATR HSV-2. (A) Closed squares indicate pooled TG from mice infected with LATR HSV-2 and open squares represent TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2. Thin and thick lines indicate linear regression analysis for LAT? and LATR HSV-2, respectively. (B) The geometric mean of the latent viral load (left panel) and the CD8-depleted reactivation rate (right panel) were plotted for TG in panel A containing ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA. For all data or data with viral load ?102 HSV-2 genome copies, ANCOVA was done using log10 (latent viral load) as covariate. For data with viral load ?102, ANCOVA found a common DELTA=0.69 (p=0.09).  Results An HSV-2 LAT<sup>?</sup> mutant reactivates at a lower rate than rescued virus DBA2 mice were inoculated by the corneal route bilaterally with 4×104 pfu (per mouse) of either LAT? or LATR HSV-2, and 28 days later the animals were sacrificed. Trigeminal ganglia cells were dispersed and plated into 96 well plates (one quarter TG per well) and assayed for spontaneous HSV-2 reactivation ex vivo without CD8+T cell depletion. Twenty-one of 80 wells of LAT? HSV-2, and 33 of 80 wells of LATR HSV-2 showed reactivation within 2 weeks of plating ( Figure 1 ). The difference between the two viruses was significant (p=0.022, parametric survival test). Therefore LAT? HSV-2 reactivated from mouse TG at lower rate than LATR HSV-2 ex vivo in the absence of additional stimuli. The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells Previously we showed that reactivation of wild-type HSV-2 from mouse TG ex vivo correlates directly with the latent viral load, but inversely with the number of CD8+T cells infiltrating the TG ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it was possible that the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 might be due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. To test this possibility, we compared the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in latently infected mouse TG infected with various doses of LAT? and LATR HSV-2. Four independent experiments were done with range of inocula from 1,111 to 800,000 pfu per mouse ( Figure 2A ). Surprisingly at low doses of inocula, animals infected with HSV LAT? tended to have a lower number of infiltrating CD8+T cells than those infected with LATR, while at higher doses of inocula the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells were similar in animals infected with the two viruses. When the numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, analysis of covariance [ANCOVA]; Figure 2B ). The increase in CD8+T cells associated with the increase in HSV-2 inoculum could reflect an increase in trafficking of T cells to the infected ganglia, and the lower number of CD8+ T cells in animals infected with HSV LAT? compared with those infected with HSV LATR might reflect less virus in the ganglia. Regardless, the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. Since the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells was lower in TG from animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 when compared to LATR HSV, we compared the reactivation rates of the two viruses in ex-vivo cultures depleted of CD8+T cells (i.e. CD8-depleted reactivation rates). TG cells from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 showed lower reactivation rates compared with cells from LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 3A ). When the CD8-depleted reactivation rates were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in CD8-depleted reactivation rates between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 3B ). Therefore, the lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 persisted even when infiltrating CD8+T were removed, indicating that lower reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 is not dependent on infiltrating CD8+T cells. The latent viral load is lower in DBA2 mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 than with LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 especially at low doses of inocula We and others have previously shown that the HSV-1 and -2 latent viral load is a critical determinant of reactivation rates of wild-type viruses ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ; Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Sawtell, 1998 ; Sawtell et al., 2001 ). The latent viral loads were generally lower in TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 4A ). When the latent viral loads were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the latent viral load was lower in animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 4B ). Since the difference in viral loads in animals infected with LAT+ and LAT? HSV-2 was smaller at higher challenge doses, we compared the latent viral loads in animals infected with low (<2×105 pfu) and high (?2×105 pfu) doses of HSV-2. Interestingly, when the pooled data of viral loads were analyzed, the difference between the two viruses was statistically significant for the low challenge doses (p<0.01), but not for the high challenge doses (p=0.84). Therefore, in DBA2 mice, the latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 was lower than that of LATR HSV-2 especially at low challenge doses. To determine how acute infection with LAT? HSV-2 compares with LATR HSV in DBA2 mice, the HSV-2 DNA load in TG was examined at days 3, 7, and 14 after infection. The amounts of HSV-2 DNA in TG at the different time points were similar for DBA2 mice infected with 1×105 pfu of LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 5 ). The number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 and LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load To study the relationship between the latent viral load and the lymphocyte response in mice infected with the two viruses, we plotted the latent viral load versus the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells ( Figure 6 ) using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 . If the lower latent viral load is solely responsible for the lower numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2, the relationship between the latent viral load and the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells should be similar and the slopes and the y-intercepts of the two regression lines for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 should be similar. However, if the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells is partially independent of the latent viral load, either the slope or the y-intercept of the regression lines should be different between the two viruses. When the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells from LAT? and LATR HSV-2 were plotted against the latent viral load, the slopes and y-intercepts of both regression lines were nearly identical and the difference between the two viruses was not significant (p=0.16 for y-intercept and p=0.90 for slope, ANCOVA; Figure 6 ). These results imply that the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load. The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not solely dependent on the latent viral load To determine the relationship between the reactivation rate and the latent viral load, we plotted the CD8-depleted reactivation rates for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 against the number of HSV-2 genome copies in ganglia. The differences in the y-intercepts and slopes were statistically significant (p=0.003 and p=0.018 for y-intercepts and slope, respectively, ANCOVA; Figure 7A ). These results indicate that the lower latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 is not sufficient to explain the reduced CD8-depleted reactivation rate. To determine how the relationship between the latent viral load and the reactivation rate was influenced by the viral load, we compared the CD8-depleted reactivation rate in pools of ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 that had viral loads of <102 or ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA. There was no significant difference of either latent viral load or CD8-depleted reactivation rates between LAT? and LATR HSV-2 when the latent viral loads were <102 viral genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA (data not shown, p?0.35, Student t-test). This is likely to be due in part to the detection limits of the ex-vivo reactivation and real-time PCR assays at low viral loads. In contrast when the latent viral loads were ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng, the difference in the latent viral load between the HSV-2 LATR and LAT? pooled TG was not significant (p=0.56, Student t-test; Figure 7B , left panel), while the reactivation rate was significantly lower in LAT? than LATR HSV-2 TG (p<0.01 Student t-test, Figure 7B , right panel, and P<0.01 by ANCOVA). Therefore, even at high doses of inocula that resulted in similar levels of latent viral loads for LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2, LAT? HSV-2 was still impaired for reactivation compared with LATR HSV-2.  Results An HSV-2 LAT<sup>?</sup> mutant reactivates at a lower rate than rescued virus DBA2 mice were inoculated by the corneal route bilaterally with 4×104 pfu (per mouse) of either LAT? or LATR HSV-2, and 28 days later the animals were sacrificed. Trigeminal ganglia cells were dispersed and plated into 96 well plates (one quarter TG per well) and assayed for spontaneous HSV-2 reactivation ex vivo without CD8+T cell depletion. Twenty-one of 80 wells of LAT? HSV-2, and 33 of 80 wells of LATR HSV-2 showed reactivation within 2 weeks of plating ( Figure 1 ). The difference between the two viruses was significant (p=0.022, parametric survival test). Therefore LAT? HSV-2 reactivated from mouse TG at lower rate than LATR HSV-2 ex vivo in the absence of additional stimuli. The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells Previously we showed that reactivation of wild-type HSV-2 from mouse TG ex vivo correlates directly with the latent viral load, but inversely with the number of CD8+T cells infiltrating the TG ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it was possible that the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 might be due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. To test this possibility, we compared the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in latently infected mouse TG infected with various doses of LAT? and LATR HSV-2. Four independent experiments were done with range of inocula from 1,111 to 800,000 pfu per mouse ( Figure 2A ). Surprisingly at low doses of inocula, animals infected with HSV LAT? tended to have a lower number of infiltrating CD8+T cells than those infected with LATR, while at higher doses of inocula the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells were similar in animals infected with the two viruses. When the numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, analysis of covariance [ANCOVA]; Figure 2B ). The increase in CD8+T cells associated with the increase in HSV-2 inoculum could reflect an increase in trafficking of T cells to the infected ganglia, and the lower number of CD8+ T cells in animals infected with HSV LAT? compared with those infected with HSV LATR might reflect less virus in the ganglia. Regardless, the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. Since the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells was lower in TG from animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 when compared to LATR HSV, we compared the reactivation rates of the two viruses in ex-vivo cultures depleted of CD8+T cells (i.e. CD8-depleted reactivation rates). TG cells from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 showed lower reactivation rates compared with cells from LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 3A ). When the CD8-depleted reactivation rates were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in CD8-depleted reactivation rates between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 3B ). Therefore, the lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 persisted even when infiltrating CD8+T were removed, indicating that lower reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 is not dependent on infiltrating CD8+T cells. The latent viral load is lower in DBA2 mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 than with LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 especially at low doses of inocula We and others have previously shown that the HSV-1 and -2 latent viral load is a critical determinant of reactivation rates of wild-type viruses ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ; Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Sawtell, 1998 ; Sawtell et al., 2001 ). The latent viral loads were generally lower in TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 4A ). When the latent viral loads were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the latent viral load was lower in animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 4B ). Since the difference in viral loads in animals infected with LAT+ and LAT? HSV-2 was smaller at higher challenge doses, we compared the latent viral loads in animals infected with low (<2×105 pfu) and high (?2×105 pfu) doses of HSV-2. Interestingly, when the pooled data of viral loads were analyzed, the difference between the two viruses was statistically significant for the low challenge doses (p<0.01), but not for the high challenge doses (p=0.84). Therefore, in DBA2 mice, the latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 was lower than that of LATR HSV-2 especially at low challenge doses. To determine how acute infection with LAT? HSV-2 compares with LATR HSV in DBA2 mice, the HSV-2 DNA load in TG was examined at days 3, 7, and 14 after infection. The amounts of HSV-2 DNA in TG at the different time points were similar for DBA2 mice infected with 1×105 pfu of LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 5 ). The number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 and LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load To study the relationship between the latent viral load and the lymphocyte response in mice infected with the two viruses, we plotted the latent viral load versus the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells ( Figure 6 ) using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 . If the lower latent viral load is solely responsible for the lower numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2, the relationship between the latent viral load and the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells should be similar and the slopes and the y-intercepts of the two regression lines for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 should be similar. However, if the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells is partially independent of the latent viral load, either the slope or the y-intercept of the regression lines should be different between the two viruses. When the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells from LAT? and LATR HSV-2 were plotted against the latent viral load, the slopes and y-intercepts of both regression lines were nearly identical and the difference between the two viruses was not significant (p=0.16 for y-intercept and p=0.90 for slope, ANCOVA; Figure 6 ). These results imply that the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load. The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not solely dependent on the latent viral load To determine the relationship between the reactivation rate and the latent viral load, we plotted the CD8-depleted reactivation rates for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 against the number of HSV-2 genome copies in ganglia. The differences in the y-intercepts and slopes were statistically significant (p=0.003 and p=0.018 for y-intercepts and slope, respectively, ANCOVA; Figure 7A ). These results indicate that the lower latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 is not sufficient to explain the reduced CD8-depleted reactivation rate. To determine how the relationship between the latent viral load and the reactivation rate was influenced by the viral load, we compared the CD8-depleted reactivation rate in pools of ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 that had viral loads of <102 or ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA. There was no significant difference of either latent viral load or CD8-depleted reactivation rates between LAT? and LATR HSV-2 when the latent viral loads were <102 viral genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA (data not shown, p?0.35, Student t-test). This is likely to be due in part to the detection limits of the ex-vivo reactivation and real-time PCR assays at low viral loads. In contrast when the latent viral loads were ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng, the difference in the latent viral load between the HSV-2 LATR and LAT? pooled TG was not significant (p=0.56, Student t-test; Figure 7B , left panel), while the reactivation rate was significantly lower in LAT? than LATR HSV-2 TG (p<0.01 Student t-test, Figure 7B , right panel, and P<0.01 by ANCOVA). Therefore, even at high doses of inocula that resulted in similar levels of latent viral loads for LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2, LAT? HSV-2 was still impaired for reactivation compared with LATR HSV-2.  An HSV-2 LAT<sup>?</sup> mutant reactivates at a lower rate than rescued virus DBA2 mice were inoculated by the corneal route bilaterally with 4×104 pfu (per mouse) of either LAT? or LATR HSV-2, and 28 days later the animals were sacrificed. Trigeminal ganglia cells were dispersed and plated into 96 well plates (one quarter TG per well) and assayed for spontaneous HSV-2 reactivation ex vivo without CD8+T cell depletion. Twenty-one of 80 wells of LAT? HSV-2, and 33 of 80 wells of LATR HSV-2 showed reactivation within 2 weeks of plating ( Figure 1 ). The difference between the two viruses was significant (p=0.022, parametric survival test). Therefore LAT? HSV-2 reactivated from mouse TG at lower rate than LATR HSV-2 ex vivo in the absence of additional stimuli.  An HSV-2 LAT<sup>?</sup> mutant reactivates at a lower rate than rescued virus DBA2 mice were inoculated by the corneal route bilaterally with 4×104 pfu (per mouse) of either LAT? or LATR HSV-2, and 28 days later the animals were sacrificed. Trigeminal ganglia cells were dispersed and plated into 96 well plates (one quarter TG per well) and assayed for spontaneous HSV-2 reactivation ex vivo without CD8+T cell depletion. Twenty-one of 80 wells of LAT? HSV-2, and 33 of 80 wells of LATR HSV-2 showed reactivation within 2 weeks of plating ( Figure 1 ). The difference between the two viruses was significant (p=0.022, parametric survival test). Therefore LAT? HSV-2 reactivated from mouse TG at lower rate than LATR HSV-2 ex vivo in the absence of additional stimuli.  The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells Previously we showed that reactivation of wild-type HSV-2 from mouse TG ex vivo correlates directly with the latent viral load, but inversely with the number of CD8+T cells infiltrating the TG ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it was possible that the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 might be due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. To test this possibility, we compared the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in latently infected mouse TG infected with various doses of LAT? and LATR HSV-2. Four independent experiments were done with range of inocula from 1,111 to 800,000 pfu per mouse ( Figure 2A ). Surprisingly at low doses of inocula, animals infected with HSV LAT? tended to have a lower number of infiltrating CD8+T cells than those infected with LATR, while at higher doses of inocula the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells were similar in animals infected with the two viruses. When the numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, analysis of covariance [ANCOVA]; Figure 2B ). The increase in CD8+T cells associated with the increase in HSV-2 inoculum could reflect an increase in trafficking of T cells to the infected ganglia, and the lower number of CD8+ T cells in animals infected with HSV LAT? compared with those infected with HSV LATR might reflect less virus in the ganglia. Regardless, the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. Since the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells was lower in TG from animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 when compared to LATR HSV, we compared the reactivation rates of the two viruses in ex-vivo cultures depleted of CD8+T cells (i.e. CD8-depleted reactivation rates). TG cells from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 showed lower reactivation rates compared with cells from LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 3A ). When the CD8-depleted reactivation rates were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in CD8-depleted reactivation rates between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 3B ). Therefore, the lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 persisted even when infiltrating CD8+T were removed, indicating that lower reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 is not dependent on infiltrating CD8+T cells.  The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells Previously we showed that reactivation of wild-type HSV-2 from mouse TG ex vivo correlates directly with the latent viral load, but inversely with the number of CD8+T cells infiltrating the TG ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ). Therefore, it was possible that the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 might be due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. To test this possibility, we compared the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in latently infected mouse TG infected with various doses of LAT? and LATR HSV-2. Four independent experiments were done with range of inocula from 1,111 to 800,000 pfu per mouse ( Figure 2A ). Surprisingly at low doses of inocula, animals infected with HSV LAT? tended to have a lower number of infiltrating CD8+T cells than those infected with LATR, while at higher doses of inocula the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells were similar in animals infected with the two viruses. When the numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, analysis of covariance [ANCOVA]; Figure 2B ). The increase in CD8+T cells associated with the increase in HSV-2 inoculum could reflect an increase in trafficking of T cells to the infected ganglia, and the lower number of CD8+ T cells in animals infected with HSV LAT? compared with those infected with HSV LATR might reflect less virus in the ganglia. Regardless, the lower rate of reactivation of LAT? HSV-2 is not due to a higher number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in the TG. Since the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells was lower in TG from animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 when compared to LATR HSV, we compared the reactivation rates of the two viruses in ex-vivo cultures depleted of CD8+T cells (i.e. CD8-depleted reactivation rates). TG cells from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 showed lower reactivation rates compared with cells from LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 3A ). When the CD8-depleted reactivation rates were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the difference in CD8-depleted reactivation rates between the two viruses was statistically significant (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 3B ). Therefore, the lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 persisted even when infiltrating CD8+T were removed, indicating that lower reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 is not dependent on infiltrating CD8+T cells.  The latent viral load is lower in DBA2 mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 than with LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 especially at low doses of inocula We and others have previously shown that the HSV-1 and -2 latent viral load is a critical determinant of reactivation rates of wild-type viruses ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ; Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Sawtell, 1998 ; Sawtell et al., 2001 ). The latent viral loads were generally lower in TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 4A ). When the latent viral loads were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the latent viral load was lower in animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 4B ). Since the difference in viral loads in animals infected with LAT+ and LAT? HSV-2 was smaller at higher challenge doses, we compared the latent viral loads in animals infected with low (<2×105 pfu) and high (?2×105 pfu) doses of HSV-2. Interestingly, when the pooled data of viral loads were analyzed, the difference between the two viruses was statistically significant for the low challenge doses (p<0.01), but not for the high challenge doses (p=0.84). Therefore, in DBA2 mice, the latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 was lower than that of LATR HSV-2 especially at low challenge doses. To determine how acute infection with LAT? HSV-2 compares with LATR HSV in DBA2 mice, the HSV-2 DNA load in TG was examined at days 3, 7, and 14 after infection. The amounts of HSV-2 DNA in TG at the different time points were similar for DBA2 mice infected with 1×105 pfu of LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 5 ).  The latent viral load is lower in DBA2 mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 than with LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 especially at low doses of inocula We and others have previously shown that the HSV-1 and -2 latent viral load is a critical determinant of reactivation rates of wild-type viruses ( Hoshino et al., 2005 ; Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Sawtell, 1998 ; Sawtell et al., 2001 ). The latent viral loads were generally lower in TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 4A ). When the latent viral loads were plotted against the dose of HSV-2 in the inocula, a linear relationship was observed for each virus, and the latent viral load was lower in animals infected with LAT? HSV-2 than LATR HSV-2 (p<0.001, ANCOVA; Figure 4B ). Since the difference in viral loads in animals infected with LAT+ and LAT? HSV-2 was smaller at higher challenge doses, we compared the latent viral loads in animals infected with low (<2×105 pfu) and high (?2×105 pfu) doses of HSV-2. Interestingly, when the pooled data of viral loads were analyzed, the difference between the two viruses was statistically significant for the low challenge doses (p<0.01), but not for the high challenge doses (p=0.84). Therefore, in DBA2 mice, the latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 was lower than that of LATR HSV-2 especially at low challenge doses. To determine how acute infection with LAT? HSV-2 compares with LATR HSV in DBA2 mice, the HSV-2 DNA load in TG was examined at days 3, 7, and 14 after infection. The amounts of HSV-2 DNA in TG at the different time points were similar for DBA2 mice infected with 1×105 pfu of LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 ( Figure 5 ).  The number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 and LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load To study the relationship between the latent viral load and the lymphocyte response in mice infected with the two viruses, we plotted the latent viral load versus the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells ( Figure 6 ) using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 . If the lower latent viral load is solely responsible for the lower numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2, the relationship between the latent viral load and the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells should be similar and the slopes and the y-intercepts of the two regression lines for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 should be similar. However, if the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells is partially independent of the latent viral load, either the slope or the y-intercept of the regression lines should be different between the two viruses. When the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells from LAT? and LATR HSV-2 were plotted against the latent viral load, the slopes and y-intercepts of both regression lines were nearly identical and the difference between the two viruses was not significant (p=0.16 for y-intercept and p=0.90 for slope, ANCOVA; Figure 6 ). These results imply that the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load.  The number of infiltrating CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 and LAT<sup>R</sup> HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load To study the relationship between the latent viral load and the lymphocyte response in mice infected with the two viruses, we plotted the latent viral load versus the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells ( Figure 6 ) using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 . If the lower latent viral load is solely responsible for the lower numbers of infiltrating CD8+T cells in mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2, the relationship between the latent viral load and the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells should be similar and the slopes and the y-intercepts of the two regression lines for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 should be similar. However, if the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells is partially independent of the latent viral load, either the slope or the y-intercept of the regression lines should be different between the two viruses. When the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells from LAT? and LATR HSV-2 were plotted against the latent viral load, the slopes and y-intercepts of both regression lines were nearly identical and the difference between the two viruses was not significant (p=0.16 for y-intercept and p=0.90 for slope, ANCOVA; Figure 6 ). These results imply that the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells in ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 is proportional to the latent viral load.  The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not solely dependent on the latent viral load To determine the relationship between the reactivation rate and the latent viral load, we plotted the CD8-depleted reactivation rates for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 against the number of HSV-2 genome copies in ganglia. The differences in the y-intercepts and slopes were statistically significant (p=0.003 and p=0.018 for y-intercepts and slope, respectively, ANCOVA; Figure 7A ). These results indicate that the lower latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 is not sufficient to explain the reduced CD8-depleted reactivation rate. To determine how the relationship between the latent viral load and the reactivation rate was influenced by the viral load, we compared the CD8-depleted reactivation rate in pools of ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 that had viral loads of <102 or ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA. There was no significant difference of either latent viral load or CD8-depleted reactivation rates between LAT? and LATR HSV-2 when the latent viral loads were <102 viral genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA (data not shown, p?0.35, Student t-test). This is likely to be due in part to the detection limits of the ex-vivo reactivation and real-time PCR assays at low viral loads. In contrast when the latent viral loads were ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng, the difference in the latent viral load between the HSV-2 LATR and LAT? pooled TG was not significant (p=0.56, Student t-test; Figure 7B , left panel), while the reactivation rate was significantly lower in LAT? than LATR HSV-2 TG (p<0.01 Student t-test, Figure 7B , right panel, and P<0.01 by ANCOVA). Therefore, even at high doses of inocula that resulted in similar levels of latent viral loads for LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2, LAT? HSV-2 was still impaired for reactivation compared with LATR HSV-2.  The lower ex vivo reactivation rate of LAT<sup>?</sup> HSV-2 is not solely dependent on the latent viral load To determine the relationship between the reactivation rate and the latent viral load, we plotted the CD8-depleted reactivation rates for LAT? and LATR HSV-2 using the data from the 4 independent experiments shown in Figures 2 - 4 against the number of HSV-2 genome copies in ganglia. The differences in the y-intercepts and slopes were statistically significant (p=0.003 and p=0.018 for y-intercepts and slope, respectively, ANCOVA; Figure 7A ). These results indicate that the lower latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR HSV-2 is not sufficient to explain the reduced CD8-depleted reactivation rate. To determine how the relationship between the latent viral load and the reactivation rate was influenced by the viral load, we compared the CD8-depleted reactivation rate in pools of ganglia from mice infected with LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 that had viral loads of <102 or ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA. There was no significant difference of either latent viral load or CD8-depleted reactivation rates between LAT? and LATR HSV-2 when the latent viral loads were <102 viral genome copies per 100 ng of total DNA (data not shown, p?0.35, Student t-test). This is likely to be due in part to the detection limits of the ex-vivo reactivation and real-time PCR assays at low viral loads. In contrast when the latent viral loads were ?102 HSV-2 genome copies per 100 ng, the difference in the latent viral load between the HSV-2 LATR and LAT? pooled TG was not significant (p=0.56, Student t-test; Figure 7B , left panel), while the reactivation rate was significantly lower in LAT? than LATR HSV-2 TG (p<0.01 Student t-test, Figure 7B , right panel, and P<0.01 by ANCOVA). Therefore, even at high doses of inocula that resulted in similar levels of latent viral loads for LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2, LAT? HSV-2 was still impaired for reactivation compared with LATR HSV-2.  Discussion Previous studies using mice, rabbits, and guinea pigs have shown that LAT-deficient HSV is impaired in spontaneous and induced reactivation ( Block et al., 1990 ; Cook et al., 1991 ; Devi-Rao et al., 1997 ; Perng et al., 1994 ; Trousdale et al., 1991 ). However, because of mixed results of effect of LAT expression on latent viral load ( Bloom et al., 1994 ; Hill et al., 1990 ; Krause et al., 1995 ; Leib et al., 1989 ; Perng et al., 2000b ; Sawtell, 1997 ; Sawtell and Thompson, 1992 ; Thompson and Sawtell, 1997 ; Thompson and Sawtell, 2001 ), we sought to determine whether LAT directly increases the reactivation rates or if the reduced reactivation rate of LAT? HSV is directly from a lower latent viral load. We compared the effects of LAT? or LATR HSV-2 at various doses, ranging from 103 to 8×105 pfu, on viral latency and reactivation in the ocular model in DBA2 mice. We found that while LAT expression is important for efficient establishment of latency and for ex-vivo reactivation at lower doses of HSV-2 in mice, the impaired reactivation could not be solely attributed to a reduced latent viral load or the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells. Examination of the data from the four experiments indicated that the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells and the latent viral loads in animals infected with low doses of LAT? HSV-2 were higher in experiment 2 than in the other three experiments; however, when experiment 2 was excluded from the analyses in Figures 2B , 3B , and 4B , the conclusions remained the same. In previous studies the latent viral DNA load of the LAT? HSV-2 in guinea pig DRG ( Krause et al., 1995 ; Wang, Pesnicak, and Straus, 1997 ) and mouse TG ( Wang et al., 2001 ; Wang, Pesnicak, and Straus, 1997 ) was comparable with that of wild-type virus. Wang et al (2001) reported that the latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 (500-800 copies per 100 ng of ganglion DNA) was comparable to wild-type HSV-2 in C57BL/6 mice after infection of the scarified corneas of the mice with 104 pfu of HSV-2. We found that the latent viral loads (102.5-103.0 copies/100ng of ganglia DNA) were similar in DBA2 mice after inoculation of unscarified cornea with ?2 ×105pfu of either LAT? or LAT revertant HSV-2; however at lower (<2×105) challenge doses, the difference in latent viral loads between the two viruses was statistically significant. Therefore, it is possible that with high doses of inocula which result in latent viral loads of several hundred copies per 100 ng of ganglia DNA, both LAT? and LATR HSV-2 establish latency with similar efficiencies; however, with low doses of virus inocula, establishment of latency is impaired in LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR virus. Since Wang et al (2001) inoculated the virus onto scarified corneas, while we infected corneas without scarification, the higher dose of inocula used in our experiment (?2 ×105pfu) might be required for a similar biologic effect as the lower dose (104 pfu) used by Wang and colleagues. When the LAT? and LATR HSV-2 were used to inoculate guinea pigs at a dose of 5 × 105 pfu by the intravaginal route, the latent viral loads of the two viruses were comparable ( Krause et al., 1995 ). Krause et al. (1995) and Wang et al. (2001) reported that LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 replicated equally well in Vero cells. In some, but not all, studies using HSV-1 LAT mutants, expression of LAT enhanced establishment of latency in mice. Experiments involving corneal inoculation of out-bred Swiss Webster mice with 5 ×104 ( Sawtell and Thompson, 1992 ) or 5×106 pfu ( Thompson and Sawtell, 1997 ) of HSV-1 showed that LAT enhances establishment of latency. In contrast, studies of corneal infection in either Balb/c mice inoculated with 106-7 pfu of HSV-1 ( Steiner et al., 1989 ) or out-bred CD-1 mice infected with 2 ×106 pfu of HSV-1 ( Leib et al., 1989 ), or footpad injection of out-bred Swiss Webster mice with 107 pfu of HSV-1 ( Devi-Rao et al., 1994 ) showed no effect of LAT on establishment of latency. Differences in strains of mice, sites of inoculation, doses of inocula, or methods used to measure or induce reactivation might explain the differences in these results. Three studies using the rabbit eye infection model of HSV showed that the latent viral load measured by dot or Southern blotting was similar in animals infected with high titers (1-2×105 pfu) of LAT? and LAT+ HSV ( Bloom et al., 1994 ; Hill et al., 1990 ; Perng et al., 1994 ); however, one study showed fewer EGFP+ neurons in TG from rabbits latently infected with 2 ×105 pfu of HSV-1 LAT? expressing EGFP than in ganglia from rabbits infected with same dose of HSV-1 LAT+ expressing EGFP ( Perng et al., 2000b ). O'Neil et al (2004) infected rabbit eyes with LAT? or LAT+ HSV at low (500 pfu) or high (5×105 pfu) titers and found no difference in latent viral loads. Comparison of these studies shows no clear correlation between the dose of infection and the effect of LAT on latent infection. Differences in HSV LAT mutations might also explain some of the differences in latency observed among the studies. While some studies, including ours, used viruses with small deletions in the LAT promoter, other studies used viruses with larger deletions that include both the promoter and the LAT intron. Nevertheless, our finding that the impairment of LAT? HSV-2 for latency is more evident at lower inoculation doses indicates that effect of LAT on latency can be different even with the same strain of virus, same route of inoculation, and same strain of animal. These lower doses of virus are likely to more similar to the doses that infect humans, since our mice required immunoglobulin to survive acute infection after high doses of virus; therefore, the differences in latent viral load and virus reactivation at lower doses of inocula might be important for future vaccine studies with mutant viruses. Studies comparing LAT? with LAT+ HSV-2 in different animal models have generally found reduced reactivation rates for LAT? HSV. Wang et al. (2001) , using the same LAT? HSV-2 as in our study, found that LAT? HSV-2 reactivated less frequently after UV-irradiation than wild-type HSV-2, both in LAT-transgenic and wild-type C57BL/6 mice. Krause et al. (1995) and Wang et al. (1997) also used the same LAT? HSV-2 as in our study, and found that LAT? HSV-2 reactivated less frequently than LATR or wild-type HSV-2 in guinea pigs inoculated with 104.0 or 105.7 pfu of virus by the intravaginal route with comparable latent viral loads. In contrast, Thompson and Sawtell (1997) found similar reactivation rates for LAT? and LAT+ HSV-1 when the latent viral loads were equivalent. Mice that received LAT? HSV-1 were subjected to hyperthermic stress for the first 3 days after infection to increase their latent viral load. In our experiments, we used a wide range of inocula doses and found that LAT? HSV-2 reactivates less frequently than LATR HSV-2 in DBA2 mice even when the latent viral load of the two viruses are similar. The difference in the effect of LAT viral on reactivation in our study and that of Thompson and Sawtell (1997) may be due to the use of ex-vivo reactivation in our study, compared with hyperthermia induced reactivation in the study by Thompson and Sawtell. Nonetheless, our findings suggest that measurement of the total latent viral load alone does not account for the differences in HSV-2 reactivation between the two viruses in these experiments. We found that the lower reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 was not associated with higher number of CD8+T cells infiltrating the TG. CD8+T cells have been found to reduce reactivation of HSV in mice ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Khanna et al., 2003 ; Liu et al., 2000 ). Since LAT? HSV reactivates less efficiently than LAT+ HSV, we predicted that TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV contained more infiltrating CD8+T cells than TG from mice infected with LAT+ HSV. However, we found that animals infected LAT? HSV had fewer CD8+T cells in their TG, and that the difference in CD8+T cells in TG between LAT? and LATR HSV-2 was dependent on the difference in the latent viral load. Our experiments compared a LAT-deficient mutant (LAT? HSV-2) with a LAT-rescued virus (LATR HSV2), and it is possible that a wild-type HSV-2 might have had a different phenotype than the LAT-rescued virus in some of our assays. We think that the latter hypothesis is highly unlikely, since the original description of the LAT-deficient (LAT? HSV-2) mutant compared the LAT-rescued virus (LATR HSV2) with wild-type HSV-2 (strain 333) in a guinea pig model of infection and found no differences between the rescued and wild-type viruses for latent viral DNA loads in ganglia by PCR, and slight (but not significant) differences in recurrent disease in the animals. LAT has multiple functions including inhibition of apoptosis ( Ahmed et al., 2002 ; Carpenter et al., 2007 ; Perng et al., 2000a ), modification of chromatin ( Kubat et al., 2004 ; Wang et al., 2005 ), encoding microRNAs that regulate expression of viral and host cell genes ( Tang et al., 2008 ; Tang, Patel, and Krause, 2008 ; Umbach et al., 2008 ), and affecting the type of neurons in which virus establishes latency ( Margolis et al., 2007 ). The effect of LAT on the establishment of latency and reactivation may be mediated by some of these activities or other, as yet unknown, functions. Further understanding of the molecular mechanisms of reactivation and establishment of latency of HSV is necessary to clarify the role of LAT during infection and may help to provide new strategies for the treatment of recurrent HSV disease.  Discussion Previous studies using mice, rabbits, and guinea pigs have shown that LAT-deficient HSV is impaired in spontaneous and induced reactivation ( Block et al., 1990 ; Cook et al., 1991 ; Devi-Rao et al., 1997 ; Perng et al., 1994 ; Trousdale et al., 1991 ). However, because of mixed results of effect of LAT expression on latent viral load ( Bloom et al., 1994 ; Hill et al., 1990 ; Krause et al., 1995 ; Leib et al., 1989 ; Perng et al., 2000b ; Sawtell, 1997 ; Sawtell and Thompson, 1992 ; Thompson and Sawtell, 1997 ; Thompson and Sawtell, 2001 ), we sought to determine whether LAT directly increases the reactivation rates or if the reduced reactivation rate of LAT? HSV is directly from a lower latent viral load. We compared the effects of LAT? or LATR HSV-2 at various doses, ranging from 103 to 8×105 pfu, on viral latency and reactivation in the ocular model in DBA2 mice. We found that while LAT expression is important for efficient establishment of latency and for ex-vivo reactivation at lower doses of HSV-2 in mice, the impaired reactivation could not be solely attributed to a reduced latent viral load or the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells. Examination of the data from the four experiments indicated that the number of infiltrating CD8+T cells and the latent viral loads in animals infected with low doses of LAT? HSV-2 were higher in experiment 2 than in the other three experiments; however, when experiment 2 was excluded from the analyses in Figures 2B , 3B , and 4B , the conclusions remained the same. In previous studies the latent viral DNA load of the LAT? HSV-2 in guinea pig DRG ( Krause et al., 1995 ; Wang, Pesnicak, and Straus, 1997 ) and mouse TG ( Wang et al., 2001 ; Wang, Pesnicak, and Straus, 1997 ) was comparable with that of wild-type virus. Wang et al (2001) reported that the latent viral load of LAT? HSV-2 (500-800 copies per 100 ng of ganglion DNA) was comparable to wild-type HSV-2 in C57BL/6 mice after infection of the scarified corneas of the mice with 104 pfu of HSV-2. We found that the latent viral loads (102.5-103.0 copies/100ng of ganglia DNA) were similar in DBA2 mice after inoculation of unscarified cornea with ?2 ×105pfu of either LAT? or LAT revertant HSV-2; however at lower (<2×105) challenge doses, the difference in latent viral loads between the two viruses was statistically significant. Therefore, it is possible that with high doses of inocula which result in latent viral loads of several hundred copies per 100 ng of ganglia DNA, both LAT? and LATR HSV-2 establish latency with similar efficiencies; however, with low doses of virus inocula, establishment of latency is impaired in LAT? HSV-2 compared with LATR virus. Since Wang et al (2001) inoculated the virus onto scarified corneas, while we infected corneas without scarification, the higher dose of inocula used in our experiment (?2 ×105pfu) might be required for a similar biologic effect as the lower dose (104 pfu) used by Wang and colleagues. When the LAT? and LATR HSV-2 were used to inoculate guinea pigs at a dose of 5 × 105 pfu by the intravaginal route, the latent viral loads of the two viruses were comparable ( Krause et al., 1995 ). Krause et al. (1995) and Wang et al. (2001) reported that LAT? HSV-2 and LATR HSV-2 replicated equally well in Vero cells. In some, but not all, studies using HSV-1 LAT mutants, expression of LAT enhanced establishment of latency in mice. Experiments involving corneal inoculation of out-bred Swiss Webster mice with 5 ×104 ( Sawtell and Thompson, 1992 ) or 5×106 pfu ( Thompson and Sawtell, 1997 ) of HSV-1 showed that LAT enhances establishment of latency. In contrast, studies of corneal infection in either Balb/c mice inoculated with 106-7 pfu of HSV-1 ( Steiner et al., 1989 ) or out-bred CD-1 mice infected with 2 ×106 pfu of HSV-1 ( Leib et al., 1989 ), or footpad injection of out-bred Swiss Webster mice with 107 pfu of HSV-1 ( Devi-Rao et al., 1994 ) showed no effect of LAT on establishment of latency. Differences in strains of mice, sites of inoculation, doses of inocula, or methods used to measure or induce reactivation might explain the differences in these results. Three studies using the rabbit eye infection model of HSV showed that the latent viral load measured by dot or Southern blotting was similar in animals infected with high titers (1-2×105 pfu) of LAT? and LAT+ HSV ( Bloom et al., 1994 ; Hill et al., 1990 ; Perng et al., 1994 ); however, one study showed fewer EGFP+ neurons in TG from rabbits latently infected with 2 ×105 pfu of HSV-1 LAT? expressing EGFP than in ganglia from rabbits infected with same dose of HSV-1 LAT+ expressing EGFP ( Perng et al., 2000b ). O'Neil et al (2004) infected rabbit eyes with LAT? or LAT+ HSV at low (500 pfu) or high (5×105 pfu) titers and found no difference in latent viral loads. Comparison of these studies shows no clear correlation between the dose of infection and the effect of LAT on latent infection. Differences in HSV LAT mutations might also explain some of the differences in latency observed among the studies. While some studies, including ours, used viruses with small deletions in the LAT promoter, other studies used viruses with larger deletions that include both the promoter and the LAT intron. Nevertheless, our finding that the impairment of LAT? HSV-2 for latency is more evident at lower inoculation doses indicates that effect of LAT on latency can be different even with the same strain of virus, same route of inoculation, and same strain of animal. These lower doses of virus are likely to more similar to the doses that infect humans, since our mice required immunoglobulin to survive acute infection after high doses of virus; therefore, the differences in latent viral load and virus reactivation at lower doses of inocula might be important for future vaccine studies with mutant viruses. Studies comparing LAT? with LAT+ HSV-2 in different animal models have generally found reduced reactivation rates for LAT? HSV. Wang et al. (2001) , using the same LAT? HSV-2 as in our study, found that LAT? HSV-2 reactivated less frequently after UV-irradiation than wild-type HSV-2, both in LAT-transgenic and wild-type C57BL/6 mice. Krause et al. (1995) and Wang et al. (1997) also used the same LAT? HSV-2 as in our study, and found that LAT? HSV-2 reactivated less frequently than LATR or wild-type HSV-2 in guinea pigs inoculated with 104.0 or 105.7 pfu of virus by the intravaginal route with comparable latent viral loads. In contrast, Thompson and Sawtell (1997) found similar reactivation rates for LAT? and LAT+ HSV-1 when the latent viral loads were equivalent. Mice that received LAT? HSV-1 were subjected to hyperthermic stress for the first 3 days after infection to increase their latent viral load. In our experiments, we used a wide range of inocula doses and found that LAT? HSV-2 reactivates less frequently than LATR HSV-2 in DBA2 mice even when the latent viral load of the two viruses are similar. The difference in the effect of LAT viral on reactivation in our study and that of Thompson and Sawtell (1997) may be due to the use of ex-vivo reactivation in our study, compared with hyperthermia induced reactivation in the study by Thompson and Sawtell. Nonetheless, our findings suggest that measurement of the total latent viral load alone does not account for the differences in HSV-2 reactivation between the two viruses in these experiments. We found that the lower reactivation rate of LAT? HSV-2 was not associated with higher number of CD8+T cells infiltrating the TG. CD8+T cells have been found to reduce reactivation of HSV in mice ( Hoshino et al., 2007 ; Khanna et al., 2003 ; Liu et al., 2000 ). Since LAT? HSV reactivates less efficiently than LAT+ HSV, we predicted that TG from mice infected with LAT? HSV contained more infiltrating CD8+T cells than TG from mice infected with LAT+ HSV. However, we found that animals infected LAT? HSV had fewer CD8+T cells in their TG, and that the difference in CD8+T cells in TG between LAT? and LATR HSV-2 was dependent on the difference in the latent viral load. Our experiments compared a LAT-deficient mutant (LAT? HSV-2) with a LAT-rescued virus (LATR HSV2), and it is possible that a wild-type HSV-2 might have had a different phenotype than the LAT-rescued virus in some of our assays. We think that the latter hypothesis is highly unlikely, since the original description of the LAT-deficient (LAT? HSV-2) mutant compared the LAT-rescued virus (LATR HSV2) with wild-type HSV-2 (strain 333) in a guinea pig model of infection and found no differences between the rescued and wild-type viruses for latent viral DNA loads in ganglia by PCR, and slight (but not significant) differences in recurrent disease in the animals. LAT has multiple functions including inhibition of apoptosis ( Ahmed et al., 2002 ; Carpenter et al., 2007 ; Perng et al., 2000a ), modification of chromatin ( Kubat et al., 2004 ; Wang et al., 2005 ), encoding microRNAs that regulate expression of viral and host cell genes ( Tang et al., 2008 ; Tang, Patel, and Krause, 2008 ; Umbach et al., 2008 ), and affecting the type of neurons in which virus establishes latency ( Margolis et al., 2007 ). The effect of LAT on the establishment of latency and reactivation may be mediated by some of these activities or other, as yet unknown, functions. Further understanding of the molecular mechanisms of reactivation and establishment of latency of HSV is necessary to clarify the role of LAT during infection and may help to provide new strategies for the treatment of recurrent HSV disease. 