Glycerol monolaurate prevents mucosal SIV transmission While there has been great progress in treating HIV-1 infection 1 , preventing transmission has thus far proven an elusive goal. Indeed, recent trials of a candidate vaccine and microbicide have been disappointing, both for want of efficacy and concerns about increased rates of transmission 2 – 4 . Nonetheless, studies of vaginal transmission in the SIV-rhesus macaque model point to opportunities in the earliest stages of infection where a vaccine or microbicide might be protective, by limiting the expansion of infected founder populations at the portal of entry 5 , 6 . Here we show in this SIV-macaque model, that an outside-in endocervical mucosal signalling system, involving MIP-3?, plasmacytoid dendritic cells and CCR5+cell-attracting chemokines produced by these cells, in combination with the innate immune and inflammatory responses to infection in both cervix and vagina, recruit CD4+T cells to fuel this obligate expansion. We then show that glycerol monolaurate, a widely used antimicrobial compound 7 with inhibitory activity against production of MIP-3? and other proinflammatory cytokines 8 , can inhibit mucosal signalling and the innate and inflammatory response to HIV-1 and SIV in vitro , and in vivo can protect rhesus macaques from acute infection despite repeated intra-vaginal exposure to high doses of SIV. This novel approach, plausibly linked to interfering with innate host responses that recruit the target cells necessary to establish systemic infection, opens a promising new avenue for development of effective interventions to block HIV-1 mucosal transmission.  Methods Animals Adult female rhesus macaque monkeys ( Macacca mulatta ) used in the studies were housed at the California and Wisconsin National Primate Centers in accordance with the regulations of the American Association of Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care and the standards of the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International; all protocols and procedures were approved by the relevant Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. All animals were negative for antibodies to HIV type 2, SIV, type D retrovirus, and simian T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1. Intra-vaginal inoculation of SIV and GML and K-Y warming gel Monkeys were inoculated intra-vaginally twice in a single day, with a 4-hour interval between inoculations, with one ml of a 2004 virus stock from Dr. C. Miller of 105 TCID50/ml SIVmac 251. For inoculation, each animal was anesthetized with an intramuscular injection of a combination of ketamine hydrochloride (Parke-Davis, Morris Plains, NJ) (up to 7mg/kg) and medetomidine (up to 5 mg/kg). Additional ketamine, when needed, was given intravenously (up to 5 mg/kg). The animal was placed in a sternal position with her posterior elevated approximately 60 degrees from horizontal and a 1 ml syringe without a needle was inserted atraumatically into the vagina to deliver the inoculum. Animals thereafter remained in the sternal position for at least 30, but no more than 40 minutes. For GML 5% and vehicle control gel dosing, as well as collection of vaginal swabs, animals were transferred to a table-top restraint device to administer either 1 ml of vehicle control K-Y warming gel or 1 ml of gel containing 50 mg solubilized GML via a 1 ml syringe without needle inserted atraumatically into the vagina, as described above. GML formulation GML (monomuls 90-L 12®, Cognis Corporation Care Chemicals, Cincinnati, Ohio) was dissolved in K-Y warming gel (5 gms/100 ml) at the Fairview Compounding Pharmacy, Minneapolis, MN. Detection of SIV RNA in plasma SIV viral RNA genomic copy equivalents in EDTA-anti-coagulated plasma was determined using a quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) procedure modified from an assay described previously 24 . Briefly, vRNA was isolated from plasma using a GuSCN-based procedure as described. QRT-PCR was performed using the SuperScript III Platinum(R) One-Step Quantitative RT-PCR System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Reactions were run on a Roche Lightcycler 2.0 instrument and software. vRNA copy number was determined using LightCycler 4.0 software (Roche Molecular Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) to interpolate sample crossing points onto an internal standard curve prepared from 10-fold serial dilutions of a synthetic RNA transcript representing a conserved region of SIV gag. Tissue collection and processing At the time of euthanasia, blood, upper, middle and lower portions of vagina, cervix, and uterus, draining LNs (iliac, obturator and inguinal), mesenteric, axillary and inguinal LNs, gut (ileum, jejunum and colon) from each animal were collected, and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, SafeFix II (Fisher Scientific, Fairview, NJ) or Streck’s fixative (Streck Laboratories, Inc., Omaha, NE), and embedded in paraffin for sectioning. In situ hybridization (ISH) In situ hybridization to detect SIV RNA was performed as previously described 9 . Briefly, After deparaffinization, pretreatment to permeabilize tissue and to block non-specific binding, 5 micron sections from 4% PFA fixed tissues were hybridized to 35S-labeled SIV RNA antisense or sense (as a negative control) riboprobes covering over 90% of SIV genome; After overnight hybridization, the sections were washed, digested with ribonucleases, coated with nuclear track emulsion, exposed, developed, and counterstained with H &E. Construction of digital atlas of SIV vRNA+cells in cervix and vagina An image of each field with SIV RNA+cells detected by in situ hybridization was collected sequentially using epifluorescent illumination, Olympus B-MAX microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and a “SPOT INSIGHT” digital camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Tokyo, Japan). The images from each section were acquired from left to right and top to bottom with a ~20% overlap with its neighboring images to avoid gaps in creating the montage image. Images were automatically merged into one Atlas image using a Photoshop 7.0 automerge function. After using the Photoshop Action procedures to associate individual silver grains with cells, the centroid X, Y coordinates of a SIV RNA+ cell were assigned using MetaMorph (version 7.1.3.) software, and these coordinates were then logged into Excel files as numeric numbers and plotted with Excel. Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry was performed as described 9 , 12 using a biotin-free detection system, MACH-3™ (Biocare Medical) or EnVision+ System (DakoCytomation), on 5 ?m tissue sections mounted on glass slides. Tissues were deparaffinized and rehydrated in deionized water. Heat-induced epitope retrieval (HIER) was performed using the water bath method (95° to 98°C for 10–20 min) in one of the following buffers: 1X EDTA Decloaker™ reagent (Biocare Medical), 1X DiVA Decloaker (Biocare Medical), 10mm/L sodium citrate, pH 6.0, or 1mm EDTA, pH 8.0, followed by cooling to room temperature. Tissues sections were blocked with SNIPER Blocking Reagent (Biocare Medical) for 1h at room temperature. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked with 3% (v/v) H2O2 in TBS (pH 7.4). Primary antibodies were diluted in 10% SNIPER Blocking Reagent in TNB and incubated overnight at 4°C. Following the primary antibody incubation, the sections were washed and then incubated with either mouse, goat or rabbit polymer system reagents conjugated with either horseradish peroxidase or alkaline phosphatase according to the manufacturer’s instructions and developed with 3,3?-diaminobenzidine (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) or Vulcan Fast Red (Biocare Medical). Sections were counterstained with CAT Hematoxylin (Biocare Medical), mounted in Permount (Fisher Scientific) and examined by light microscopy. Primary antibodies and other reagents and protocols used are summarized in End notes. All anti-human antibody reagents were demonstrated to show good cross reactivity with the cognate macaque antigens. Isotype matched IgG negative control antibodies in all instances yielded negative staining results. Immunohistochemical staining (IHCS) and in situ hybridization (ISH) Combined IHCS and ISH were performed as described previously 9 . In brief, sections were microwaved for antigen retrieval, hybridized, washed and digested with ribonucleases, incubated with antibody markers for cell type, CD3, CD4, CD68, and then stained with the Dako Envision + Peroxidase kit with antibodies to the primary antibody and diaminobenzidine (DAB). After washing, the sections were coated with nuclear track emulsion, exposed, developed, and counterstained with hematoxylin. Culture of HVECs and induction and measurement of MIP-3? and IL-8 HVECs were cultured until confluent at 37°C, 7% CO2 in 96-well flat-bottom microtiter plates (Becton Dickinson Labware, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in 100 ?l per well of keratinocyte serum free medium (KSFM) with antibiotics 25 . HIV-1 ± GML was added to wells, and, after 6 hours incubation, supernates were collected and tested for chemokines by ELISA as described by the manufacturer (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Data reported are mean ± standard deviation. We have previously shown 25 that GML does not interfere with ELISA for chemokine detection. Microarray analysis of cervical transcriptional responses to intravaginal SIV inoculation Gene expression profiles in cervix of macaques before and after intravaginal SIV inoculation at 1 and 3 dpi were analysed with the GeneChip® Rhesus Macaque Genome Array (AFFYMETRIX, INC. 3380 Central Expressway, Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA), which contains ~ 47,000 rhesus transcripts. RNA extractions, preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA probes, and microarray hybridization followed previously published protocols 26 . Briefly, snap-frozen cervical tissues from two un-infected and three infected Indian rhesus macaques at 1 dpi and two macaques at 3 dpi were homogenized, total RNA was extracted, double-stranded cDNA and biotin-labeled cRNA probes were synthesized from 5 ?g of total RNA. Fifteen micrograms of fragmented cRNA was hybridized to an Affymetrix the GeneChip® Rhesus Macaque Genome Array. After hybridization, chips were washed, stained with streptavidin-phycoerythrin, and scanned with GeneChip Operating Software at the Biomedical Genomics Center at the University of Minnesota. The experiments from each RNA sample were duplicated in the preparation of each cRNA probe, and microarray hybridization. Microarray data were analyzed in Expressionist program Genedata, Pro version 4.5, using the RMA algorithm. The expression levels from duplicated chips of the same animals’ RNA were correlated and averaged. Tests for differences between the uninfected and infected animals at 1dpi and 3 dpi were conducted using the 2-sample t-test. Cut-off was set at p <0.05 and ? 2-fold increased expression. Statistical methods In the initial protocol, animals were challenged twice and then necropsied at peak replication in order to obtain tissues to evaluate viral replication, whereas, in the second experiment, each animal was repeatedly challenged until all of the controls were infected. For this second experiment, we used the negative binomial likelihood as a statistical model to interpret the results of the experiment. Note that since the design of the second stage of the experiment included the possibility that treated animals would never get infected, animals in the treatment group who were not infected were considered to be right censored at the trial at which all the controls were finally infected. Since the challenge involved 2 doses at each time point, our trials consist of 2 such doses. So an animal that survived 2 challenges was subjected to 4 doses. Our model supposes that a success for a trial occurs when an animal is infected by one of these double dose challenges. Moreover, the model supposes that the outcome for each animal is independent and there is a different probability of a success for a trial depending on treatment status. Hence, if we let ? represent the probability that an animal is infected with one challenge, and an animal is infected on the m th challenge, then this animal contributes a factor of (1 ? ?) m ? 1 ? to the likelihood. For an animal that survives m such challenges, then since the probability that this occurs is (1 ? ?) m , this animal would contribute (1 ? ?) m to the likelihood. The likelihood for each group is then found by multiplying the contributions from each animal The likelihood in that group. Maximum likelihood estimates are then found by maximizing the likelihood. We can also compute Bayesian credible sets and the posterior probability that the probability of success differs between the 2 groups using numerical integration (using an adaptive 15-point Gauss-Kronrod quadrature, as implemented in the software S-plus, version 3.4 release 1, from Mathsoft, Inc.). For the groups of three animals challenged four times, GML’s efficacy against transmission is estimated to be at least 65%, and the probability that GML is more likely to prevent infection than K-Y warming gel alone is 0.98. While we prefer this estimate, because the outcome was determined decisively, including the animals in the pilot experiment where we did not repeatedly challenge until infected, 5/5 GML treated animals and 1/5 controls did not get infected. The estimated efficacy of GML (using the same methods) in this case is at least 72% at a probability of 0.95.  Animals Adult female rhesus macaque monkeys ( Macacca mulatta ) used in the studies were housed at the California and Wisconsin National Primate Centers in accordance with the regulations of the American Association of Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care and the standards of the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International; all protocols and procedures were approved by the relevant Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. All animals were negative for antibodies to HIV type 2, SIV, type D retrovirus, and simian T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1.  Intra-vaginal inoculation of SIV and GML and K-Y warming gel Monkeys were inoculated intra-vaginally twice in a single day, with a 4-hour interval between inoculations, with one ml of a 2004 virus stock from Dr. C. Miller of 105 TCID50/ml SIVmac 251. For inoculation, each animal was anesthetized with an intramuscular injection of a combination of ketamine hydrochloride (Parke-Davis, Morris Plains, NJ) (up to 7mg/kg) and medetomidine (up to 5 mg/kg). Additional ketamine, when needed, was given intravenously (up to 5 mg/kg). The animal was placed in a sternal position with her posterior elevated approximately 60 degrees from horizontal and a 1 ml syringe without a needle was inserted atraumatically into the vagina to deliver the inoculum. Animals thereafter remained in the sternal position for at least 30, but no more than 40 minutes. For GML 5% and vehicle control gel dosing, as well as collection of vaginal swabs, animals were transferred to a table-top restraint device to administer either 1 ml of vehicle control K-Y warming gel or 1 ml of gel containing 50 mg solubilized GML via a 1 ml syringe without needle inserted atraumatically into the vagina, as described above.  GML formulation GML (monomuls 90-L 12®, Cognis Corporation Care Chemicals, Cincinnati, Ohio) was dissolved in K-Y warming gel (5 gms/100 ml) at the Fairview Compounding Pharmacy, Minneapolis, MN.  Detection of SIV RNA in plasma SIV viral RNA genomic copy equivalents in EDTA-anti-coagulated plasma was determined using a quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) procedure modified from an assay described previously 24 . Briefly, vRNA was isolated from plasma using a GuSCN-based procedure as described. QRT-PCR was performed using the SuperScript III Platinum(R) One-Step Quantitative RT-PCR System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Reactions were run on a Roche Lightcycler 2.0 instrument and software. vRNA copy number was determined using LightCycler 4.0 software (Roche Molecular Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) to interpolate sample crossing points onto an internal standard curve prepared from 10-fold serial dilutions of a synthetic RNA transcript representing a conserved region of SIV gag.  Tissue collection and processing At the time of euthanasia, blood, upper, middle and lower portions of vagina, cervix, and uterus, draining LNs (iliac, obturator and inguinal), mesenteric, axillary and inguinal LNs, gut (ileum, jejunum and colon) from each animal were collected, and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, SafeFix II (Fisher Scientific, Fairview, NJ) or Streck’s fixative (Streck Laboratories, Inc., Omaha, NE), and embedded in paraffin for sectioning.  In situ hybridization (ISH) In situ hybridization to detect SIV RNA was performed as previously described 9 . Briefly, After deparaffinization, pretreatment to permeabilize tissue and to block non-specific binding, 5 micron sections from 4% PFA fixed tissues were hybridized to 35S-labeled SIV RNA antisense or sense (as a negative control) riboprobes covering over 90% of SIV genome; After overnight hybridization, the sections were washed, digested with ribonucleases, coated with nuclear track emulsion, exposed, developed, and counterstained with H &E.  Construction of digital atlas of SIV vRNA+cells in cervix and vagina An image of each field with SIV RNA+cells detected by in situ hybridization was collected sequentially using epifluorescent illumination, Olympus B-MAX microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and a “SPOT INSIGHT” digital camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Tokyo, Japan). The images from each section were acquired from left to right and top to bottom with a ~20% overlap with its neighboring images to avoid gaps in creating the montage image. Images were automatically merged into one Atlas image using a Photoshop 7.0 automerge function. After using the Photoshop Action procedures to associate individual silver grains with cells, the centroid X, Y coordinates of a SIV RNA+ cell were assigned using MetaMorph (version 7.1.3.) software, and these coordinates were then logged into Excel files as numeric numbers and plotted with Excel.  Immunohistochemistry Immunohistochemistry was performed as described 9 , 12 using a biotin-free detection system, MACH-3™ (Biocare Medical) or EnVision+ System (DakoCytomation), on 5 ?m tissue sections mounted on glass slides. Tissues were deparaffinized and rehydrated in deionized water. Heat-induced epitope retrieval (HIER) was performed using the water bath method (95° to 98°C for 10–20 min) in one of the following buffers: 1X EDTA Decloaker™ reagent (Biocare Medical), 1X DiVA Decloaker (Biocare Medical), 10mm/L sodium citrate, pH 6.0, or 1mm EDTA, pH 8.0, followed by cooling to room temperature. Tissues sections were blocked with SNIPER Blocking Reagent (Biocare Medical) for 1h at room temperature. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked with 3% (v/v) H2O2 in TBS (pH 7.4). Primary antibodies were diluted in 10% SNIPER Blocking Reagent in TNB and incubated overnight at 4°C. Following the primary antibody incubation, the sections were washed and then incubated with either mouse, goat or rabbit polymer system reagents conjugated with either horseradish peroxidase or alkaline phosphatase according to the manufacturer’s instructions and developed with 3,3?-diaminobenzidine (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) or Vulcan Fast Red (Biocare Medical). Sections were counterstained with CAT Hematoxylin (Biocare Medical), mounted in Permount (Fisher Scientific) and examined by light microscopy. Primary antibodies and other reagents and protocols used are summarized in End notes. All anti-human antibody reagents were demonstrated to show good cross reactivity with the cognate macaque antigens. Isotype matched IgG negative control antibodies in all instances yielded negative staining results.  Immunohistochemical staining (IHCS) and in situ hybridization (ISH) Combined IHCS and ISH were performed as described previously 9 . In brief, sections were microwaved for antigen retrieval, hybridized, washed and digested with ribonucleases, incubated with antibody markers for cell type, CD3, CD4, CD68, and then stained with the Dako Envision + Peroxidase kit with antibodies to the primary antibody and diaminobenzidine (DAB). After washing, the sections were coated with nuclear track emulsion, exposed, developed, and counterstained with hematoxylin.  Culture of HVECs and induction and measurement of MIP-3? and IL-8 HVECs were cultured until confluent at 37°C, 7% CO2 in 96-well flat-bottom microtiter plates (Becton Dickinson Labware, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in 100 ?l per well of keratinocyte serum free medium (KSFM) with antibiotics 25 . HIV-1 ± GML was added to wells, and, after 6 hours incubation, supernates were collected and tested for chemokines by ELISA as described by the manufacturer (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Data reported are mean ± standard deviation. We have previously shown 25 that GML does not interfere with ELISA for chemokine detection.  Microarray analysis of cervical transcriptional responses to intravaginal SIV inoculation Gene expression profiles in cervix of macaques before and after intravaginal SIV inoculation at 1 and 3 dpi were analysed with the GeneChip® Rhesus Macaque Genome Array (AFFYMETRIX, INC. 3380 Central Expressway, Santa Clara, CA 95051 USA), which contains ~ 47,000 rhesus transcripts. RNA extractions, preparation of biotin-labeled cRNA probes, and microarray hybridization followed previously published protocols 26 . Briefly, snap-frozen cervical tissues from two un-infected and three infected Indian rhesus macaques at 1 dpi and two macaques at 3 dpi were homogenized, total RNA was extracted, double-stranded cDNA and biotin-labeled cRNA probes were synthesized from 5 ?g of total RNA. Fifteen micrograms of fragmented cRNA was hybridized to an Affymetrix the GeneChip® Rhesus Macaque Genome Array. After hybridization, chips were washed, stained with streptavidin-phycoerythrin, and scanned with GeneChip Operating Software at the Biomedical Genomics Center at the University of Minnesota. The experiments from each RNA sample were duplicated in the preparation of each cRNA probe, and microarray hybridization. Microarray data were analyzed in Expressionist program Genedata, Pro version 4.5, using the RMA algorithm. The expression levels from duplicated chips of the same animals’ RNA were correlated and averaged. Tests for differences between the uninfected and infected animals at 1dpi and 3 dpi were conducted using the 2-sample t-test. Cut-off was set at p <0.05 and ? 2-fold increased expression.  Statistical methods In the initial protocol, animals were challenged twice and then necropsied at peak replication in order to obtain tissues to evaluate viral replication, whereas, in the second experiment, each animal was repeatedly challenged until all of the controls were infected. For this second experiment, we used the negative binomial likelihood as a statistical model to interpret the results of the experiment. Note that since the design of the second stage of the experiment included the possibility that treated animals would never get infected, animals in the treatment group who were not infected were considered to be right censored at the trial at which all the controls were finally infected. Since the challenge involved 2 doses at each time point, our trials consist of 2 such doses. So an animal that survived 2 challenges was subjected to 4 doses. Our model supposes that a success for a trial occurs when an animal is infected by one of these double dose challenges. Moreover, the model supposes that the outcome for each animal is independent and there is a different probability of a success for a trial depending on treatment status. Hence, if we let ? represent the probability that an animal is infected with one challenge, and an animal is infected on the m th challenge, then this animal contributes a factor of (1 ? ?) m ? 1 ? to the likelihood. For an animal that survives m such challenges, then since the probability that this occurs is (1 ? ?) m , this animal would contribute (1 ? ?) m to the likelihood. The likelihood for each group is then found by multiplying the contributions from each animal The likelihood in that group. Maximum likelihood estimates are then found by maximizing the likelihood. We can also compute Bayesian credible sets and the posterior probability that the probability of success differs between the 2 groups using numerical integration (using an adaptive 15-point Gauss-Kronrod quadrature, as implemented in the software S-plus, version 3.4 release 1, from Mathsoft, Inc.). For the groups of three animals challenged four times, GML’s efficacy against transmission is estimated to be at least 65%, and the probability that GML is more likely to prevent infection than K-Y warming gel alone is 0.98. While we prefer this estimate, because the outcome was determined decisively, including the animals in the pilot experiment where we did not repeatedly challenge until infected, 5/5 GML treated animals and 1/5 controls did not get infected. The estimated efficacy of GML (using the same methods) in this case is at least 72% at a probability of 0.95.  Supplementary Material 1 