Local Production of Interferon Gamma by Invariant Natural Killer T cells Modulates Acute Lyme Carditis The Lyme disease spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi , is the only known human pathogen that directly activates invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells. The number and activation kinetics of iNKT cells vary greatly among different strains of mice. We now report the role of the iNKT cell response in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease using C57Bl/6 mice, a strain with optimal iNKT cell activation that is resistant to the development of spirochetal-induced inflammation. During experimental infection of B6 mice with B. burgdorferi , iNKT cells localize to the inflamed heart where they are activated by CD1d-expressing macrophages. Activation of iNKT cells in vivo results in the production of IFN?, which we demonstrate ameliorates the severity of murine Lyme carditis by at least two mechanisms. First, IFN? enhances the recognition of B. burgdorferi by macrophages, leading to increased phagocytosis of the spirochete. Secondly, IFN? activation of macrophages increases the surface expression of CD1d, thereby facilitating further iNKT activation. Collectively, our data demonstrate that in the resistant background, B6, iNKT cells modulate the severity of murine Lyme carditis through the action of IFN?, which appears to self-renew through a positive feedback loop during infection.  Introduction Natural Killer T (NKT) cells are a unique and complex population of T lymphocytes that co-express ?? T cell (TCR) and NK receptors ( 1 , 2 ). In humans, NKT cells nearly always have a V?24-J?18 TCR ( 2 ), whereas mouse NKT cells possess a V?14-J?18 rearrangement. In both humans and mice, this invariant TCR is capable of antigen recognition in the context of an MHC class I-like molecule, CD1d, which is adapted for the presentation of lipid antigens ( 3 ). Upon activation, V?14-J?18i NKT (iNKT) cells rapidly produce large quantities of cytokines such as IFN?, IL-4, IL-17, IL-5 and IL-13, which can modulate many immunological processes, including tumor immunity, maintenance of self-tolerance, prevention of autoimmune disorders and protection from a variety of pathogens during experimental infections ( 2 , 4 ). Pathogenic bacteria also can activate iNKT cells indirectly through Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4, 7 or 9-driven maturation of dendritic cells, which then present self-glycolipids in the context of CD1d and soluble factors such as IL-12 or type 1 interferon ( 5 , 6 ). Until recently, the identification of an iNKT cell antigen expressed by a human pathogen capable of directly activating iNKT cells eluded investigators. Kinjo and co-workers reported that the Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi expresses a diacylglycerol glycolipid, BbGL-IIc, which acts as a natural antigen for murine and human iNKT cells ( 7 ). To date B. burgdorferi is the only known human pathogen containing an antigen capable of activating iNKT cells. B. burgdorferi is the etiologic agent of Lyme borreliosis, a tick-borne inflammatory disease that afflicts humans in parts of the United States and most of Eurasia. Infection with B. burgdorferi can result in multi-system complications that most commonly affect the musculoskeletal, nervous and cardiac systems ( 8 - 12 ). Among the inflammatory conditions observed in infected humans, Lyme arthritis and carditis are reproduced to some extent in the murine model of infection with the spirochete ( 13 ). Mice become persistently infected upon experimental infection and develop joint and cardiac inflammation that resembles the human disease ( 14 ). The incidence and severity of Lyme borreliosis is dependent on the genetic background of the infected animal. Thus, C3H mice develop carditis and arthritis with a greater incidence and severity than strains such as Balb/c, DBA/2, C57Bl/6 or 129 ( 14 - 16 ). The basis for the genetic susceptibility to the development of B. burgdorferi -mediated inflammation is unknown. One potential factor that could influence the development of inflammation in infected organs is the capacity of infiltrating iNKT cells to respond to specific ligands. Thus, recent reports have demonstrated that iNKT cells from B6 mice migrate differentially to distinct organs and respond more vigorously and with faster kinetics than do those from other strains, including Balb/c and C3H ( 17 ). These results suggest that B6 mice would be an ideal background in which to assess the role of iNKT cells in experimental Lyme disease. Experimental infection of B6/129 mice deficient in CD1d with B. burgdorferi revealed that CD1d has an important role in controlling spirochete burdens as well as Lyme arthritis ( 18 ). Although CD1d-deficient mice lack iNKT cells because of a developmental failure in the thymus, they also lack other CD1d-reactive T cells with more diverse TCRs ( 18 - 20 ) and further show deficient marginal zone B cell responses, which are involved in the response to B. burgdorferi ( 21 , 22 ). This pleiotropy complicates the assignment of the observed phenotype to a single cell type, such as iNKT cells. In contrast, J?18-deficent mice specifically lack V?14-J?18i NKT cells and thus represent a suitable model to determine the role of iNKT cells in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease. In this study, we have determined the contribution of iNKT cells to the host response against B. burgdorferi in B6 mice. We report that in this strain of mice, iNKT cells localize to the inflamed heart following infection with B. burgdorferi , where they exert a protective role that is mediated by the cytokine, IFN? by enhancing the phagocytic capacity of macrophages, leading to the control of infection; and increasing the expression of the antigen presenting molecule CD1d in a positive feedback loop.  Materials and Methods Mice and infection with <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> J?18-deficient mice ( 23 ) were bred at UMass Amherst. The mice have been backcrossed to the C57Bl/6J (B6) background more than 10 generations. Age-matched B6 mice were from Jackson laboratories. IFN?R?-deficient mice in a 129 Sv/J background were purchased from Jackson laboratories and bred at UMass Amherst. Six to 8 week old mice were infected by subcutaneous injection with 105 B. burgdorferi strain 297 in the midline of the back, as previously described ( 24 ). At 2 weeks of infection, which represents the acute phase of disease, the mice were sacrificed and analyzed for inflammation and bacterial burdens, as previously described ( 25 ). Arthritis and carditis were evaluated histologically in formalin-fixed sections processed for H&E staining. The joints were also decalcified. The hearts were cut in half through bisections across the atria and ventricles prior to sectioning. Signs of arthritis were evaluated as described ( 25 ), based on a combined assessment of histological parameters of B. burgdorferi -induced inflammation, such as exudation of fibrin and inflammatory cells into the joints, alteration in the thickness of tendons or ligament sheaths, as well as hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the synovium. Signs of carditis were evaluated based on the cardiac inflammatory infiltrate, including the infiltration of connective tissue with macrophages at the base of the heart, including surrounding the aortic valve and the atria. Carditis was scored on a scale of 0 (no inflammation), 1 (mild inflammation with less than two small foci of infiltration), 2 (moderate inflammation with 2 or more foci of infiltration), or 3 (severe inflammation with focal and diffuse infiltration covering a large area). Both joint and heart tissue sections were blindly examined. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at UMass Amherst approved all procedures involving animals. Cells and stimulations Mouse bone marrow cells were collected from the femoral shafts by flushing 3 times with 1 ml of cold RPMI (10% FCS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin) supplemented with 20% L929-conditioned RPMI. The cell suspensions were cultured in 100mm × 15mm petri dishes (Fisher Scientific) in 20% L929-conditioned RPMI for 8 days at 37° C with 5% CO2. Following incubation, non-adherent cells were eliminated and adherent macrophages scraped, counted and resuspended in serum-free RPMI medium without antibiotics prior to use. RAW264.7 macrophages were cultured in RPMI but washed and resuspended in serum- and antibiotic-free RPMI before use. 106 BMMs or RAW264.7 cells per ml were incubated with recombinant murine IFN? (rmIFN?; carrier- and endotoxin-free; eBioscience, Inc., San Diego, CA) (0, 0.5, 5, 50 ng ml-1) for 12h and analyzed for expression of CD1d (PE-anti-mouse CD1d, eBioscience, Inc.) or stimulated with live B. burgdorferi (strain 297) at a 25:1 multiplicity of infection (m.o.i) for 12h. Following stimulation with B. burgdorferi , culture supernatants were analyzed by ELISA for TNF? and IL-6, as previously described ( 26 ). <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic>-specific antibodies Analysis of Total IgG and IgM were determined by coating 96 well plates with 0.5 ?g/ml (IgG) or 1.0 ?g/ml (IgM) of a B. burgdorferi strain 297 lysate and incubated with serial two-fold dilutions starting at 1:100 followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated anti mouse IgM or IgG (BD Pharmingen) (1:10000 dilution). The reactions were developed using 1-component TMB substrate and stopped with TMB stop solution (KPL, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD). Quantitative analysis of IFN? expression The relative expression of IFN? in cardiac tissue was determined using total RNA extracted from the base of the heart using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA was treated with DNase I (Promega, Madison, WI), and reverse transcribed using random primers (Invitrogen) and SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (RT) (Invitrogen). The cDNA was amplified using primers specific for glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase ( gadph ; 5?-CCA TCA CCA TCT TCC AGG AGC GAG-3? and 5?-CAC AGT CTT CTG GGT GGC AGT GAT -3?) and ifn? (5?-GCG TCA TTG AAT CAC ACC-3? and 5?-GGA CCT GTG GGT TGT TGA CC-3?) in an Mx3005P® QPCR System (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) and SYBR green-containing reaction buffer (Roche, Nutley, NJ). Relative expression of the gene is referred to control-infected mouse heart tissue, as described ( 27 ). Detection of iNKT cells DNA from the hearts of control and infected mice were utilized to perform a nested-PCR reaction using primers specific for the V?14-J?18i TCR. For the first reaction, non-specific TCR (5?-GTC CTC AGT CCC TGG TTG TC-3? and 5?-CTG CCT CCG AGG TAG TGA C-3?) was amplified using 5 ?l of DNA in a total volume of 50 ?l with the following conditions: 94°C 2 min, (94°C 1 min, 55°C 1.5 min, 72°C 1.5 min) x 30 and 72°C 2 min. A second reaction using primers specific for the V?14-J?18i TCR (5?-GAC AGT CCT GGT TGA CC-3? and 5?-AAT GCA GCC TCC CTA AG-3?) was performed using 5 ?l of template from reaction 1 with the same conditions, except that 35 cycles were used. Confocal microscopy At sacrifice, hearts were collected and snap-frozen in O.C.T. freezing medium (Sigma) and stored at -80°C. Hearts were grossly cut through the ventricles parallel to the atria, sectioned using a Triangle Biomedical Sciences Cryostat (Durham, NC) and every sixth 10 micron section through the aortic sinus was placed on Fisherbrand Superfrost microscope slides (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Sections were fixed in -20 °C acetone for 5 min, rehydrated in distilled water for 3 min, blocked with Fc Block (anti-mouse CD16/32, clone 2.4G2; BD Pharmingen, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and stained with the following monoclonal antibodies: Alexa Fluor488 anti-mouse CD3 (clone 145-2C11), Alexa Fluor647 anti-mouse CD11b (clone M1/70), PE-anti-mouse CD1d (clone 1B1; BD Pharmingen). Nuclear staining was done with DAPI (Roche). The sections were imaged using a Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal laser scanning microscope (Zeiss Microimaging, Thornwood NY) operating in the multitrack mode, as described before ( 28 ). Analysis of phagocytosis BMM or RAW264.7 cells were activated with different doses of rmIFN? for 12 hour in serum- and antibiotic-free RPMI prior to the addition of GFP-expressing B. burgdorferi strain 297 at an m.o.i. of 10 for 4h. To distinguish between binding and internalization of spirochetes, the mixtures were incubated at 4 °C and 37 °C, in parallel. The incubation at 4 °C results in the binding of particles, but not their internalization ( 29 ). After the incubation, the cells were washed and analyzed by flow cytometry. For Apotome epifluorescence analysis of phagocytosis, RAW264.7 cells were activated with 50 ng ml-1 of rmIFN? and challenged with GFP- B. burgdorferi at 37° C, as described. The cells were then washed, cytospun and stained with the macrophage cell membrane marker F4/80 (clone BM8; rat anti-mouse F4/80, eBioscience, Inc.) followed by a secondary stain with Alexa Fluor594 goat anti-rat IgG (Invitrogen). Statistical Analysis The results are presented as means ± SE. Significant differences between means were calculated with the Student’s t test. P values of 0.05 or less were considered statistically significant.  Mice and infection with <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> J?18-deficient mice ( 23 ) were bred at UMass Amherst. The mice have been backcrossed to the C57Bl/6J (B6) background more than 10 generations. Age-matched B6 mice were from Jackson laboratories. IFN?R?-deficient mice in a 129 Sv/J background were purchased from Jackson laboratories and bred at UMass Amherst. Six to 8 week old mice were infected by subcutaneous injection with 105 B. burgdorferi strain 297 in the midline of the back, as previously described ( 24 ). At 2 weeks of infection, which represents the acute phase of disease, the mice were sacrificed and analyzed for inflammation and bacterial burdens, as previously described ( 25 ). Arthritis and carditis were evaluated histologically in formalin-fixed sections processed for H&E staining. The joints were also decalcified. The hearts were cut in half through bisections across the atria and ventricles prior to sectioning. Signs of arthritis were evaluated as described ( 25 ), based on a combined assessment of histological parameters of B. burgdorferi -induced inflammation, such as exudation of fibrin and inflammatory cells into the joints, alteration in the thickness of tendons or ligament sheaths, as well as hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the synovium. Signs of carditis were evaluated based on the cardiac inflammatory infiltrate, including the infiltration of connective tissue with macrophages at the base of the heart, including surrounding the aortic valve and the atria. Carditis was scored on a scale of 0 (no inflammation), 1 (mild inflammation with less than two small foci of infiltration), 2 (moderate inflammation with 2 or more foci of infiltration), or 3 (severe inflammation with focal and diffuse infiltration covering a large area). Both joint and heart tissue sections were blindly examined. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at UMass Amherst approved all procedures involving animals.  Cells and stimulations Mouse bone marrow cells were collected from the femoral shafts by flushing 3 times with 1 ml of cold RPMI (10% FCS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin) supplemented with 20% L929-conditioned RPMI. The cell suspensions were cultured in 100mm × 15mm petri dishes (Fisher Scientific) in 20% L929-conditioned RPMI for 8 days at 37° C with 5% CO2. Following incubation, non-adherent cells were eliminated and adherent macrophages scraped, counted and resuspended in serum-free RPMI medium without antibiotics prior to use. RAW264.7 macrophages were cultured in RPMI but washed and resuspended in serum- and antibiotic-free RPMI before use. 106 BMMs or RAW264.7 cells per ml were incubated with recombinant murine IFN? (rmIFN?; carrier- and endotoxin-free; eBioscience, Inc., San Diego, CA) (0, 0.5, 5, 50 ng ml-1) for 12h and analyzed for expression of CD1d (PE-anti-mouse CD1d, eBioscience, Inc.) or stimulated with live B. burgdorferi (strain 297) at a 25:1 multiplicity of infection (m.o.i) for 12h. Following stimulation with B. burgdorferi , culture supernatants were analyzed by ELISA for TNF? and IL-6, as previously described ( 26 ).  <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic>-specific antibodies Analysis of Total IgG and IgM were determined by coating 96 well plates with 0.5 ?g/ml (IgG) or 1.0 ?g/ml (IgM) of a B. burgdorferi strain 297 lysate and incubated with serial two-fold dilutions starting at 1:100 followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated anti mouse IgM or IgG (BD Pharmingen) (1:10000 dilution). The reactions were developed using 1-component TMB substrate and stopped with TMB stop solution (KPL, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD).  Quantitative analysis of IFN? expression The relative expression of IFN? in cardiac tissue was determined using total RNA extracted from the base of the heart using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA was treated with DNase I (Promega, Madison, WI), and reverse transcribed using random primers (Invitrogen) and SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (RT) (Invitrogen). The cDNA was amplified using primers specific for glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase ( gadph ; 5?-CCA TCA CCA TCT TCC AGG AGC GAG-3? and 5?-CAC AGT CTT CTG GGT GGC AGT GAT -3?) and ifn? (5?-GCG TCA TTG AAT CAC ACC-3? and 5?-GGA CCT GTG GGT TGT TGA CC-3?) in an Mx3005P® QPCR System (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) and SYBR green-containing reaction buffer (Roche, Nutley, NJ). Relative expression of the gene is referred to control-infected mouse heart tissue, as described ( 27 ).  Detection of iNKT cells DNA from the hearts of control and infected mice were utilized to perform a nested-PCR reaction using primers specific for the V?14-J?18i TCR. For the first reaction, non-specific TCR (5?-GTC CTC AGT CCC TGG TTG TC-3? and 5?-CTG CCT CCG AGG TAG TGA C-3?) was amplified using 5 ?l of DNA in a total volume of 50 ?l with the following conditions: 94°C 2 min, (94°C 1 min, 55°C 1.5 min, 72°C 1.5 min) x 30 and 72°C 2 min. A second reaction using primers specific for the V?14-J?18i TCR (5?-GAC AGT CCT GGT TGA CC-3? and 5?-AAT GCA GCC TCC CTA AG-3?) was performed using 5 ?l of template from reaction 1 with the same conditions, except that 35 cycles were used.  Confocal microscopy At sacrifice, hearts were collected and snap-frozen in O.C.T. freezing medium (Sigma) and stored at -80°C. Hearts were grossly cut through the ventricles parallel to the atria, sectioned using a Triangle Biomedical Sciences Cryostat (Durham, NC) and every sixth 10 micron section through the aortic sinus was placed on Fisherbrand Superfrost microscope slides (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Sections were fixed in -20 °C acetone for 5 min, rehydrated in distilled water for 3 min, blocked with Fc Block (anti-mouse CD16/32, clone 2.4G2; BD Pharmingen, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and stained with the following monoclonal antibodies: Alexa Fluor488 anti-mouse CD3 (clone 145-2C11), Alexa Fluor647 anti-mouse CD11b (clone M1/70), PE-anti-mouse CD1d (clone 1B1; BD Pharmingen). Nuclear staining was done with DAPI (Roche). The sections were imaged using a Zeiss LSM 510 META confocal laser scanning microscope (Zeiss Microimaging, Thornwood NY) operating in the multitrack mode, as described before ( 28 ).  Analysis of phagocytosis BMM or RAW264.7 cells were activated with different doses of rmIFN? for 12 hour in serum- and antibiotic-free RPMI prior to the addition of GFP-expressing B. burgdorferi strain 297 at an m.o.i. of 10 for 4h. To distinguish between binding and internalization of spirochetes, the mixtures were incubated at 4 °C and 37 °C, in parallel. The incubation at 4 °C results in the binding of particles, but not their internalization ( 29 ). After the incubation, the cells were washed and analyzed by flow cytometry. For Apotome epifluorescence analysis of phagocytosis, RAW264.7 cells were activated with 50 ng ml-1 of rmIFN? and challenged with GFP- B. burgdorferi at 37° C, as described. The cells were then washed, cytospun and stained with the macrophage cell membrane marker F4/80 (clone BM8; rat anti-mouse F4/80, eBioscience, Inc.) followed by a secondary stain with Alexa Fluor594 goat anti-rat IgG (Invitrogen).  Statistical Analysis The results are presented as means ± SE. Significant differences between means were calculated with the Student’s t test. P values of 0.05 or less were considered statistically significant.  Results iNKT cells modulate the pathogenesis of Lyme carditis The recent identification of B. burgdorferi -derived diacylglycerol glycolipids as natural antigens to iNKT cells ( 7 ), prompted us to examine the role of iNKT cells in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease. To determine whether iNKT cells contribute to the host response to B. burgdorferi , we syringe-infected wild type and J?18-deficient C57Bl/6 mice with 1 × 105 spirochetes in the midline of the back and allowed infection to progress for 2-3 weeks, which represents the acute phase of infection ( 25 ). Histological evaluation of the joints and hearts of the infected mice revealed that J?18-deficient animals are more susceptible to both arthritis ( Fig. 1A ) and carditis ( Fig. 1B, C ). Although there was a trend towards worse arthritis in mice that lacked J?18, the difference was not significant (Student t test; p = 0.07; n = 15). In contrast, carditis severity in J?18-deficient mice was increased significantly (p < 0.01). Infection of J?18-deficient mice results in increased spirochetal burdens in the heart Inflammation during experimental infection with B. burgdorferi is dependent on the ability of spirochetes to evade local clearance mechanisms in cardiac and joint tissue ( 16 ). Thus, we evaluated the ability of the mice to clear B. burgdorferi in the absence of iNKT cells by assessing bacterial loads in the heart tissue of the infected animals. Compared to wild type mice, J?18-deficient mice harbored significantly more B. burgdorferi in their heart (Student’s T test; p = 0.05), while the bacterial burden in the ear was unaffected by the loss of iNKT cells ( Fig. 2A ). iNKT cells have been shown to potentiate the antibody response to various pathogens ( 30 , 31 ). Since the antibody response to B. burgdorferi is critical for clearance of spirochetal infection ( 32 , 33 ), we assessed the B. burgdorferi -specific IgM and IgG responses 2 weeks following infection. The serum levels of antigen-specific IgM and IgG in wild type and J?18-deficient mice were similar ( Fig. 2B and 2C ). Moreover, the antigen specificity between the groups of mice was indistinguishable as assessed by immunoblotting (data not shown). These results demonstrate an important role for iNKT cells in the control of B. burgdorferi at the tissue level where acute inflammation occurs and show that differences in B. burgdorferi control and pathology between the J?18-deficient and wildtype mice are not due to distinct antibody responses. iNKT cells and CD1d-positive macrophages migrate to the inflamed heart of <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic>-infected mice iNKT cells have been shown to migrate to sites of inflammation in the lung, liver and spleen ( 17 , 34 - 37 ). We therefore analyzed the presence of iNKT cells in the hearts of uninfected and B. burgdorferi -infected mice using a nested PCR approach ( 38 , 39 ). While control mice did not harbor iNKT cells in the heart, the presence of the invariant TCR alpha chain was readily detected in the inflamed cardiac tissue of wild type, but not of J?18-deficient mice ( Fig. 3A ). We next used confocal immunofluorescence microscopy to characterize the infiltrating cells in the infected hearts. The infected hearts contained, as expected, CD11b+ cells (a macrophage marker) as well as CD3-expressing lymphocytes, ( Fig. 3B ), and confirmed ( 40 ) a predominant macrophage infiltration during Lyme carditis. The inflamed hearts also showed increased expression of CD1d compared to uninfected controls ( Fig. 3B ). Because CD1d expression is a requirement for APC-mediated activation of iNKT cells, we next determined the identity of the CD1d-expressing cells. CD1d expression colocalized with CD11b expression ( Fig. 3C ), thereby identifying macrophages as the predominant CD1d-expressing immune cell. iNKT cells are responsible for the production of IFN? in the infected heart B. burgdorferi glycolipid-pulsed dendritic cells induce IFN? production by iNKT cells in vivo ( 7 ). In addition, IFN?-producing CD4+ T cells facilitate the regression of murine Lyme carditis ( 41 ), while Stat1-deficient mice infected with B. burgdorferi develop exacerbated Lyme carditis, compared to control mice ( 42 ). We therefore addressed the contribution of iNKT cells to the pool of cardiac IFN? in B. burgdorferi -infected mice. B. burgdorferi infection of wild type mice resulted in increased expression of the ifn? gene in the cardiac tissue compared to uninfected controls, as determined by quantitative RT-PCR ( Fig. 4A ). Of particular importance, the level of ifn? gene expression in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice was reduced in J?18-deficient mice at the peak of disease (Student’s t test, p < .05; Fig. 4A ). These results indicate that iNKT cells are critical for generating an IFN? response in the heart, which, in turn, is required for local control of spirochete burdens. We next tested the direct contribution of IFN? to local inflammation and spirochete clearance in Lyme carditis by infecting IFN? receptor alpha (IFN?R?)-deficient 129Sv/J mice. Like J?18-deficient mice, IFN?R?-deficient mice developed increased cardiac inflammation following syringe infection with B. burgdorferi (Student t test; p < .05; Fig. 4B ), supporting a role for IFN? in the protection against Lyme carditis. The quantification of B. burgdorferi burdens by real-time PCR in the heart of the infected mice showed a significant (p < .006) increase in the levels of bacteria in the absence of IFN?-mediated signals ( Fig. 4C ). IFN? signaling enhances macrophage responses to <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> The mechanism underlying the control of cardiac inflammation during murine Lyme borreliosis by IFN? has not been elucidated. IFN? enhances cellular responses, including macrophages, to various pathogens ( 43 ). Indeed, activation of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) with IFN? enhances spirochete recognition, as evidenced by augmented TNF and IL-6 production elicited against live B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5A and 5B ). Increased B. burgdorferi burdens in the heart of IFN?R?- and J?18-deficient mice during the presence of a strong antibody response suggested a defect in phagocytic clearance of the spirochete by infiltrating macrophages. We therefore defined the contribution of IFN? to macrophage-mediated clearance of B. burgdorferi by phagocytosis. First, we determined by flow cytometric analysis that BMMs readily phagocytose GFP-expressing infectious B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). Activation with recombinant murine IFN? increased the already high phagocytic capacity of BMMs for B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). We also performed this assay using the macrophage cell line RAW264.7. Incubation of RAW264.7 cells with GFP- B. burgdorferi resulted in a modest amount of phagocytosis, compared to BMMs, confirming previous reports indicating their relatively low phagocytic capacity ( 44 ) ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). In separate experiments, a few RAW264.7 cells showed internalized B. burgdorferi by fluorescence microscopy (data not shown). The activation of these cells with IFN? markedly enhanced the percentage of cells that had internalized GFP-expressing B. burgdorferi , as determined by flow cytometric analysis and flourescence microscopy ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). These results suggested that iNKT cells control the levels of spirochetes in the infected heart through the production of IFN? and increased phagocytosis. IFN? enhances the surface expression of CD1d in macrophages Previous reports have suggested that IFN? can increase CD1d surface expression by macrophages ( 2 , 45 ). We thus assessed the effect of IFN? on the expression of CD1d in primary macrophages and RAW264.7 cells. We stimulated BMMs ( Fig. 6A ) and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6B ) with 50 ng/ml of recombinant IFN? for 16 h. The cells were subsequently assessed for surface CD1d expression by flow cytometry. IFN? treatment increased the expression of CD1d in both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Since B. burgdorferi induces the upregulation of CD1 molecules on human monocytes ( 46 ), we also assessed the effect of live spirochetes on CD1d expression by BMMs and RAW264.7 cells. In contrast to human monocytes, the stimulation of both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells with live B. burgdorferi resulted in a minimal increase of CD1d expression (data not shown). These results suggest that during infection with B. burgdorferi , iNKT-derived IFN? is self-renewing through its capacity to induce CD1d expression and presentation to iNKT cells.  Results iNKT cells modulate the pathogenesis of Lyme carditis The recent identification of B. burgdorferi -derived diacylglycerol glycolipids as natural antigens to iNKT cells ( 7 ), prompted us to examine the role of iNKT cells in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease. To determine whether iNKT cells contribute to the host response to B. burgdorferi , we syringe-infected wild type and J?18-deficient C57Bl/6 mice with 1 × 105 spirochetes in the midline of the back and allowed infection to progress for 2-3 weeks, which represents the acute phase of infection ( 25 ). Histological evaluation of the joints and hearts of the infected mice revealed that J?18-deficient animals are more susceptible to both arthritis ( Fig. 1A ) and carditis ( Fig. 1B, C ). Although there was a trend towards worse arthritis in mice that lacked J?18, the difference was not significant (Student t test; p = 0.07; n = 15). In contrast, carditis severity in J?18-deficient mice was increased significantly (p < 0.01). Infection of J?18-deficient mice results in increased spirochetal burdens in the heart Inflammation during experimental infection with B. burgdorferi is dependent on the ability of spirochetes to evade local clearance mechanisms in cardiac and joint tissue ( 16 ). Thus, we evaluated the ability of the mice to clear B. burgdorferi in the absence of iNKT cells by assessing bacterial loads in the heart tissue of the infected animals. Compared to wild type mice, J?18-deficient mice harbored significantly more B. burgdorferi in their heart (Student’s T test; p = 0.05), while the bacterial burden in the ear was unaffected by the loss of iNKT cells ( Fig. 2A ). iNKT cells have been shown to potentiate the antibody response to various pathogens ( 30 , 31 ). Since the antibody response to B. burgdorferi is critical for clearance of spirochetal infection ( 32 , 33 ), we assessed the B. burgdorferi -specific IgM and IgG responses 2 weeks following infection. The serum levels of antigen-specific IgM and IgG in wild type and J?18-deficient mice were similar ( Fig. 2B and 2C ). Moreover, the antigen specificity between the groups of mice was indistinguishable as assessed by immunoblotting (data not shown). These results demonstrate an important role for iNKT cells in the control of B. burgdorferi at the tissue level where acute inflammation occurs and show that differences in B. burgdorferi control and pathology between the J?18-deficient and wildtype mice are not due to distinct antibody responses. iNKT cells and CD1d-positive macrophages migrate to the inflamed heart of <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic>-infected mice iNKT cells have been shown to migrate to sites of inflammation in the lung, liver and spleen ( 17 , 34 - 37 ). We therefore analyzed the presence of iNKT cells in the hearts of uninfected and B. burgdorferi -infected mice using a nested PCR approach ( 38 , 39 ). While control mice did not harbor iNKT cells in the heart, the presence of the invariant TCR alpha chain was readily detected in the inflamed cardiac tissue of wild type, but not of J?18-deficient mice ( Fig. 3A ). We next used confocal immunofluorescence microscopy to characterize the infiltrating cells in the infected hearts. The infected hearts contained, as expected, CD11b+ cells (a macrophage marker) as well as CD3-expressing lymphocytes, ( Fig. 3B ), and confirmed ( 40 ) a predominant macrophage infiltration during Lyme carditis. The inflamed hearts also showed increased expression of CD1d compared to uninfected controls ( Fig. 3B ). Because CD1d expression is a requirement for APC-mediated activation of iNKT cells, we next determined the identity of the CD1d-expressing cells. CD1d expression colocalized with CD11b expression ( Fig. 3C ), thereby identifying macrophages as the predominant CD1d-expressing immune cell. iNKT cells are responsible for the production of IFN? in the infected heart B. burgdorferi glycolipid-pulsed dendritic cells induce IFN? production by iNKT cells in vivo ( 7 ). In addition, IFN?-producing CD4+ T cells facilitate the regression of murine Lyme carditis ( 41 ), while Stat1-deficient mice infected with B. burgdorferi develop exacerbated Lyme carditis, compared to control mice ( 42 ). We therefore addressed the contribution of iNKT cells to the pool of cardiac IFN? in B. burgdorferi -infected mice. B. burgdorferi infection of wild type mice resulted in increased expression of the ifn? gene in the cardiac tissue compared to uninfected controls, as determined by quantitative RT-PCR ( Fig. 4A ). Of particular importance, the level of ifn? gene expression in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice was reduced in J?18-deficient mice at the peak of disease (Student’s t test, p < .05; Fig. 4A ). These results indicate that iNKT cells are critical for generating an IFN? response in the heart, which, in turn, is required for local control of spirochete burdens. We next tested the direct contribution of IFN? to local inflammation and spirochete clearance in Lyme carditis by infecting IFN? receptor alpha (IFN?R?)-deficient 129Sv/J mice. Like J?18-deficient mice, IFN?R?-deficient mice developed increased cardiac inflammation following syringe infection with B. burgdorferi (Student t test; p < .05; Fig. 4B ), supporting a role for IFN? in the protection against Lyme carditis. The quantification of B. burgdorferi burdens by real-time PCR in the heart of the infected mice showed a significant (p < .006) increase in the levels of bacteria in the absence of IFN?-mediated signals ( Fig. 4C ). IFN? signaling enhances macrophage responses to <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> The mechanism underlying the control of cardiac inflammation during murine Lyme borreliosis by IFN? has not been elucidated. IFN? enhances cellular responses, including macrophages, to various pathogens ( 43 ). Indeed, activation of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) with IFN? enhances spirochete recognition, as evidenced by augmented TNF and IL-6 production elicited against live B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5A and 5B ). Increased B. burgdorferi burdens in the heart of IFN?R?- and J?18-deficient mice during the presence of a strong antibody response suggested a defect in phagocytic clearance of the spirochete by infiltrating macrophages. We therefore defined the contribution of IFN? to macrophage-mediated clearance of B. burgdorferi by phagocytosis. First, we determined by flow cytometric analysis that BMMs readily phagocytose GFP-expressing infectious B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). Activation with recombinant murine IFN? increased the already high phagocytic capacity of BMMs for B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). We also performed this assay using the macrophage cell line RAW264.7. Incubation of RAW264.7 cells with GFP- B. burgdorferi resulted in a modest amount of phagocytosis, compared to BMMs, confirming previous reports indicating their relatively low phagocytic capacity ( 44 ) ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). In separate experiments, a few RAW264.7 cells showed internalized B. burgdorferi by fluorescence microscopy (data not shown). The activation of these cells with IFN? markedly enhanced the percentage of cells that had internalized GFP-expressing B. burgdorferi , as determined by flow cytometric analysis and flourescence microscopy ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). These results suggested that iNKT cells control the levels of spirochetes in the infected heart through the production of IFN? and increased phagocytosis. IFN? enhances the surface expression of CD1d in macrophages Previous reports have suggested that IFN? can increase CD1d surface expression by macrophages ( 2 , 45 ). We thus assessed the effect of IFN? on the expression of CD1d in primary macrophages and RAW264.7 cells. We stimulated BMMs ( Fig. 6A ) and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6B ) with 50 ng/ml of recombinant IFN? for 16 h. The cells were subsequently assessed for surface CD1d expression by flow cytometry. IFN? treatment increased the expression of CD1d in both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Since B. burgdorferi induces the upregulation of CD1 molecules on human monocytes ( 46 ), we also assessed the effect of live spirochetes on CD1d expression by BMMs and RAW264.7 cells. In contrast to human monocytes, the stimulation of both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells with live B. burgdorferi resulted in a minimal increase of CD1d expression (data not shown). These results suggest that during infection with B. burgdorferi , iNKT-derived IFN? is self-renewing through its capacity to induce CD1d expression and presentation to iNKT cells.  iNKT cells modulate the pathogenesis of Lyme carditis The recent identification of B. burgdorferi -derived diacylglycerol glycolipids as natural antigens to iNKT cells ( 7 ), prompted us to examine the role of iNKT cells in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease. To determine whether iNKT cells contribute to the host response to B. burgdorferi , we syringe-infected wild type and J?18-deficient C57Bl/6 mice with 1 × 105 spirochetes in the midline of the back and allowed infection to progress for 2-3 weeks, which represents the acute phase of infection ( 25 ). Histological evaluation of the joints and hearts of the infected mice revealed that J?18-deficient animals are more susceptible to both arthritis ( Fig. 1A ) and carditis ( Fig. 1B, C ). Although there was a trend towards worse arthritis in mice that lacked J?18, the difference was not significant (Student t test; p = 0.07; n = 15). In contrast, carditis severity in J?18-deficient mice was increased significantly (p < 0.01).  iNKT cells modulate the pathogenesis of Lyme carditis The recent identification of B. burgdorferi -derived diacylglycerol glycolipids as natural antigens to iNKT cells ( 7 ), prompted us to examine the role of iNKT cells in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease. To determine whether iNKT cells contribute to the host response to B. burgdorferi , we syringe-infected wild type and J?18-deficient C57Bl/6 mice with 1 × 105 spirochetes in the midline of the back and allowed infection to progress for 2-3 weeks, which represents the acute phase of infection ( 25 ). Histological evaluation of the joints and hearts of the infected mice revealed that J?18-deficient animals are more susceptible to both arthritis ( Fig. 1A ) and carditis ( Fig. 1B, C ). Although there was a trend towards worse arthritis in mice that lacked J?18, the difference was not significant (Student t test; p = 0.07; n = 15). In contrast, carditis severity in J?18-deficient mice was increased significantly (p < 0.01).  Infection of J?18-deficient mice results in increased spirochetal burdens in the heart Inflammation during experimental infection with B. burgdorferi is dependent on the ability of spirochetes to evade local clearance mechanisms in cardiac and joint tissue ( 16 ). Thus, we evaluated the ability of the mice to clear B. burgdorferi in the absence of iNKT cells by assessing bacterial loads in the heart tissue of the infected animals. Compared to wild type mice, J?18-deficient mice harbored significantly more B. burgdorferi in their heart (Student’s T test; p = 0.05), while the bacterial burden in the ear was unaffected by the loss of iNKT cells ( Fig. 2A ). iNKT cells have been shown to potentiate the antibody response to various pathogens ( 30 , 31 ). Since the antibody response to B. burgdorferi is critical for clearance of spirochetal infection ( 32 , 33 ), we assessed the B. burgdorferi -specific IgM and IgG responses 2 weeks following infection. The serum levels of antigen-specific IgM and IgG in wild type and J?18-deficient mice were similar ( Fig. 2B and 2C ). Moreover, the antigen specificity between the groups of mice was indistinguishable as assessed by immunoblotting (data not shown). These results demonstrate an important role for iNKT cells in the control of B. burgdorferi at the tissue level where acute inflammation occurs and show that differences in B. burgdorferi control and pathology between the J?18-deficient and wildtype mice are not due to distinct antibody responses.  Infection of J?18-deficient mice results in increased spirochetal burdens in the heart Inflammation during experimental infection with B. burgdorferi is dependent on the ability of spirochetes to evade local clearance mechanisms in cardiac and joint tissue ( 16 ). Thus, we evaluated the ability of the mice to clear B. burgdorferi in the absence of iNKT cells by assessing bacterial loads in the heart tissue of the infected animals. Compared to wild type mice, J?18-deficient mice harbored significantly more B. burgdorferi in their heart (Student’s T test; p = 0.05), while the bacterial burden in the ear was unaffected by the loss of iNKT cells ( Fig. 2A ). iNKT cells have been shown to potentiate the antibody response to various pathogens ( 30 , 31 ). Since the antibody response to B. burgdorferi is critical for clearance of spirochetal infection ( 32 , 33 ), we assessed the B. burgdorferi -specific IgM and IgG responses 2 weeks following infection. The serum levels of antigen-specific IgM and IgG in wild type and J?18-deficient mice were similar ( Fig. 2B and 2C ). Moreover, the antigen specificity between the groups of mice was indistinguishable as assessed by immunoblotting (data not shown). These results demonstrate an important role for iNKT cells in the control of B. burgdorferi at the tissue level where acute inflammation occurs and show that differences in B. burgdorferi control and pathology between the J?18-deficient and wildtype mice are not due to distinct antibody responses.  iNKT cells and CD1d-positive macrophages migrate to the inflamed heart of <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic>-infected mice iNKT cells have been shown to migrate to sites of inflammation in the lung, liver and spleen ( 17 , 34 - 37 ). We therefore analyzed the presence of iNKT cells in the hearts of uninfected and B. burgdorferi -infected mice using a nested PCR approach ( 38 , 39 ). While control mice did not harbor iNKT cells in the heart, the presence of the invariant TCR alpha chain was readily detected in the inflamed cardiac tissue of wild type, but not of J?18-deficient mice ( Fig. 3A ). We next used confocal immunofluorescence microscopy to characterize the infiltrating cells in the infected hearts. The infected hearts contained, as expected, CD11b+ cells (a macrophage marker) as well as CD3-expressing lymphocytes, ( Fig. 3B ), and confirmed ( 40 ) a predominant macrophage infiltration during Lyme carditis. The inflamed hearts also showed increased expression of CD1d compared to uninfected controls ( Fig. 3B ). Because CD1d expression is a requirement for APC-mediated activation of iNKT cells, we next determined the identity of the CD1d-expressing cells. CD1d expression colocalized with CD11b expression ( Fig. 3C ), thereby identifying macrophages as the predominant CD1d-expressing immune cell.  iNKT cells and CD1d-positive macrophages migrate to the inflamed heart of <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic>-infected mice iNKT cells have been shown to migrate to sites of inflammation in the lung, liver and spleen ( 17 , 34 - 37 ). We therefore analyzed the presence of iNKT cells in the hearts of uninfected and B. burgdorferi -infected mice using a nested PCR approach ( 38 , 39 ). While control mice did not harbor iNKT cells in the heart, the presence of the invariant TCR alpha chain was readily detected in the inflamed cardiac tissue of wild type, but not of J?18-deficient mice ( Fig. 3A ). We next used confocal immunofluorescence microscopy to characterize the infiltrating cells in the infected hearts. The infected hearts contained, as expected, CD11b+ cells (a macrophage marker) as well as CD3-expressing lymphocytes, ( Fig. 3B ), and confirmed ( 40 ) a predominant macrophage infiltration during Lyme carditis. The inflamed hearts also showed increased expression of CD1d compared to uninfected controls ( Fig. 3B ). Because CD1d expression is a requirement for APC-mediated activation of iNKT cells, we next determined the identity of the CD1d-expressing cells. CD1d expression colocalized with CD11b expression ( Fig. 3C ), thereby identifying macrophages as the predominant CD1d-expressing immune cell.  iNKT cells are responsible for the production of IFN? in the infected heart B. burgdorferi glycolipid-pulsed dendritic cells induce IFN? production by iNKT cells in vivo ( 7 ). In addition, IFN?-producing CD4+ T cells facilitate the regression of murine Lyme carditis ( 41 ), while Stat1-deficient mice infected with B. burgdorferi develop exacerbated Lyme carditis, compared to control mice ( 42 ). We therefore addressed the contribution of iNKT cells to the pool of cardiac IFN? in B. burgdorferi -infected mice. B. burgdorferi infection of wild type mice resulted in increased expression of the ifn? gene in the cardiac tissue compared to uninfected controls, as determined by quantitative RT-PCR ( Fig. 4A ). Of particular importance, the level of ifn? gene expression in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice was reduced in J?18-deficient mice at the peak of disease (Student’s t test, p < .05; Fig. 4A ). These results indicate that iNKT cells are critical for generating an IFN? response in the heart, which, in turn, is required for local control of spirochete burdens. We next tested the direct contribution of IFN? to local inflammation and spirochete clearance in Lyme carditis by infecting IFN? receptor alpha (IFN?R?)-deficient 129Sv/J mice. Like J?18-deficient mice, IFN?R?-deficient mice developed increased cardiac inflammation following syringe infection with B. burgdorferi (Student t test; p < .05; Fig. 4B ), supporting a role for IFN? in the protection against Lyme carditis. The quantification of B. burgdorferi burdens by real-time PCR in the heart of the infected mice showed a significant (p < .006) increase in the levels of bacteria in the absence of IFN?-mediated signals ( Fig. 4C ).  iNKT cells are responsible for the production of IFN? in the infected heart B. burgdorferi glycolipid-pulsed dendritic cells induce IFN? production by iNKT cells in vivo ( 7 ). In addition, IFN?-producing CD4+ T cells facilitate the regression of murine Lyme carditis ( 41 ), while Stat1-deficient mice infected with B. burgdorferi develop exacerbated Lyme carditis, compared to control mice ( 42 ). We therefore addressed the contribution of iNKT cells to the pool of cardiac IFN? in B. burgdorferi -infected mice. B. burgdorferi infection of wild type mice resulted in increased expression of the ifn? gene in the cardiac tissue compared to uninfected controls, as determined by quantitative RT-PCR ( Fig. 4A ). Of particular importance, the level of ifn? gene expression in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice was reduced in J?18-deficient mice at the peak of disease (Student’s t test, p < .05; Fig. 4A ). These results indicate that iNKT cells are critical for generating an IFN? response in the heart, which, in turn, is required for local control of spirochete burdens. We next tested the direct contribution of IFN? to local inflammation and spirochete clearance in Lyme carditis by infecting IFN? receptor alpha (IFN?R?)-deficient 129Sv/J mice. Like J?18-deficient mice, IFN?R?-deficient mice developed increased cardiac inflammation following syringe infection with B. burgdorferi (Student t test; p < .05; Fig. 4B ), supporting a role for IFN? in the protection against Lyme carditis. The quantification of B. burgdorferi burdens by real-time PCR in the heart of the infected mice showed a significant (p < .006) increase in the levels of bacteria in the absence of IFN?-mediated signals ( Fig. 4C ).  IFN? signaling enhances macrophage responses to <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> The mechanism underlying the control of cardiac inflammation during murine Lyme borreliosis by IFN? has not been elucidated. IFN? enhances cellular responses, including macrophages, to various pathogens ( 43 ). Indeed, activation of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) with IFN? enhances spirochete recognition, as evidenced by augmented TNF and IL-6 production elicited against live B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5A and 5B ). Increased B. burgdorferi burdens in the heart of IFN?R?- and J?18-deficient mice during the presence of a strong antibody response suggested a defect in phagocytic clearance of the spirochete by infiltrating macrophages. We therefore defined the contribution of IFN? to macrophage-mediated clearance of B. burgdorferi by phagocytosis. First, we determined by flow cytometric analysis that BMMs readily phagocytose GFP-expressing infectious B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). Activation with recombinant murine IFN? increased the already high phagocytic capacity of BMMs for B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). We also performed this assay using the macrophage cell line RAW264.7. Incubation of RAW264.7 cells with GFP- B. burgdorferi resulted in a modest amount of phagocytosis, compared to BMMs, confirming previous reports indicating their relatively low phagocytic capacity ( 44 ) ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). In separate experiments, a few RAW264.7 cells showed internalized B. burgdorferi by fluorescence microscopy (data not shown). The activation of these cells with IFN? markedly enhanced the percentage of cells that had internalized GFP-expressing B. burgdorferi , as determined by flow cytometric analysis and flourescence microscopy ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). These results suggested that iNKT cells control the levels of spirochetes in the infected heart through the production of IFN? and increased phagocytosis.  IFN? signaling enhances macrophage responses to <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> The mechanism underlying the control of cardiac inflammation during murine Lyme borreliosis by IFN? has not been elucidated. IFN? enhances cellular responses, including macrophages, to various pathogens ( 43 ). Indeed, activation of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) with IFN? enhances spirochete recognition, as evidenced by augmented TNF and IL-6 production elicited against live B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5A and 5B ). Increased B. burgdorferi burdens in the heart of IFN?R?- and J?18-deficient mice during the presence of a strong antibody response suggested a defect in phagocytic clearance of the spirochete by infiltrating macrophages. We therefore defined the contribution of IFN? to macrophage-mediated clearance of B. burgdorferi by phagocytosis. First, we determined by flow cytometric analysis that BMMs readily phagocytose GFP-expressing infectious B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). Activation with recombinant murine IFN? increased the already high phagocytic capacity of BMMs for B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 5C ). We also performed this assay using the macrophage cell line RAW264.7. Incubation of RAW264.7 cells with GFP- B. burgdorferi resulted in a modest amount of phagocytosis, compared to BMMs, confirming previous reports indicating their relatively low phagocytic capacity ( 44 ) ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). In separate experiments, a few RAW264.7 cells showed internalized B. burgdorferi by fluorescence microscopy (data not shown). The activation of these cells with IFN? markedly enhanced the percentage of cells that had internalized GFP-expressing B. burgdorferi , as determined by flow cytometric analysis and flourescence microscopy ( Fig. 5D, 5E ). These results suggested that iNKT cells control the levels of spirochetes in the infected heart through the production of IFN? and increased phagocytosis.  IFN? enhances the surface expression of CD1d in macrophages Previous reports have suggested that IFN? can increase CD1d surface expression by macrophages ( 2 , 45 ). We thus assessed the effect of IFN? on the expression of CD1d in primary macrophages and RAW264.7 cells. We stimulated BMMs ( Fig. 6A ) and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6B ) with 50 ng/ml of recombinant IFN? for 16 h. The cells were subsequently assessed for surface CD1d expression by flow cytometry. IFN? treatment increased the expression of CD1d in both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Since B. burgdorferi induces the upregulation of CD1 molecules on human monocytes ( 46 ), we also assessed the effect of live spirochetes on CD1d expression by BMMs and RAW264.7 cells. In contrast to human monocytes, the stimulation of both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells with live B. burgdorferi resulted in a minimal increase of CD1d expression (data not shown). These results suggest that during infection with B. burgdorferi , iNKT-derived IFN? is self-renewing through its capacity to induce CD1d expression and presentation to iNKT cells.  IFN? enhances the surface expression of CD1d in macrophages Previous reports have suggested that IFN? can increase CD1d surface expression by macrophages ( 2 , 45 ). We thus assessed the effect of IFN? on the expression of CD1d in primary macrophages and RAW264.7 cells. We stimulated BMMs ( Fig. 6A ) and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6B ) with 50 ng/ml of recombinant IFN? for 16 h. The cells were subsequently assessed for surface CD1d expression by flow cytometry. IFN? treatment increased the expression of CD1d in both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells ( Fig. 6A, 6B ). Since B. burgdorferi induces the upregulation of CD1 molecules on human monocytes ( 46 ), we also assessed the effect of live spirochetes on CD1d expression by BMMs and RAW264.7 cells. In contrast to human monocytes, the stimulation of both BMMs and RAW264.7 cells with live B. burgdorferi resulted in a minimal increase of CD1d expression (data not shown). These results suggest that during infection with B. burgdorferi , iNKT-derived IFN? is self-renewing through its capacity to induce CD1d expression and presentation to iNKT cells.  Discussion Invariant natural killer T cell responses are important for host protection during a variety of microbial infections ( 2 ). The discovery that B. burgdorferi -derived diacylglycerol glycolipids act as natural antigens to iNKT cells is the sole demonstration of an iNKT cell antigen expressed by a human pathogen ( 7 ). The experimental infection of CD1d-deficient mice, which lack iNKT cells, with B. burgdorferi also suggested their potential involvement in the genesis of inflammation during Lyme borreliosis. The absence of CD1d results in augmented B. burgdorferi levels in the urinary bladder of infected mice, in addition to increased Lyme arthritis incidence and severity ( 18 ), while the effect of CD1d-deficiency on Lyme carditis was not reported. However, these findings could not be assigned exclusively to iNKT cell function, since CD1d-deficiency also leads to the lack of CD1d-reactive cells other than iNKTs ( 18 - 20 ). Furthermore, CD1d-deficient mice have impaired marginal zone B cell function ( 21 ), which may also affect the systemic response to the spirochete. These findings prompted us to examine the specific role of iNKT cells in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease. Our studies, using a mouse line deficient for a component of the invariant alpha TCR, which specifically precludes the development of iNKT cells in the thymus ( 2 ), show that infection of J?18-deficient mice with B. burgdorferi results in higher pathogen burdens in the heart and, as a consequence, more severe Lyme carditis. Although iNKT cells are able to potentiate B cell responses to various pathogens ( 47 ), our data indicate that this does not occur during infection with B. burgdorferi . Furthermore, J?18-deficient mice infected with B. burgdorferi did not develop an altered Th1 response to B. burgdorferi antigens, as determined by antigen-specific restimulation experiments (data not shown). Thus, the effect of iNKT-deficiency on the pathogenesis of murine Lyme disease is likely the result of the modulation of cell responses at sites of acute inflammation and not in secondary lymphoid organs. Indeed, we show that spirochete colonization and expansion in the heart leads to cardiac inflammation, which is marked by the migration to the heart of CD3+ T cells as well as CD1d+ and CD11b+ antigen presenting cells, while no infiltration of CD11c+ cells was detected (data not shown). Our data show that CD3+ T cells include iNKT and other T cells (CD4+ and/or ?? T cells), because J?18-deficient infected hearts still contained CD3+ cells (data not shown). Since B. burgdorferi glycolipid-pulsed dendritic cells induce IFN? production by iNKT cells in vivo ( 7 ), we tested the contribution of these cells to the pool of IFN? mRNA found in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice. Our results show that induction of ifn? gene expression in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice was almost completely abrogated in J?18-deficient mice 2 weeks post infection, indicating that iNKT cells are critical for generating an IFN? response in vivo during the peak of disease. Reports have suggested that an intact IFN? response is important for controlling pathogenesis of Lyme carditis and not Lyme arthritis ( 15 , 41 , 42 , 48 ). Although the presence of T cells in the absence of B cells results in the exacerbation of Lyme carditis ( 49 ), mice lacking T cells failed to resolve cardiac inflammation at 60 days of infection ( 50 ) and CD4+ T cells have been shown to mediate the regression of murine Lyme carditis 45 days after infection ( 41 ). Consistent with this, our results demonstrate that iNKT cells are important for controlling the severity of inflammation in the heart; a phenomenon circumscribed to their role in the production of IFN? and modulation of the macrophage response to B. burgdorferi . Thus, we propose that the similar disease phenotype during acute infection between IFN?R?- and J?18-deficient mice is explained by the critical contribution of iNKT cells to the pool of IFN? found in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice. Future studies will determine whether iNKT cells are also involved in the resolution of Lyme carditis. Studies have reported great variation among different inbred strains of mice in terms of the presence of iNKT cells in different organs and their capacity to respond to antigen ( 17 ). Among a large panel of strains tested, iNKT cells from B6 mice showed the highest production of cytokines and the fastest response kinetics to the prototypical ligand ?GalCer ( 17 ). The use of B6 mice that develop mild inflammation during Lyme borreliosis, also provides a model in which modulatory effects are not constrained by a high degree of pathology that is observed in other strains, most predominantly C3H mice ( 16 ). The difference in susceptibility among different strains of mice is not completely understood, but it may have a genetic component ( 51 ). Indeed, data generated with J?18-deficient animals in the Balb/c background failed to identify iNKT cell migration to inflamed tissues ( 52 ), further highlighting the differences among strains. In Balb/c mice, the lack of iNKT cells results in systemic rather than local effects including antibody production and the degree of arthritis but not carditis ( 52 ), in clear contrast with our results. Since B6 mice are naturally resistant to inflammation elicited by infection with the spirochete, compared to other strains of mice ( 16 ), and due to the difference in the number of iNKT cells and their response to specific antigen among these strains, it is tempting to speculate that the differential susceptibiltity to cardiac inflammation is associated with the presence and capacity of iNKT cells to respond to B. burgdorferi antigens. Whether these differences in quantity and/or their capacity to respond to antigen are also present in human subjects remains to be elucidated. A mechanism underlying IFN?-mediated control of B. burgdorferi pathogenesis has not been determined. Since macrophages are the predominant leukocyte of the inflamed heart ( 40 ) and IFN? activation of macrophages has been shown to enhance their response to various pathogens ( 53 ), we determined the effect that IFN? had on the macrophage response to B. burgdorferi . Our results indicate that IFN? greatly enhances proinflammatory cytokine production by macrophages challenged with live B. burgdorferi . Most notably, IFN? enhanced the phagocytic capacity of macrophages, suggesting their role in spirochete clearance at sites of active inflammation, such as the heart. This is an interesting observation given that IFN? has historically been regarded as a cytokine with a biological activity confined to the response to intracellular pathogens, including viruses, bacteria and parasites. Here, we show that IFN? is important for protection against the extracellular gram-negative spirochete, B. burgdorferi . The lack of involvement of IFN? in the pathogenesis of Lyme arthritis might be explained by the cellular profile of the inflammatory infiltrate. Indeed, lesions in the heart of B. burgdorferi infected mice are predominantly comprised of macrophages, while neutrophils are primarily found in the joint. The contribution of other cell types such as synoviocytes, chondrocytes and other cells ( 54 , 55 ) to joint but not heart inflammation further distinguishes both inflammatory phenomena. As a consequence of the more complex cellular interplay, iNKT cell responses to B. burgdorferi in the joint might not be as effective at controlling Lyme arthritis. In summary, we have defined the role of iNKT cells in the host response elicited against the Lyme disease spirochete, B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 7 ). Our results show that iNKT cells migrate to the inflamed heart of B. burgdorferi -infected B6 mice and are exposed to an environment conducive for their activation by B. burgdorferi glycolipids. Activation of iNKT cells is critical for the induction of IFN?, which enhances macrophage effector functions required for efficient clearance of B. burgdorferi from the inflamed heart and the sustained activation of iNKT cells.  Discussion Invariant natural killer T cell responses are important for host protection during a variety of microbial infections ( 2 ). The discovery that B. burgdorferi -derived diacylglycerol glycolipids act as natural antigens to iNKT cells is the sole demonstration of an iNKT cell antigen expressed by a human pathogen ( 7 ). The experimental infection of CD1d-deficient mice, which lack iNKT cells, with B. burgdorferi also suggested their potential involvement in the genesis of inflammation during Lyme borreliosis. The absence of CD1d results in augmented B. burgdorferi levels in the urinary bladder of infected mice, in addition to increased Lyme arthritis incidence and severity ( 18 ), while the effect of CD1d-deficiency on Lyme carditis was not reported. However, these findings could not be assigned exclusively to iNKT cell function, since CD1d-deficiency also leads to the lack of CD1d-reactive cells other than iNKTs ( 18 - 20 ). Furthermore, CD1d-deficient mice have impaired marginal zone B cell function ( 21 ), which may also affect the systemic response to the spirochete. These findings prompted us to examine the specific role of iNKT cells in the pathogenesis of Lyme disease. Our studies, using a mouse line deficient for a component of the invariant alpha TCR, which specifically precludes the development of iNKT cells in the thymus ( 2 ), show that infection of J?18-deficient mice with B. burgdorferi results in higher pathogen burdens in the heart and, as a consequence, more severe Lyme carditis. Although iNKT cells are able to potentiate B cell responses to various pathogens ( 47 ), our data indicate that this does not occur during infection with B. burgdorferi . Furthermore, J?18-deficient mice infected with B. burgdorferi did not develop an altered Th1 response to B. burgdorferi antigens, as determined by antigen-specific restimulation experiments (data not shown). Thus, the effect of iNKT-deficiency on the pathogenesis of murine Lyme disease is likely the result of the modulation of cell responses at sites of acute inflammation and not in secondary lymphoid organs. Indeed, we show that spirochete colonization and expansion in the heart leads to cardiac inflammation, which is marked by the migration to the heart of CD3+ T cells as well as CD1d+ and CD11b+ antigen presenting cells, while no infiltration of CD11c+ cells was detected (data not shown). Our data show that CD3+ T cells include iNKT and other T cells (CD4+ and/or ?? T cells), because J?18-deficient infected hearts still contained CD3+ cells (data not shown). Since B. burgdorferi glycolipid-pulsed dendritic cells induce IFN? production by iNKT cells in vivo ( 7 ), we tested the contribution of these cells to the pool of IFN? mRNA found in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice. Our results show that induction of ifn? gene expression in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice was almost completely abrogated in J?18-deficient mice 2 weeks post infection, indicating that iNKT cells are critical for generating an IFN? response in vivo during the peak of disease. Reports have suggested that an intact IFN? response is important for controlling pathogenesis of Lyme carditis and not Lyme arthritis ( 15 , 41 , 42 , 48 ). Although the presence of T cells in the absence of B cells results in the exacerbation of Lyme carditis ( 49 ), mice lacking T cells failed to resolve cardiac inflammation at 60 days of infection ( 50 ) and CD4+ T cells have been shown to mediate the regression of murine Lyme carditis 45 days after infection ( 41 ). Consistent with this, our results demonstrate that iNKT cells are important for controlling the severity of inflammation in the heart; a phenomenon circumscribed to their role in the production of IFN? and modulation of the macrophage response to B. burgdorferi . Thus, we propose that the similar disease phenotype during acute infection between IFN?R?- and J?18-deficient mice is explained by the critical contribution of iNKT cells to the pool of IFN? found in the hearts of B. burgdorferi -infected mice. Future studies will determine whether iNKT cells are also involved in the resolution of Lyme carditis. Studies have reported great variation among different inbred strains of mice in terms of the presence of iNKT cells in different organs and their capacity to respond to antigen ( 17 ). Among a large panel of strains tested, iNKT cells from B6 mice showed the highest production of cytokines and the fastest response kinetics to the prototypical ligand ?GalCer ( 17 ). The use of B6 mice that develop mild inflammation during Lyme borreliosis, also provides a model in which modulatory effects are not constrained by a high degree of pathology that is observed in other strains, most predominantly C3H mice ( 16 ). The difference in susceptibility among different strains of mice is not completely understood, but it may have a genetic component ( 51 ). Indeed, data generated with J?18-deficient animals in the Balb/c background failed to identify iNKT cell migration to inflamed tissues ( 52 ), further highlighting the differences among strains. In Balb/c mice, the lack of iNKT cells results in systemic rather than local effects including antibody production and the degree of arthritis but not carditis ( 52 ), in clear contrast with our results. Since B6 mice are naturally resistant to inflammation elicited by infection with the spirochete, compared to other strains of mice ( 16 ), and due to the difference in the number of iNKT cells and their response to specific antigen among these strains, it is tempting to speculate that the differential susceptibiltity to cardiac inflammation is associated with the presence and capacity of iNKT cells to respond to B. burgdorferi antigens. Whether these differences in quantity and/or their capacity to respond to antigen are also present in human subjects remains to be elucidated. A mechanism underlying IFN?-mediated control of B. burgdorferi pathogenesis has not been determined. Since macrophages are the predominant leukocyte of the inflamed heart ( 40 ) and IFN? activation of macrophages has been shown to enhance their response to various pathogens ( 53 ), we determined the effect that IFN? had on the macrophage response to B. burgdorferi . Our results indicate that IFN? greatly enhances proinflammatory cytokine production by macrophages challenged with live B. burgdorferi . Most notably, IFN? enhanced the phagocytic capacity of macrophages, suggesting their role in spirochete clearance at sites of active inflammation, such as the heart. This is an interesting observation given that IFN? has historically been regarded as a cytokine with a biological activity confined to the response to intracellular pathogens, including viruses, bacteria and parasites. Here, we show that IFN? is important for protection against the extracellular gram-negative spirochete, B. burgdorferi . The lack of involvement of IFN? in the pathogenesis of Lyme arthritis might be explained by the cellular profile of the inflammatory infiltrate. Indeed, lesions in the heart of B. burgdorferi infected mice are predominantly comprised of macrophages, while neutrophils are primarily found in the joint. The contribution of other cell types such as synoviocytes, chondrocytes and other cells ( 54 , 55 ) to joint but not heart inflammation further distinguishes both inflammatory phenomena. As a consequence of the more complex cellular interplay, iNKT cell responses to B. burgdorferi in the joint might not be as effective at controlling Lyme arthritis. In summary, we have defined the role of iNKT cells in the host response elicited against the Lyme disease spirochete, B. burgdorferi ( Fig. 7 ). Our results show that iNKT cells migrate to the inflamed heart of B. burgdorferi -infected B6 mice and are exposed to an environment conducive for their activation by B. burgdorferi glycolipids. Activation of iNKT cells is critical for the induction of IFN?, which enhances macrophage effector functions required for efficient clearance of B. burgdorferi from the inflamed heart and the sustained activation of iNKT cells.  Figures Figure 1 J?18-deficiency results in increased carditis during infection with <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> Joint (A) and cardiac (B) inflammation in wild type and J?18-deficient mice 2 weeks following syringe infection with B. burgdorferi . Data are representative of 2 to 3 experiments with 5 mice per group. (C) Representative H&E-stained cardiac sections from uninfected (UI), and infected wild type (B6) and J?18-deficient mice. Magnification is noted at the bottom. Figure 2 J?18-deficient mice harbor increased bacterial burdens in the hearts in the presence of a normal IgM and IgG response following <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> infection (A) Quantitative real-time PCR determination of spirochete burden in the ears and heart of infected wild type (n=13 and n=8, respectively) and J?18-deficient mice (n=14 and n=5, respectively) 2 weeks following infection in 2 separate experiments. * Student’s T test; p = 0.05. Serum ELISA titers for total IgM (B) or IgG (C) from 2-week infected wild type (closed circles) and J?18-deficient mice (open circles). Results depicted were derived from 2 uninfected mice and 7-15 mice per infected group and are representative of at least 2 independent experiments. Figure 3 V?14-J?18i NKT cells and CD1d positive macrophages migrate to the inflamed heart (A) Nested PCR was used to detect the presence of the V?14-J?18i TCR in the inflamed heart of wild-type infected mice. gapdh amplification was used to verify the presence of DNA. The data are derived from 2 control mice and 3 mice per infected group. (B) Confocal microscopy analysis of heart sections of control or infected B6 mice to determine the presence of CD1d+ (red), CD11b+ (purple) and CD3+ cells (green). Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Results depicted here are representative of 2 experiments. (C) Confocal microscopy of a B. burgdorferi -infected heart showing the presence of CD11b+ (green) cells and their co-localization with CD1d (red) staining. The panel on the right shows co-localization of both signals. Figure 4 V?14-J?18i NKT cells regulate the expression of IFN? in B. burgdorferi-infected hearts (A) Relative IFN? mRNA expression in the heart by real-time RT-PCR. Results are the average of 3 mice per group. (B) Increased cardiac inflammation in IFN?R?-deficient mice in the 129 Sv/J background at 2 weeks of infection with B. burgdorferi , compared to wild type mice (129 Sv/J). Results are derived from 2 independent experiments. (C) Bacterial burdens in the heart of wild type (n=5) and IFN?R?-deficient, infected mice at 2 weeks of infection. * Student’s T test, p<0.006. Figure 5 IFN? enhances the effector function of macrophages responding to <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> (A) rmIFN? activation (0, 0.5, 5, 50 ng/ml) of BMMs for 16 h leads to enhanced production of TNF? (A) and IL-6 (B) in response to live B. burgdorferi (m.o.i. = 25:1). (C) BMMs were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of rmIFN? for 16 h. The cells were washed and assessed their phagocytic capacity for GFP- B. burgdorferi at an m.o.i of 10:1. The grey histogram represents the unlabeled control. Black line: Unstimulated; green line: IFN?-stimulated cells. (D) RAW264.7 cells were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of rmIFN? for 16 h and assessed their phagocytic capacity, as before. (E) The cells were also cytospun in positively charged slides and labeled with an anti-F4/80 antibody and DAPI (nuclear staining). The cells were analyzed by fluorescence microscopy (ApoTome). The arrows indicate internalized bacteria. Results are representative of at least 3 experiments. Figure 6 IFN? increases the surface expression of CD1d in macrophages BMMs (A) and RAW264.7 cells (B) were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of rmIFN? for 16 h (grey line) or left unstimulated (black line). The cells were washed and stained with an anti-CD1d antibody labeled with phycoerythrin (PE). The grey histogram represents unlabeled cells. Results are representative of at least 2 experiments for each cell type. Figure 7 Proposed model of iNKT cell activation in the heart during infection with <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> Macrophages phagocytose invading B. burgdorferi and present antigen in the context of CD1d to local V?14-J?18 iNKT cells resulting in the production of IFN?. IFN? activation of macrophages results in enhanced phagocytosis of B. burgdorferi and upregulation of CD1d. These events further perpetuate iNKT cell activation and thus results in self-renewal of IFN?.  Figures Figure 1 J?18-deficiency results in increased carditis during infection with <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> Joint (A) and cardiac (B) inflammation in wild type and J?18-deficient mice 2 weeks following syringe infection with B. burgdorferi . Data are representative of 2 to 3 experiments with 5 mice per group. (C) Representative H&E-stained cardiac sections from uninfected (UI), and infected wild type (B6) and J?18-deficient mice. Magnification is noted at the bottom. Figure 2 J?18-deficient mice harbor increased bacterial burdens in the hearts in the presence of a normal IgM and IgG response following <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> infection (A) Quantitative real-time PCR determination of spirochete burden in the ears and heart of infected wild type (n=13 and n=8, respectively) and J?18-deficient mice (n=14 and n=5, respectively) 2 weeks following infection in 2 separate experiments. * Student’s T test; p = 0.05. Serum ELISA titers for total IgM (B) or IgG (C) from 2-week infected wild type (closed circles) and J?18-deficient mice (open circles). Results depicted were derived from 2 uninfected mice and 7-15 mice per infected group and are representative of at least 2 independent experiments. Figure 3 V?14-J?18i NKT cells and CD1d positive macrophages migrate to the inflamed heart (A) Nested PCR was used to detect the presence of the V?14-J?18i TCR in the inflamed heart of wild-type infected mice. gapdh amplification was used to verify the presence of DNA. The data are derived from 2 control mice and 3 mice per infected group. (B) Confocal microscopy analysis of heart sections of control or infected B6 mice to determine the presence of CD1d+ (red), CD11b+ (purple) and CD3+ cells (green). Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Results depicted here are representative of 2 experiments. (C) Confocal microscopy of a B. burgdorferi -infected heart showing the presence of CD11b+ (green) cells and their co-localization with CD1d (red) staining. The panel on the right shows co-localization of both signals. Figure 4 V?14-J?18i NKT cells regulate the expression of IFN? in B. burgdorferi-infected hearts (A) Relative IFN? mRNA expression in the heart by real-time RT-PCR. Results are the average of 3 mice per group. (B) Increased cardiac inflammation in IFN?R?-deficient mice in the 129 Sv/J background at 2 weeks of infection with B. burgdorferi , compared to wild type mice (129 Sv/J). Results are derived from 2 independent experiments. (C) Bacterial burdens in the heart of wild type (n=5) and IFN?R?-deficient, infected mice at 2 weeks of infection. * Student’s T test, p<0.006. Figure 5 IFN? enhances the effector function of macrophages responding to <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> (A) rmIFN? activation (0, 0.5, 5, 50 ng/ml) of BMMs for 16 h leads to enhanced production of TNF? (A) and IL-6 (B) in response to live B. burgdorferi (m.o.i. = 25:1). (C) BMMs were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of rmIFN? for 16 h. The cells were washed and assessed their phagocytic capacity for GFP- B. burgdorferi at an m.o.i of 10:1. The grey histogram represents the unlabeled control. Black line: Unstimulated; green line: IFN?-stimulated cells. (D) RAW264.7 cells were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of rmIFN? for 16 h and assessed their phagocytic capacity, as before. (E) The cells were also cytospun in positively charged slides and labeled with an anti-F4/80 antibody and DAPI (nuclear staining). The cells were analyzed by fluorescence microscopy (ApoTome). The arrows indicate internalized bacteria. Results are representative of at least 3 experiments. Figure 6 IFN? increases the surface expression of CD1d in macrophages BMMs (A) and RAW264.7 cells (B) were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of rmIFN? for 16 h (grey line) or left unstimulated (black line). The cells were washed and stained with an anti-CD1d antibody labeled with phycoerythrin (PE). The grey histogram represents unlabeled cells. Results are representative of at least 2 experiments for each cell type. Figure 7 Proposed model of iNKT cell activation in the heart during infection with <italic>B. burgdorferi</italic> Macrophages phagocytose invading B. burgdorferi and present antigen in the context of CD1d to local V?14-J?18 iNKT cells resulting in the production of IFN?. IFN? activation of macrophages results in enhanced phagocytosis of B. burgdorferi and upregulation of CD1d. These events further perpetuate iNKT cell activation and thus results in self-renewal of IFN?. 