Genetic Aspects of Alzheimer Disease Background Alzheimer disease (AD) is a genetically complex disorder. Mutations in 3 genes, presenilin 1, amyloid precursor protein, and presenilin 2, lead to early-onset familial AD in rare families with onset of disease occurring prior to age 65. Specific polymorphisms in apolipoprotein E are associated with the more common, late-onset AD occurring after age 65. In this review, we discuss current advances in AD genetics, the implications of the known AD genes, presenilin 1, presenilin 2, amyloid precursor protein, and apolipoprotein E, and other possible genes on the clinical diagnosis, treatment, and genetic counseling of patients and families with early- and late-onset AD. Review Summary In addition to the mutations in 4 known genes associated with AD, mutations in other genes may be implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease. Most recently, 2 different research groups have reported genetic association between 2 genes, sortilin-related receptor and GAB2 , and AD. These associations have not changed the diagnostic and medical management of AD. Conclusions New research in the genetics of AD have implicated novel genes as having a role in the disease, but these findings have not been replicated nor have specific disease causing mutations been identified. To date, clinical genetic testing is limited to familial early-onset disease for symptomatic individuals and asymptomatic relatives and, although not recommended, amyloid precursor protein apolipoprotein E testing as an adjunct to diagnosis of symptomatic individuals.  CONCLUSION AD is one of the most challenging disorders of the century and is considered a looming public health crisis. Understanding the genetics of late-onset AD may lead to early detection, prevention and treatment. The genetics of the rare, early-onset familial form of AD has resulted in a better understanding of the pathophysiology of the disease. The more common, late-onset form of AD has a substantial genetic component that remains unexplained, despite the identification of the susceptibility allele, APOE ? 4. Genome-wide association and linkage studies and candidate gene studies have produced multiple genes of interest that may also play a role in the pathophysiology of and susceptibility to AD. Until these finding have been replicated and their contribution to risk elucidated, current clinical practice is limited to genetic testing in the 4 confirmed genes, PSEN1 , PSEN2 , APP , and APOE .  Figure and Tables FIGURE 1 Clinical genetic gecision making for Alzheimer disease. TABLE 1 Alzheimer Disease Genes Discussed in This Review Gene/Protein/Chromosomal Location Mode of Inheritance Penetrance Age of Onset No. Mutations/No. Families * Availability of Clinical Testing APP /amyloid precursor protein/21q21.3 Autosomal Dominant Complete 40–60 28 in 76 families Yes (limited) PSEN1 /presenilin1/14q24.3 Autosomal Dominant Complete 30–60 (generally before age 65) 165 in 354 families Yes PSEN2 /presenilin2/1q31–42 Autosomal Dominant Incomplete 40–75 10 in 18 families Yes (limited) APOE /apolipoproteinE/19q13.32 Complex (susceptibility) n/a Late onset Not a mutation e4 polymorphism associated with increased risk Yes (recommended for symptomatic only) SORL1 /neuronal sortilin-related receptor/11q23 Complex/susceptibility? n/a Late onset n/a No GAB2 /11q14 Complex/susceptibility? n/a Late onset n/a No * http://www.molgen.ua.ac.be/ADMutations . TABLE 2 Genetic Testing Recommendations for Alzheimer Disease Organization Recommendation National Institute on Aging/Alzheimer’s Association 34 Discretionary use of APOE genotyping as an adjunct to other AD diagnostic procedures Routine clinical use not recommended Pre-test and post-test counseling and psychosocial support necessary American College of Medical Genetics/American Society of Human Genetics 38 Genotyping is also not recommended for use as a predictive genetic test Not recommended for use in routine clinical diagnosis 