Multiple recurrent genetic events converge on control of histone lysine methylation in medulloblastoma We used high-resolution SNP genotyping to identify regions of genomic gain and loss in the genomes of 212 medulloblastomas, malignant pediatric brain tumors. We found focal amplifications of 15 known oncogenes and focal deletions of 20 known tumor suppressor genes (TSG), most not previously implicated in medulloblastoma. Notably, we identified previously unknown amplifications and homozygous deletions, including recurrent, mutually exclusive, highly focal genetic events in genes targeting histone lysine methylation, particularly that of histone 3, lysine 9 (H3K9). Post-translational modification of histone proteins is critical for regulation of gene expression, can participate in determination of stem cell fates and has been implicated in carcinogenesis. Consistent with our genetic data, restoration of expression of genes controlling H3K9 methylation greatly diminishes proliferation of medulloblastoma in vitro . Copy number aberrations of genes with critical roles in writing, reading, removing and blocking the state of histone lysine methylation, particularly at H3K9, suggest that defective control of the histone code contributes to the pathogenesis of medulloblastoma.  METHODS Medulloblastoma tumor specimens We obtained all tumor specimens in accordance with the Research Ethics Board at the Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Canada). A total of 201 primary medulloblastomas were obtained as surgically resected, fresh-frozen samples. We obtained tumor specimens from the Co-operative Human Tissue Network (Columbus, OH), the Brain Tumor Tissue Bank (London, Canada) and from our collaborators. Additional clinical details are available in the Supplementary Note online. 100K and 500K GeneChip mapping arrays Medulloblastoma samples were processed and hybridized to Affymetrix SNP arrays at the Centre for Applied Genomics (TCAG) at the Hospital for Sick Children. We genotyped genomic DNA samples isolated from primary medulloblastomas and cell lines using the Affymetrix 50K Hind 240 and 50K Xba 240, or the 250K Nsp and 250K Sty GeneChip Mapping arrays as directed by the manufacturer. Briefly, 250 ng of DNA was digested with Hind III, Xba I, Nsp I or Sty I (NEB), adaptor-ligated and PCR-amplified using a single primer with AmpliTaq Gold (Applied Biosystems). Amplified PCR products were pooled, concentrated and fragmented with DNase I. Products were subsequently labeled, denatured and hybridized overnight to the respective arrays. Arrays were washed using an Affymetrix fluidics station and scanned using the GeneChip Scanner 3000. We generated CEL files using the Affymetrix GeneChip Operating Software (GCOS) 3.0. See Supplementary Methods online for additional details. SNP array data processing Affymetrix CEL files were extracted using the Affymetrix Data Transfer Tool (version 1.1.0). For SNP genotyping, we used the BRLMM Analysis Tool (version 1.0) for individual array platforms using default parameters. Copy number and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analyses were done using both dChip 2006 and CNAG 2.0. In dChip, we normalized arrays by invariant set normalization and computed signal intensities using PM/MM model-based expression. Raw copy number data was computed using 100 normal control samples as a reference (provided by S.W.S.) and inferred copy numbers were predicted using the hidden Markov model (HMM). We carried out LOH analysis using the HMM considering haplotype method, removing haplotypes consistent with ?10% of reference samples. In CNAG, nonself analysis was done automatically with the same reference samples as above using a maximum of ten reference samples of the same sex per analysis. Inferred copy number changes and LOH were predicted using the HMM with default parameters. To identify homozygous deletions, we used the following criteria: (i) ?3 contiguous SNPs, (ii) size range 1 kb–10 Mb and (iii) mean dChip/CNAG HMM copy number ?0 or mean dChip raw copy number ?0.4. To identify amplifications, we used the following criteria: (i) ?5 contiguous SNPs, (ii) size range 10 kb–10 Mb and (iii) mean dChip/CNAG HMM copy number ?5. Recurrent, focal single copy losses were reported using the following criteria: (i) ?3 samples with overlapping interstitial loss (CNAG HMM copy number = 1) and (ii) size range of individual losses 10 kb–5 Mb. To exclude abnormalities associated with known segmental duplications (LCRs), we compared amplifications and deletions to the LCRs detected in the Human Genome Segmental Duplication Database. Similarly, all amplifications and deletions were compared to known characterized structural variants through comparison with known copy number variants (CNVs) using the Database of Genomic Variants (February 2007). Regions of genomic gain or loss overlapping with known CNVs were eliminated. To identify regions of statistical significance, raw copy number data was first segmented using GLAD (Gain and Loss Analysis of DNA) and probable CNVs were eliminated on the basis of their overlap with known, recurrent (?2 samples) CNVs described in the HapMap and POPGEN control populations and/or the Ontario control population. We then analyzed filtered segmented copy number data with GISTIC (Genomic Identification of Significant Targets In Cancer) in GenePattern using default parameters. Fluorescence <italic>in situ</italic> hybridization FISH for JMJD2 family members was carried out on a medulloblastoma tissue microarray as previously published 30 . BACs used for probes included RP11-1082E7 ( JMJD2C , 9p24.1), RP11-235C23 (9q31.2 control), RP11-3214K1 ( JMJD2B , 19p13.3), RP11-927F22 (19q13.32 control), RP11-105H7 (19q13.32 control), RP11-5C19 ( JMJD2A , 1p34.1), RP11-54H19 (1q22 control) and RP11-336K24 (1q22 control). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Chromatin immunoprecipiation of modified histones was done using the Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay Kit (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 106 medulloblastoma cells were fixed in culture medium with 1% (vol/vol) formaldehyde (VWR International) at 37°C for 10 min, washed twice on ice with cold PBS and collected by centrifugation at 2,000 rpm for 4 min at 4°C. Cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer for 10 min on ice, sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Cell supernatants were diluted in ChIP dilution buffer and pre-cleared for 30 min with Protein A Agarose/Salmon Sperm DNA slurry at 4°C before immunprecipitation with appropriate antibodies overnight at 4°C. Immune complexes were captured by incubation with Protein A Agarose/Salmon Sperm DNA slurry for 1 h at 4°C, before 5 min washes with low salt buffer, high salt buffer, and LiCl buffer, and two 5 min washes with TE buffer. Histone complexes were eluted from primary antibodies by two successive 15-min incubations with elution buffer (1% SDS, 0.1M NaHCO3). Histone-DNA cross-links were reversed by addition of 5M NaCl and heating at 65°C for 4 h, followed by proteinase K digestion for one hour at 45°C. DNA was then recovered by phenol/chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation with glycogen. Resulting DNA pellets were washed once with 70% ethanol and resuspended in TE buffer. To assess the levels of H3K9me2 at promoters of candidate genes, we carried out end-point PCR reactions using primers targeting the promoter regions of MYC, TK1 and CDC25A .  Medulloblastoma tumor specimens We obtained all tumor specimens in accordance with the Research Ethics Board at the Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Canada). A total of 201 primary medulloblastomas were obtained as surgically resected, fresh-frozen samples. We obtained tumor specimens from the Co-operative Human Tissue Network (Columbus, OH), the Brain Tumor Tissue Bank (London, Canada) and from our collaborators. Additional clinical details are available in the Supplementary Note online.  100K and 500K GeneChip mapping arrays Medulloblastoma samples were processed and hybridized to Affymetrix SNP arrays at the Centre for Applied Genomics (TCAG) at the Hospital for Sick Children. We genotyped genomic DNA samples isolated from primary medulloblastomas and cell lines using the Affymetrix 50K Hind 240 and 50K Xba 240, or the 250K Nsp and 250K Sty GeneChip Mapping arrays as directed by the manufacturer. Briefly, 250 ng of DNA was digested with Hind III, Xba I, Nsp I or Sty I (NEB), adaptor-ligated and PCR-amplified using a single primer with AmpliTaq Gold (Applied Biosystems). Amplified PCR products were pooled, concentrated and fragmented with DNase I. Products were subsequently labeled, denatured and hybridized overnight to the respective arrays. Arrays were washed using an Affymetrix fluidics station and scanned using the GeneChip Scanner 3000. We generated CEL files using the Affymetrix GeneChip Operating Software (GCOS) 3.0. See Supplementary Methods online for additional details.  SNP array data processing Affymetrix CEL files were extracted using the Affymetrix Data Transfer Tool (version 1.1.0). For SNP genotyping, we used the BRLMM Analysis Tool (version 1.0) for individual array platforms using default parameters. Copy number and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analyses were done using both dChip 2006 and CNAG 2.0. In dChip, we normalized arrays by invariant set normalization and computed signal intensities using PM/MM model-based expression. Raw copy number data was computed using 100 normal control samples as a reference (provided by S.W.S.) and inferred copy numbers were predicted using the hidden Markov model (HMM). We carried out LOH analysis using the HMM considering haplotype method, removing haplotypes consistent with ?10% of reference samples. In CNAG, nonself analysis was done automatically with the same reference samples as above using a maximum of ten reference samples of the same sex per analysis. Inferred copy number changes and LOH were predicted using the HMM with default parameters. To identify homozygous deletions, we used the following criteria: (i) ?3 contiguous SNPs, (ii) size range 1 kb–10 Mb and (iii) mean dChip/CNAG HMM copy number ?0 or mean dChip raw copy number ?0.4. To identify amplifications, we used the following criteria: (i) ?5 contiguous SNPs, (ii) size range 10 kb–10 Mb and (iii) mean dChip/CNAG HMM copy number ?5. Recurrent, focal single copy losses were reported using the following criteria: (i) ?3 samples with overlapping interstitial loss (CNAG HMM copy number = 1) and (ii) size range of individual losses 10 kb–5 Mb. To exclude abnormalities associated with known segmental duplications (LCRs), we compared amplifications and deletions to the LCRs detected in the Human Genome Segmental Duplication Database. Similarly, all amplifications and deletions were compared to known characterized structural variants through comparison with known copy number variants (CNVs) using the Database of Genomic Variants (February 2007). Regions of genomic gain or loss overlapping with known CNVs were eliminated. To identify regions of statistical significance, raw copy number data was first segmented using GLAD (Gain and Loss Analysis of DNA) and probable CNVs were eliminated on the basis of their overlap with known, recurrent (?2 samples) CNVs described in the HapMap and POPGEN control populations and/or the Ontario control population. We then analyzed filtered segmented copy number data with GISTIC (Genomic Identification of Significant Targets In Cancer) in GenePattern using default parameters.  Fluorescence <italic>in situ</italic> hybridization FISH for JMJD2 family members was carried out on a medulloblastoma tissue microarray as previously published 30 . BACs used for probes included RP11-1082E7 ( JMJD2C , 9p24.1), RP11-235C23 (9q31.2 control), RP11-3214K1 ( JMJD2B , 19p13.3), RP11-927F22 (19q13.32 control), RP11-105H7 (19q13.32 control), RP11-5C19 ( JMJD2A , 1p34.1), RP11-54H19 (1q22 control) and RP11-336K24 (1q22 control).  Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Chromatin immunoprecipiation of modified histones was done using the Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay Kit (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 106 medulloblastoma cells were fixed in culture medium with 1% (vol/vol) formaldehyde (VWR International) at 37°C for 10 min, washed twice on ice with cold PBS and collected by centrifugation at 2,000 rpm for 4 min at 4°C. Cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer for 10 min on ice, sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Cell supernatants were diluted in ChIP dilution buffer and pre-cleared for 30 min with Protein A Agarose/Salmon Sperm DNA slurry at 4°C before immunprecipitation with appropriate antibodies overnight at 4°C. Immune complexes were captured by incubation with Protein A Agarose/Salmon Sperm DNA slurry for 1 h at 4°C, before 5 min washes with low salt buffer, high salt buffer, and LiCl buffer, and two 5 min washes with TE buffer. Histone complexes were eluted from primary antibodies by two successive 15-min incubations with elution buffer (1% SDS, 0.1M NaHCO3). Histone-DNA cross-links were reversed by addition of 5M NaCl and heating at 65°C for 4 h, followed by proteinase K digestion for one hour at 45°C. DNA was then recovered by phenol/chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation with glycogen. Resulting DNA pellets were washed once with 70% ethanol and resuspended in TE buffer. To assess the levels of H3K9me2 at promoters of candidate genes, we carried out end-point PCR reactions using primers targeting the promoter regions of MYC, TK1 and CDC25A .  Supplementary Material Figures and Tables 4&5 Note Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 6 