Effective Incorporation of Biomarkers into Phase II Trials The incorporation of biomarkers into the drug development process will improve understanding of how new therapeutics work and allow for more accurate identification of patients who will benefit from those therapies. Strategically planned biomarker evaluations in phase II studies may allow for the design of more efficient phase III trials and better screening of therapeutics for entry into phase III development, hopefully leading to increased chances of positive phase III trial results. Some examples of roles that a biomarker can play in a phase II trial include predictor of response or resistance to specific therapies, patient enrichment, correlative endpoint, or surrogate endpoint. Considerations for using biomarkers most effectively in these roles are discussed in the context of several examples. The substantial technical, logistic, and ethical challenges that can be faced when trying to incorporate biomarkers into phase II trials are also addressed. A rational and coordinated approach to the inclusion of biomarker studies throughout the drug development process will be the key to attaining the goal of personalized medicine.  Discussion Over the past decade, biomarkers and targeted therapies have been important to many of the major success stories in cancer treatment (e.g., imatinib mesylate therapy for BCR-ABL-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia and c-KIT-positive gastrointestinal stromal tumors and trastuzumab for HER-2-positive breast cancer). For each of these success stories, however, hundreds of biomarker studies have been done without bearing fruit. A common feature of the success stories is the investment that was made early in the drug development process, including in the preclinical phase, to develop biomarkers that would improve the understanding of the biology of the disease and mechanism of action of the therapeutic agent. Haphazard inclusion of biomarkers into phase II trials is likely to be too late and not very informative. The drug development community will also have to accept that phase II trials may need to be somewhat larger and more complex and more randomized phase II trials may be needed to fully evaluate the potential of biomarkers for their usefulness in the conduct of phase III trials and ultimately for clinical decision-making. For example, to get an early indication of whether a kinase inhibitor may be effective only in patients with a mutated target, one may want to perform a phase II study both in patients with the wild-type target and the mutated target to assess whether there is evidence for differential efficacy. Table 2 summarizes some suggested principles to guide the use of biomarkers in the drug development process. With greater investment and more rational approaches to biomarker research in earlier stages of drug development, greater rewards await at the end.  Discussion Over the past decade, biomarkers and targeted therapies have been important to many of the major success stories in cancer treatment (e.g., imatinib mesylate therapy for BCR-ABL-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia and c-KIT-positive gastrointestinal stromal tumors and trastuzumab for HER-2-positive breast cancer). For each of these success stories, however, hundreds of biomarker studies have been done without bearing fruit. A common feature of the success stories is the investment that was made early in the drug development process, including in the preclinical phase, to develop biomarkers that would improve the understanding of the biology of the disease and mechanism of action of the therapeutic agent. Haphazard inclusion of biomarkers into phase II trials is likely to be too late and not very informative. The drug development community will also have to accept that phase II trials may need to be somewhat larger and more complex and more randomized phase II trials may be needed to fully evaluate the potential of biomarkers for their usefulness in the conduct of phase III trials and ultimately for clinical decision-making. For example, to get an early indication of whether a kinase inhibitor may be effective only in patients with a mutated target, one may want to perform a phase II study both in patients with the wild-type target and the mutated target to assess whether there is evidence for differential efficacy. Table 2 summarizes some suggested principles to guide the use of biomarkers in the drug development process. With greater investment and more rational approaches to biomarker research in earlier stages of drug development, greater rewards await at the end.  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Schema of the adaptive parallel two-stage design. In the first stage of the design, N 1 ? biomarker-negative ( NEG ) subjects and N 1 + biomarker-positive ( POS ) subjects are studied. If the number of responses to the drug in the biomarker-negative group in the first stage, X 1 ? , meets or exceeds a cutoff of k 1 ? , then N un unselected subjects are accrued during the second stage. If X 1 ? is less than k 1 ? but the number of responses in the biomarker-positive group in the first stage, X 1 + , meets or exceeds a cutoff of k 1 + , then the design enrolls N 2 + additional biomarker-positive subjects during the second stage and no further biomarker-negative subjects are accrued. A total of N + and N ? biomarker-positive and biomarker-negative subjects, respectively, will have been enrolled by the end of the second stage. A total of X T + (biomarker-positive group) and X T ? (biomarker-negative group) responders will have been observed. To determine drug benefit, total responses X T + and X T ? are compared against cutoffs k + and k ? if unselected patients continued to be enrolled during the second stage or X T + is compared against the cutoff k 2 + if only biomarker-positive subjects were enrolled in the second stage. The trial stage- and group-specific samples sizes N 1 ? , N 1 + , N un, N 2 + and cutoffs k 1 ? , k 1 + , k ?, k +, k 2 + are determined so that they control the probability of correct conclusions in the biomarker-positive and unselected patient groups. Adapted from Jones CL and Holmgren E. An adaptive Simon two-stage design for phase 2 studies of targeted therapies. Contemp ClinTrials 2007:28;654–61, with permission from Elsevier. Fig. 2 Schema of the tandem two-step phase II predictor biomarker evaluation trial design. In the first stage, a group of patients unselected with regard to biomarker status (all comers) is studied. If sufficient numbers of objective responses are observed in the first stage, then the study continues into the second stage, still accruing unselected patients. If the number of responses observed in the first stage is not sufficiently high, then the study continues accruing only patients in the subgroup predicted by the pharmacogenomic classifier to be responders; study termination is governed by a standard optimal two-stage phase II trial design in that subgroup of patients predicted to be responders. Adapted with permission from Pusztai et al. (Fig. 3). Pharmacogenomic predictor discovery in phase II clinical trials for breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2007:13;6080–6. Table 1 Effect of enrichment for biomarker-positive cases on the probability of falsely concluding that a new therapy increases the response rate when a single-arm phase II study is designed using assumptions from an unselected population Historical response rate in the unselected population (%) Historical response rate in the subpopulation enriched for biomarker- positive cases (%) Sample size No. observed responses required to conclude that the response rate is increased by the new therapy Actual probability of falsely concluding that the new therapy increases the response rate in the enriched subpopulation 10 15 30 6 0.29 10 20 30 6 0.57 20 25 36 11 0.27 20 30 36 11 0.53 30 35 39 16 0.26 30 40 39 16 0.51 NOTE: Single-arm phase II studies are typically designed to test against benchmark historical response rates in the range of the example rates provided in column 1. When the historical response rate in the subpopulation enriched for biomarker-positive cases is unknown, it is often assumed to be the same as in the unselected population. Column 2 presents the (unknown) historical response rate in the subset of patients who are positive for the biomarker. Sample size (column 3) and required observed response rate (column 4) are calculated to satisfy two conditions: ( a ) control the probability of falsely concluding that the true response rate has been increased from the historical rate in the unselected population to be ?0.10 and ( b ) provide at least 0.90 probability of concluding that the new therapy has increased the response rate when the new therapy has a true response rate that represents an absolute increase of 20% compared with the historical response rate in the unselected population. Table 2 Principles to guide the inclusion of biomarkers in the drug development process Stage in drug development process Recommendation Preclinical Conduct comprehensive preclinical studies aimed at reliably identifying the drug target and developing a robust biomarker coupled with a sufficiently reliable and reproducible assay. At this point, efforts should be directed at developing an analytically validated assay for the biomarker. Phase I Incorporate the biomarker in phase I testing with the goal of better characterizing the biomarker and assay performance in human samples. Phase II The biomarker should be incorporated into trials for hypothesis testing. Questions of whether use of the biomarker is likely to inform treatment decisions by identifying populations likely to respond or whether it may be useful as a surrogate or correlative endpoint can be preliminarily assessed. To achieve this, larger and more complex phase II designs, including randomized designs, may be needed. Phase III Once the biomarker assay is analytically validated for use on clinical specimens, an indication of efficacy in phase II testing will allow for the design of a phase III trial that will lead to clinical validation and eventually incorporation of the biomarker into clinical use.  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Schema of the adaptive parallel two-stage design. In the first stage of the design, N 1 ? biomarker-negative ( NEG ) subjects and N 1 + biomarker-positive ( POS ) subjects are studied. If the number of responses to the drug in the biomarker-negative group in the first stage, X 1 ? , meets or exceeds a cutoff of k 1 ? , then N un unselected subjects are accrued during the second stage. If X 1 ? is less than k 1 ? but the number of responses in the biomarker-positive group in the first stage, X 1 + , meets or exceeds a cutoff of k 1 + , then the design enrolls N 2 + additional biomarker-positive subjects during the second stage and no further biomarker-negative subjects are accrued. A total of N + and N ? biomarker-positive and biomarker-negative subjects, respectively, will have been enrolled by the end of the second stage. A total of X T + (biomarker-positive group) and X T ? (biomarker-negative group) responders will have been observed. To determine drug benefit, total responses X T + and X T ? are compared against cutoffs k + and k ? if unselected patients continued to be enrolled during the second stage or X T + is compared against the cutoff k 2 + if only biomarker-positive subjects were enrolled in the second stage. The trial stage- and group-specific samples sizes N 1 ? , N 1 + , N un, N 2 + and cutoffs k 1 ? , k 1 + , k ?, k +, k 2 + are determined so that they control the probability of correct conclusions in the biomarker-positive and unselected patient groups. Adapted from Jones CL and Holmgren E. An adaptive Simon two-stage design for phase 2 studies of targeted therapies. Contemp ClinTrials 2007:28;654–61, with permission from Elsevier. Fig. 2 Schema of the tandem two-step phase II predictor biomarker evaluation trial design. In the first stage, a group of patients unselected with regard to biomarker status (all comers) is studied. If sufficient numbers of objective responses are observed in the first stage, then the study continues into the second stage, still accruing unselected patients. If the number of responses observed in the first stage is not sufficiently high, then the study continues accruing only patients in the subgroup predicted by the pharmacogenomic classifier to be responders; study termination is governed by a standard optimal two-stage phase II trial design in that subgroup of patients predicted to be responders. Adapted with permission from Pusztai et al. (Fig. 3). Pharmacogenomic predictor discovery in phase II clinical trials for breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2007:13;6080–6. Table 1 Effect of enrichment for biomarker-positive cases on the probability of falsely concluding that a new therapy increases the response rate when a single-arm phase II study is designed using assumptions from an unselected population Historical response rate in the unselected population (%) Historical response rate in the subpopulation enriched for biomarker- positive cases (%) Sample size No. observed responses required to conclude that the response rate is increased by the new therapy Actual probability of falsely concluding that the new therapy increases the response rate in the enriched subpopulation 10 15 30 6 0.29 10 20 30 6 0.57 20 25 36 11 0.27 20 30 36 11 0.53 30 35 39 16 0.26 30 40 39 16 0.51 NOTE: Single-arm phase II studies are typically designed to test against benchmark historical response rates in the range of the example rates provided in column 1. When the historical response rate in the subpopulation enriched for biomarker-positive cases is unknown, it is often assumed to be the same as in the unselected population. Column 2 presents the (unknown) historical response rate in the subset of patients who are positive for the biomarker. Sample size (column 3) and required observed response rate (column 4) are calculated to satisfy two conditions: ( a ) control the probability of falsely concluding that the true response rate has been increased from the historical rate in the unselected population to be ?0.10 and ( b ) provide at least 0.90 probability of concluding that the new therapy has increased the response rate when the new therapy has a true response rate that represents an absolute increase of 20% compared with the historical response rate in the unselected population. Table 2 Principles to guide the inclusion of biomarkers in the drug development process Stage in drug development process Recommendation Preclinical Conduct comprehensive preclinical studies aimed at reliably identifying the drug target and developing a robust biomarker coupled with a sufficiently reliable and reproducible assay. At this point, efforts should be directed at developing an analytically validated assay for the biomarker. Phase I Incorporate the biomarker in phase I testing with the goal of better characterizing the biomarker and assay performance in human samples. Phase II The biomarker should be incorporated into trials for hypothesis testing. Questions of whether use of the biomarker is likely to inform treatment decisions by identifying populations likely to respond or whether it may be useful as a surrogate or correlative endpoint can be preliminarily assessed. To achieve this, larger and more complex phase II designs, including randomized designs, may be needed. Phase III Once the biomarker assay is analytically validated for use on clinical specimens, an indication of efficacy in phase II testing will allow for the design of a phase III trial that will lead to clinical validation and eventually incorporation of the biomarker into clinical use. 