Influence of bone marrow-derived hematopoietic cells on the tumor response to radiotherapy: Experimental models and clinical perspectives In this review, we highlight some of recent studies underscoring the importance of the tumor microenvironment, especially the role of bone marrow-derived myeloid cells, in restoring tumor growth after irradiation. Myeloid cells are hematopoietic cells that give rise to monocytes and macrophages in the peripheral blood and tissues. These cells have been shown to be proangiogenic in tumors promoting tumor growth. We also discuss our previously unpublished results on the effect of irradiation on the tumor vasculature including pericyte and basement membrane coverage to the endothelium of tumor blood vessels. We summarize the clinical significance of these studies including the use of MMP-9 inhibitors, administering white blood cell boosters, or planning safety margin of tumor volumes, in order to improve overall clinical benefits in cancer patients treated with radiotherapy.  Methods Immunofluorescent staining was performed as previously. 11 For basement membrane staining, a rabbit anti-mouse type IV collagen antibody (Biodesign, MA) was used.  Figures Figure 1 (A) Growth of MT1A2 tumor in FVB mice that did not receive whole body radiation (WBR) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) (open circles) or in FVB mice that receive WBR at 9 Gy followed by BMT from Tie2lacZ transgenic mice (closed circles) 4 weeks prior. Tumors were implanted at the same time and monitored for their growth. (B) RIF tumor growth in female C3H mice that received 9 Gy local irradiation at the tumor implantation site (open circles) or in female C3H mice that received 9 Gy WBR followed by BMT from male C3H mice (closed circles) at the same time as the group in open circles. Tumors were implanted 4 weeks later, irradiated at approximately 200 mm3 with 20 Gy (arrow), and were monitored for their growth. Symbols in (A and B) are the mean ± s.e.m. for n = 5 per group. Figure 2 (A) Growth of MT1A2 tumors that were non-irradiated (control; open circles), irradiated and re-grown (IR tumor; closed circles), or grown in previously irradiated tissues (pre-IR bed; closed squares) in FVB mice. Arrowhead indicates local irradiation of 20 Gy to the ‘IR tumor group only. Numbers in red indicate points at which tumors were excised and examined histologically for basement membrane (B) and for pericytes ( Fig. 3 ). Reproduced from 11 with permission. (B) Left: Immunostaining of tumors in A for endothelial cells (CD31; red) or basement membrane (type IV collagen, green). Numbers in parentheses correspond to the numbers in red from (A). Right: The number of endothelial cells was subtracted from that of basement membrane to determine the presence of basement membrane empty sleeves (see the text). The difference in means between different volumes or treatment groups did not reach a statistical significance (p > 0.05). Figure 3 Immunostaining of tumors from Figure 2 for endothelial cells (CD31; red) or pericytes (?-smooth muscle actin; ?-SMA; green). Numbers in parentheses are as in Figure 2 . Percentage of endothelial cells associated with pericytes were calculated and shown on right. Note that pre-IR tumors showed the percent endothelial cells with pericyte coverage to be significantly lower than other groups (p < 0.001).  Clinical Importance and Implications Our recent study demonstrated that bone marrow-derived myeloid cells may modulate tumor response to irradiation by expressing the extracellular matrix-degrading enzyme MMP-9. 11 Thus, MMP-9 could be a target for adjunct therapy to potentiate tumor response to irradiation. Indeed preclinical studies have reported that MMP inhibition significantly increases antitumor activity by irradiation. 61 , 62 Our study also showed that despite the absence of MMP-9 from the bone marrow, tumors could still grow via low levels of MMP-9 provided by other stromal cells such as fibroblast- or smooth muscle-like cells. 11 This indicates that even low levels of MMP-9 could catalyze restoration of tumor vasculature following irradiation. There are some limitations in inhibiting MMP in tumors as adjunct therapy to radiotherapy. First, currently available MMP inhibitors lack selectivity for targeting MMP-9 by inhibiting both MMP-9 and its closely related family member MMP-2 as shown by the study by Kaliski and colleagues. 61 Second, the source of MMP-9 may be different depending on the type of tumors. For example, the MT1A2 tumors used in our study showed very little activity in MMP-9 with or without irradiation, and depended on supply of MMP-9 from stromal cells such as myeloid cells and fibroblast-like cells. 11 In contrast, RIF tumors showed very strong activity of both MMP-2 and MMP-9 upon irradiation (irradiated tumors or the tumor bed; unpublished data, Ahn & Brown). Therefore it is important that the source and levels of MMP-9 activity in tumors should be monitored before an attempt of MMP-9 inhibition. Lastly, even if there was a MMP-9 specific inhibitor, one should carefully consider the extent to which MMP-9 can be inhibited. Due to physicochemical properties of the drug (diffusion properties) or tumor microenvironmental factors (leaky blood vessels) it may be difficult to achieve complete inhibition in MMP-9 within tumors. For some tumors, small levels of MMP-9 would be sufficient to allow tumors to growth, as in our study. 11 Our recent study suggests that the proangiogenic property of myeloid cells is an attractive target for an enhancement of tumor response to irradiation. Use of granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) has been used to ameliorate mucositis in cancer patients treated with radiotherapy, 63 and to treat chemotherapy-induced neutropenia in many patients treated with chemotherapy. 64 Although it is critical for these patients to receive G-CSF/GM-CSF to avoid treatment delays, recent research indicates a potential danger involving the stimulation of tumor angiogenesis by myeloid cells. For example, Shojaei and colleagues demonstrated that myeloid cells contribute to tumor refractoriness to anti-angiogenic (anti-VEGF) therapy. 34 Investigators have also reported that G-CSF positively regulate Bv8 (prokineticin 2), a proangiogenic factor, highly expressed in myeloid cells to influence tumor angiogenesis. 65 Interestingly, a study of three randomized trials showed that chemotherapy-induced neutropenia was a good prognostic marker for increased survival in NSCLC patients, although they excluded patients treated with G-CSF in the analysis. 66 It should be noted that this study utilized chemotherapy-induced neutropenia as a surrogate marker predicting adequate dosing of chemotherapeutic drug(s) rather than as a cause of the enhanced antitumor activity. However, a preclinical study has demonstrated that neutropenia caused by an antibody treatment to c-Kit (a hematopoietic stem cell marker) suppressed angiogenesis of various tumor xenograft models, 67 underscoring the importance of myeloid cells for promoting tumor angiogenesis. Despite the important role played by myeloid cells in tumor angiogenesis, the source of endothelial cells that restore tumor growth after irradiation is not likely to be the bone marrow. These cells may be non-bone marrow-derived progenitors 68 or circulating endothelial cells 69 as suggested by other investigators. Our previous study suggested that the bone marrow-derived myeloid cells could aid the (circulating) endothelial cells to rescue the tumor vasculature from radiation-induced collapse. 11 If endothelial cells could access the irradiated tumors, it may be necessary to reconsider the small margins of the targeted tumor volume with IMRT on the basis that the narrow margin of the tumors may not necessarily be beneficial given the fact that surrounding endothelial cells may enter the tumor to reverse the treatment effect. Overall, we believe that our study and others indicate that we need a better understanding of the functions and mechanisms by which myeloid cells (and other bone marrow-derived cells) interact with tumors. Such knowledge will enable us to develop novel therapeutic strategies that will improve cure rates in cancer patients.  Clinical Importance and Implications Our recent study demonstrated that bone marrow-derived myeloid cells may modulate tumor response to irradiation by expressing the extracellular matrix-degrading enzyme MMP-9. 11 Thus, MMP-9 could be a target for adjunct therapy to potentiate tumor response to irradiation. Indeed preclinical studies have reported that MMP inhibition significantly increases antitumor activity by irradiation. 61 , 62 Our study also showed that despite the absence of MMP-9 from the bone marrow, tumors could still grow via low levels of MMP-9 provided by other stromal cells such as fibroblast- or smooth muscle-like cells. 11 This indicates that even low levels of MMP-9 could catalyze restoration of tumor vasculature following irradiation. There are some limitations in inhibiting MMP in tumors as adjunct therapy to radiotherapy. First, currently available MMP inhibitors lack selectivity for targeting MMP-9 by inhibiting both MMP-9 and its closely related family member MMP-2 as shown by the study by Kaliski and colleagues. 61 Second, the source of MMP-9 may be different depending on the type of tumors. For example, the MT1A2 tumors used in our study showed very little activity in MMP-9 with or without irradiation, and depended on supply of MMP-9 from stromal cells such as myeloid cells and fibroblast-like cells. 11 In contrast, RIF tumors showed very strong activity of both MMP-2 and MMP-9 upon irradiation (irradiated tumors or the tumor bed; unpublished data, Ahn & Brown). Therefore it is important that the source and levels of MMP-9 activity in tumors should be monitored before an attempt of MMP-9 inhibition. Lastly, even if there was a MMP-9 specific inhibitor, one should carefully consider the extent to which MMP-9 can be inhibited. Due to physicochemical properties of the drug (diffusion properties) or tumor microenvironmental factors (leaky blood vessels) it may be difficult to achieve complete inhibition in MMP-9 within tumors. For some tumors, small levels of MMP-9 would be sufficient to allow tumors to growth, as in our study. 11 Our recent study suggests that the proangiogenic property of myeloid cells is an attractive target for an enhancement of tumor response to irradiation. Use of granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) has been used to ameliorate mucositis in cancer patients treated with radiotherapy, 63 and to treat chemotherapy-induced neutropenia in many patients treated with chemotherapy. 64 Although it is critical for these patients to receive G-CSF/GM-CSF to avoid treatment delays, recent research indicates a potential danger involving the stimulation of tumor angiogenesis by myeloid cells. For example, Shojaei and colleagues demonstrated that myeloid cells contribute to tumor refractoriness to anti-angiogenic (anti-VEGF) therapy. 34 Investigators have also reported that G-CSF positively regulate Bv8 (prokineticin 2), a proangiogenic factor, highly expressed in myeloid cells to influence tumor angiogenesis. 65 Interestingly, a study of three randomized trials showed that chemotherapy-induced neutropenia was a good prognostic marker for increased survival in NSCLC patients, although they excluded patients treated with G-CSF in the analysis. 66 It should be noted that this study utilized chemotherapy-induced neutropenia as a surrogate marker predicting adequate dosing of chemotherapeutic drug(s) rather than as a cause of the enhanced antitumor activity. However, a preclinical study has demonstrated that neutropenia caused by an antibody treatment to c-Kit (a hematopoietic stem cell marker) suppressed angiogenesis of various tumor xenograft models, 67 underscoring the importance of myeloid cells for promoting tumor angiogenesis. Despite the important role played by myeloid cells in tumor angiogenesis, the source of endothelial cells that restore tumor growth after irradiation is not likely to be the bone marrow. These cells may be non-bone marrow-derived progenitors 68 or circulating endothelial cells 69 as suggested by other investigators. Our previous study suggested that the bone marrow-derived myeloid cells could aid the (circulating) endothelial cells to rescue the tumor vasculature from radiation-induced collapse. 11 If endothelial cells could access the irradiated tumors, it may be necessary to reconsider the small margins of the targeted tumor volume with IMRT on the basis that the narrow margin of the tumors may not necessarily be beneficial given the fact that surrounding endothelial cells may enter the tumor to reverse the treatment effect. Overall, we believe that our study and others indicate that we need a better understanding of the functions and mechanisms by which myeloid cells (and other bone marrow-derived cells) interact with tumors. Such knowledge will enable us to develop novel therapeutic strategies that will improve cure rates in cancer patients. 