The Influence of Substance Use on Adolescent Brain Development Adolescence is a unique period in neurodevelopment. Alcohol and marijuana use are common. Recent research has indicated that adolescent substance users show abnormalities on measures of brain functioning, which is linked to changes in neurocognition over time. Abnormalities have been seen in brain structure volume, white matter quality, and activation to cognitive tasks, even in youth with as little as 1–2 years of heavy drinking and consumption levels of 20 drinks per month, especially if >4–5 drinks are consumed on a single occasion. Heavy marijuana users show some subtle anomalies too, but generally not the same degree of divergence from demographically similar non-using adolescents. This article reviews the extant literature on neurocognition, brain structure, and brain function in adolescent substance users with an emphasis on the most commonly used substances, and in the context of ongoing neuromaturational processes. Methodological and treatment implications are provided.  CONCLUSIONS Current research suggests that substance use in adolescence leads to abnormalities in brain functioning, including poorer neurocognitive performance, white matter quality, changes in brain volume, and abnormal neuronal activation patterns. fMRI studies have illuminated enhanced cue response in adolescent drinkers, and have shown the potential to predict treatment outcomes in stimulant dependent adults. A few questions still remain, such as whether heavy substance use during adolescence causes cognitive impairments and changes in neurodevelopment, if and when are critical periods of heightened vulnerability to such effects, and if observed abnormalities remit with reduced use. We have the capability to design studies in which we restrict or control for nicotine and most other drug use, but few adolescent drug users do not also use alcohol. It is also important to understand if results generalize to youth with psychiatric problems, other substance use histories, and low socioeconomic status, and to further explore implications for changes in brain activation for learning and behavioral control, along with mood and psychiatric illness. Harder parametric tasks that include conditions on which behavior does differ between groups would help us better understand the cognitive domains we have observed differences on. Lastly, we need to better understand the biochemical changes that may mediate macrostructural, microstructural, and functional neuronal changes in response to substance use, such as cannabinoid receptor activity changes. Multimodal approaches to neuroimaging may help us disentangle such questions (e.g., PET, spectroscopy). Our group is currently conducting longitudinal studies of adolescent substance users as well as youth at risk for substance problems due to family history or early conduct disorder (minimal use at the time of the first imaging session). Follow-up scan data, already underway, will elucidate if substance use during the follow-up interval predicts changes in brain functioning. These investigations will ascertain if: (1) substance (alcohol and marijuana, predominantly, given sample characteristics) use during adolescence seems to cause detrimental changes in neurodevelopment, or if (2) substance use does not account for the differences, the previously observed differences would likely represent pre-existing markers of risk for heavy substance use during adolescence.  Figures Figure 1 Hippocampal volume for adolescents with different substance use patterns. Adolescent users of alcohol, but not alcohol plus marijuana, showed significantly smaller left hippocampal volumes than demographically similar non-users (Medina et al., 2007). Figure 2 Ventral prefrontal volume in adolescents with minimal and heavy drinking histories; ventral prefrontal region is highlight in white in the figure to the right. 