Anaplastic lymphoma kinase: role in cancer pathogenesis and small-molecule inhibitor development for therapy Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), a receptor tyrosine kinase in the insulin receptor superfamily, was initially identified in constitutively activated oncogenic fusion forms – the most common being nucleophosmin-ALK – in anaplastic large-cell lymphomas, and subsequent studies have identified ALK fusions in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, systemic histiocytosis, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors, esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and non-small-cell lung carcinomas. More recently, genomic DNA amplification and protein overexpression, as well as activating point mutations, of ALK have been described in neuroblastomas. In addition to those cancers for which a causative role for aberrant ALK activity is well validated, more circumstantial links implicate the full-length, normal ALK receptor in the genesis of other malignancies – including glioblastoma and breast cancer – via a mechanism of receptor activation involving autocrine and/or paracrine growth loops with the reported ALK ligands, pleiotrophin and midkine. This review summarizes normal ALK biology, the confirmed and putative roles of ALK in the development of human cancers and efforts to target ALK using small-molecule kinase inhibitors.  Conclusion & expert commentary Various mutant forms of ALK are now well validated as the proximate cause of several human malignancies including both relatively uncommon cancers, such as ALCL and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, as well as subsets of common neoplasms, such as lung cancer. Small-molecule ALK inhibitor development is still at an early stage, with only a single agent (PF-2341066) having entered clinical trials to date. Industry interest in ALK as an anticancer target has, heretofore, been diminished due to the relatively small market that had been represented by those malignancies unequivocally known to be driven by abnormal ALK signaling; it is anticipated that the increasing number and types of cancers now being shown to be associated with aberrations of ALK will foster greater interest in inhibitor discovery and development. As with ABL and EGFR small-molecule kinase inhibitors, it is quite likely that resistance to ALK inhibitors will also emerge in a portion of patients treated with these agents; such a likelihood should provide further impetus to develop more than one ALK inhibitor for clinical use – perhaps both additional ATP-competitive inhibitors as well as non-ATP-competitive, allosteric inhibitors – to fully optimize the management of responsive cancers. The availability of several inhibitors would also permit the testing of possible combination therapy as a means to potentially help prevent the development of resistance [ 230 ]. Based on the preceding experience with other kinase inhibitors, it is expected that patients whose tumors harbor genetic abnormalities that cause ALK activation (e.g., the truncation and creation of fused forms, activating point mutations, genomic DNA amplification and resultant overexpression) will be the most highly responsive to small-molecule inhibitor therapy; thus, the molecular definition of the ALK status of tumors should be considered as a criterion for evaluation and selection of patients for clinical trials that seek to assess the efficacy of these compounds.  Five-year view The recognition during the past year that tumorigenic ALK fusions occur in common human cancers, such as esophageal and lung carcinomas, together with the recent discovery that ALK can also be oncogenically activated in the pediatric malignancy neuro blastoma by point mutations, will prompt investigators to perform comprehensive surveys of various cancers to assess the possibility that ALK could play a pathogenic role in them. While the results of such surveys cannot be predicted, it is likely that causative links to subsets of still more malignancies will be made with genetic abnormalities of ALK and/or that alternative mechanisms of ALK activation will be discovered in cancers already known to express mutant forms of ALK (e.g., activating point mutations of ALK may be identified in lung cancers, in addition to the recently described ALK fusions). Interest in ALK small-molecule inhibitor development has only recently heightened, due largely to the expanding number of malignancies in which aberrant ALK activity is being implicated. It is expected that an increasing number of inhibitors will be at various stages of development during the next 5 years. Given the very marked anti-tumor responses and minimal toxicities of the ALK inhibitors characterized to date in preclinical and clinical studies, it is also highly likely that the clinical development path for such agents will be quite rapid; as such, at least one ALK small-molecule inhibitor should be approved for clinical use within the coming 5-year timeline. As has been the case with ATP-competitive inhibitors targeting other oncogenic kinases, resistance mutations of ALK will almost certainly emerge following continuous clinical exposure to any one inhibitor (prolonged inhibitor administration will likely be required to optimally treat solid tumors such as ALK-positive esophageal and lung carcinomas, for example), necessitating the clinical development of second and subsequent generation inhibitors. It is also quite probable that small-molecule inhibitors will vary in their ability to abrogate ALK activation due to different oncogenic point mutations within the ALK KD, thus providing additional incentive for the clinical development of more than one inhibitor. Key issues The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) receptor tyrosine kinase is a single-chain member of the insulin receptor kinase superfamily that is expressed normally in the central and peripheral nervous sytems. Among other possible neural functions, ALK may play a physiologic role in aspects of normal behavior and cognition. As such, ALK could potentially be a therapeutic target of utility for the management of certain neurobehavioral and psychiatric disorders. Oncogenic fusion forms of ALK – two of the most common being nucleolar protein nucleophosmin (NPM)–ALK (which occurs mainly in anaplastic large-cell lymphomas) and EML4–ALK (in lung cancers) – are of pathogenic importance in subsets of anaplastic large-cell lymphomas, diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, systemic histiocytosis, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors, non-small-cell lung carcinomas and, possibly, esophageal squamous cell cancers. Oncogenic point mutations as well as genomic DNA amplification and overexpression of ALK have recently been discovered in the pediatric malignancy neuroblastoma, raising the possibility that still more human tumors may harbor such pathogenic cancer-associated ALK genetic abnormalities. Although yet to be fully validated, ALK may also contribute to the genesis of other human tumors (e.g., glioblastoma) via autocrine and/or paracrine growth-promoting loops involving the putative ALK ligands pleiotrophin and midkine. Preclinical and early clinical experience with ALK small-molecule inhibitor compounds has demonstrated extremely robust anti-tumor efficacy together with little or no target-associated toxicity. Efforts to develop ALK small-molecule inhibitors are currently still at a relatively early stage, with only one such inhibitor (PF-2341066) in the clinic and nearing the completion of a Phase I trial. ALK represents a highly attractive and tractable target for small-molecule inhibitor-based anticancer drug development.  Figures Figure 1 (A) ALK receptor tyrosine kinase and the NPM–ALK fusion protein created by t(2;5). Fusion of the chromosome 5 gene encoding NPM to the chromosome 2 gene encoding ALK generates the chimeric tyrosine kinase, NPM–ALK. NPM contains an OD (residues 1–117) a putative MB (residues 104–115), two ADs (Asp/Glu-rich acidic domain; residues 120–132 and 161–188) that function as acceptor regions for nucleolar targeting signals and two NLS (residues 152–157 and 191–197). ALK contains a single MAM domain, a region of approximately 170 aa homologous to the extracellular portions of a number of functionally diverse proteins that may have an adhesive function (residues 480–635). The LBS for pleiotrophin and midkine (ALK residues 391–401) is indicated. Note that the entire intracytoplasmic portion of ALK, exclusive of the TM, is incorporated into the NPM–ALK and all other ALK chimeric proteins. (B) Representative ALK fusion proteins, the chromosomalrearrangements that generate them, their occurrence in ALK-positivelymphomas and IMTs and their subcellular localizations. A partiallisting of the more common oncogenic ALK fusions is shown; a total of15 different ALK fusions have now been described (those not shown are ALO17–ALK, CARS–ALK, MYH9–ALK, SEC31L1– ALK and TFGXL–ALK). The exact frequency of the various ALK fusions expressed in IMT has not yet been determined. To date, six ALK fusions (CARS–ALK, CLTC–ALK, RANBP2–ALK, SEC31L1–ALK, TPM3–ALK and TPM4–ALK) have been identified in IMT. The TPM3–ALK, TPM4–ALK and CLTC–ALK fusions have been detected in both classical null or T-cell anaplastic large-cell lymphomas and IMT, whereas CARS-ALK, RANBP2–ALK and SEC31L1–ALK occur in IMT but have not yet been described in anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. CLTC–ALK and, to a lesser extent, NPM–ALK, also occur in rare B-cell plasmablastic/immunoblastic non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. Two independent reports have also recently described the occurrence of the TPM4–ALK fusion in squamous cell carcinomas of the esophagus [ 177 , 178 ], and several studies have identified the presence of the novel ALK fusion, EML4–ALK, in a subset of non-small-cell lung cancers [ 180 - 187 ]. aa: Amino acid; AD: Acidic amino acid domain; ALK: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase; ATIC: 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase/IMP cyclohydrolase; C: Cytosolic; CLTC: Clathrin heavy chain; CM: Cell membrane; EML: Echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like; LBS: Ligand-binding site; IMT: Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor; MAM: Meprin/A5/protein tyrosine phosphatase Mu; MB: Metal-binding domain; MSN: Moesin; N: Nuclear; NLS: Nuclear localization signal; NPM: Nucleophosmin; NM: Nuclear membrane; OD: Oligomerization domain; RanBP2: Ran-binding protein 2; TFG: TRK-fused gene; TK: Tyrosine kinase catalytic domain; TM: Transmembrane domain; TPM3: Non-muscle tropomyosi. Figure 2 Selected tyrosine kinase inhibitors approved for clinical anticancer indications. Figure 3 Small molecules shown experimentally to inhibit a ‘gatekeeper residue-mutant’ form of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK; L256T-NPM–ALK) but not wild-type ALK. Figure 4 Naturally occurring inhibitors of anaplastic lymphoma kinase and selected derivative compounds. Figure 5 Staurosporine-based anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors from Cephalon In contrast to CEP-14083 and CEP-14513, both of which are potent ALK inhibitors (enzymatic IC50 2–4 nM; cellular IC50 10–30 nM for both), the structurally related CEP-11988 displays only weak ALK inhibition (enzymatic IC50 > 20 ?M; IC50 for inhibition of cell-based ALK tyrosine phosphorylation > 30 ?M). From [ 221 ]. Figure 6 ChemBridge–St Jude pyridone-based anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitor. Figure 7 ChemBridge–St Jude IGF1 receptor-targeted inhibitor with anaplastic lymphoma kinase-inhibitory activity. Figure 8 Amino-pyrimidine anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitors from Novartis. Figure 9 PHA-665752, a MET (hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor)-selective inhibitor that has provided insight for anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitor design. Figure 10 The Pfizer dual anaplastic lymphoma kinase/MET (hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor) inhibitor PF-2341066. Figure 11 Dose-dependent anticancer activity of PF-2341066 in a Karpas-299 xenograft model Immunocompromized mice bearing established (200-mm3) subcutaneous tumors of the human nucleolar protein nucleophosmin–anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma cell line Karpas-299 were treated with the Pfizer dual ALK/MET (hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor) inhibitor PF-2341066 at the indicated dosing regimens or with vehicle only. Treatments were administered from day 11 to day 23 except for the 100 mg/kg group, which received treatment through day 28. The mean tumor volumes at the time of the final measurements were significantly less in each of the three treatment groups compared with the control cohort (p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA). A subset of the mice treated at the 100 mg/kg/day dose of PF-2341066 (three mice total) experienced tumor regrowth after prolonged observation following the cessation of therapy; the tumors in these mice underwent complete regression again following a 13-day course of PF-2341066 100 mg/kg/day (not shown). p.o.: Orally; q.d.: Once daily. Modified with permission from [ 231 ]. Figure 12 Dual anaplastic lymphoma kinase/MET (hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor receptor) inhibitor from Cephalon. 