A self-agency bias in preschoolers' causal inferences Preschoolers' causal learning from intentional actions – causal interventions – is subject to a self-agency bias . We propose that this bias is evidence-based; it is responsive to causal uncertainty. In the current studies, two causes (one child-controlled, one experimenter-controlled) were associated with one or two effects, first independently, then simultaneously. When initial independent effects were probabilistic, and thus subsequent simultaneous actions were causally ambiguous, children showed a self-agency bias. Children showed no bias when initial effects were deterministic. Further controls establish that children's self-agency bias is not a wholesale preference but rather is influenced by uncertainty in causal evidence. These results demonstrate that children's own experience of action influences their causal learning, and suggest possible benefits in uncertain and ambiguous everyday learning contexts.  Experiment 1 Methods Participants Eighty 3- and 4-year-olds (40 Female; Mean = 4;0, SD = 6.8 months) from a Midwestern university town participated. The sample was predominantly middle- to upper-middle-class and white, reflecting the make up of this community at large. Twenty children were randomly assigned to each condition, with the constraint that the ages be roughly equal across conditions. Materials The novel device was a white plastic cylinder (height = 4.25?, diameter = 2.5?). The bottom half was opaque and the top half was clear. Two identical buttons were attached to wires which were plugged into the device, and a control box was hidden under the table. The control box contained two sliding switches that determined the effects of the buttons. One sliding switch enabled/disabled a 3s bell sound and one enabled/disabled a light on the clear top of the device to glow red for 3s. Thus, the experimenter could determine whether the button presses caused a sound, a light, or both effects together (in sync for 3s). Procedure Each child was individually seated opposite the experimenter, with the device in between them on a table and one button on either side. The experimenter began with, “This is my special toy. It has two buttons. Let's figure out what the buttons do.” In order to keep the simultaneous button presses in sync, ALL button presses (in all conditions) were prompted by the experimenter saying, “One, two, three, go!” The four conditions are described below, and depicted in Figure 1 . In each condition, button A refers to the button that independently produced effect A more often. Button B refers to the button that independently produced effect B more often. The button that the child intervened on (in all conditions except the Observed Effects condition) was button A. Effect B was designated to be the “target” effect. The inclusion of an alternate effect ensured that all actions were associated with a positive outcome of one kind or another. This method – different from previous studies in which effects were either present or absent – further ensured that any sense children had that they caused the target effect did not arise from the simple expectation that all actions they perform must be efficacious. Focal Condition This condition was hypothesized to elicit the self-agency bias. The initial independent effects of the buttons were probabilistic. The child's button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect. The experimenter's button was strongly associated with the target effect, and weakly associated with the alternate effect. Simultaneous actions were then associated with both effects. So, the child pressed button A four times. The sequence of effects was AABA (e.g., light, light, sound, light). The experimenter pressed button B four times. The sequence of effects was BBAB (e.g., sound, sound, light, sound). Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously four times, each time the producing the combined effect (sound and light). The most straightforward interpretation of these events assumes that the independent actions are representative of the general behavior of the buttons: that button A causes effect A about 75% of the time and button B causes effect B about 75% of the time. However, the probabilistic nature of the effect makes the simultaneous actions causally ambiguous. Thus, we propose that children will be biased to treat their actions on button A as causing effect B during some (or all) of the simultaneous actions. Contrast 1: Deterministic Effects This condition provides the critical contrast to the Focal Condition above. In this condition all independent effects of the buttons were deterministic. Thus, all associations between the child's action and the target effect were spurious (occurred in the presence of a known, deterministic cause – the experimenter's action on the other button), though the number of associations was exactly the same as in the Focal Condition. So, the child pressed button A three times. The sequence of effects was AAA. Then the experimenter pressed button B three times. The sequence of effects was BBB. Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously five times, each time the producing the combined A and B effect. Under an evidence-based hypothesis children should weigh the effects of their own actions in light of all of the supporting evidence, including the actions of the experimenter. Thus, the simultaneous actions should have a clear interpretation due to the deterministic independent evidence: the child's action on button A is causing effect A whereas the experimenter's simultaneous action on button B is causing effect B. Contrast 2: Independent Effects In this condition the independent interventions on the buttons were identical to the target condition, but there were no simultaneous interventions. Thus the child pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then the experimenter pressed button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), and nothing else was done or shown. Again, an evidence-based bias predicts that children's inference in the Focal Condition is based in part on their interpretation of the simultaneous evidence. Thus, weak independent evidence of children's own efficacy (1 out of 4 successes) should not be sufficient to override strong evidence in favor of the experimenter's actions (3 out of 4 successes), and children should choose button B as the cause of effect B. Contrast 3: Observed Effects In this condition the pattern of independent and dependent probabilities was identical to those in the Focal Condition, but all of the actions were generated by another person (no self-agency). The experimenter pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), then both buttons simultaneously four times (resulting in the combined effect four times). Without self-agency to interfere, children should reason about the probabilistic evidence normatively. Thus, they should infer that the independent evidence is representative of the true causal strength of each button – that button A is the stronger cause of effect A, and button B is the stronger cause of effect B. At the end, each child was asked which button produced effect B (e.g., “Which button makes the sound?”), and his/her first choice was recorded. In all conditions, starting side (right or left) and button A's effect (sound or light) were counterbalanced. In the first three conditions in which the child was allowed to intervene, the starting intervener (child or experimenter) was counterbalanced. In the Observed Effects contrast, the effect mentioned in the question (“Which button makes the [sound/light]?”) was counterbalanced. Results and Discussion The results provide evidence for an evidence-based self-agency bias that affects children's causal inferences. The proportion of children choosing button B as the cause of effect B in each condition is shown in Table 1 . In the Focal Condition, only 6 out of 20 children said that button B – the experimenter's button, and the button that was more often independently associated with effect B - was the cause of effect B. Instead, 14 out of 20 children claimed that their own button (button A) caused effect B. In contrast, in the Deterministic Effects contrast a significant majority of children (17 out of 20) said that button B caused effect B, binomial test, p < .01. Thus, as hypothesized, children were significantly more likely to choose button A (their own button) as the cause of effect B when the independent effects of the buttons were probabilistic (70% of children) rather than deterministic (15% of children), Fisher's exact test, p < .01. Thus, they did not base their judgments of self-agency on associative evidence alone. Moreover, this difference was not exclusively due to children producing the target outcome 1 out of 4 times independently of the experimenter's actions. In the Independent effects contrast, 14 out of 20 children (70%) chose button B as the cause, significantly more than in the Focal Condition, Fisher's exact test, p < .05. This contrast shows that children considered the strength of the probabilistic evidence against their own agency – they did not disregard frequency information based on being able to produce effect B once. Finally, a significant majority of children (18 out of 20) who merely observed the experimenter perform the same pattern of actions as in the Focal Condition chose button B as the cause of effect B, binomial test, p < .01. This was also significantly different from the Focal Condition, Fisher's exact test, p < .001. Thus children can, in general, make accurate causal inferences based on combinations of independent probabilistic actions and simultaneous actions. Overall, the contrasts show that children's self-agency bias affected their interpretation of the simultaneous actions in the Focal Condition. Strikingly, this occurred even though children knew that their button had another strong effect, effect A. This suggests that children's bias toward self-agency is quite strong, yet evidence-based, occurring only under conditions of uncertainty. An alternative interpretation of the findings, however, is that the salience of children's own actions makes them easier to attend to or encode, and that children gravitate towards causes that are more salient in ambiguous situations. The contrast conditions provide some evidence that speaks against this interpretation. Children's accurate responses in the Deterministic Effects contrast show that they do not simply disregard another's actions simply because their own actions may be more salient. The Observed Effects contrast shows that children can make accurate causal inferences based on probabilistic evidence when salience is equated (same agent presses both buttons). In Experiment 2, we explore this possibility further by asking whether children can make accurate inferences about the stronger cause when the weaker cause has a more salient agent – a puppet that they find more interesting and prefer to play with.  Methods Participants Eighty 3- and 4-year-olds (40 Female; Mean = 4;0, SD = 6.8 months) from a Midwestern university town participated. The sample was predominantly middle- to upper-middle-class and white, reflecting the make up of this community at large. Twenty children were randomly assigned to each condition, with the constraint that the ages be roughly equal across conditions. Materials The novel device was a white plastic cylinder (height = 4.25?, diameter = 2.5?). The bottom half was opaque and the top half was clear. Two identical buttons were attached to wires which were plugged into the device, and a control box was hidden under the table. The control box contained two sliding switches that determined the effects of the buttons. One sliding switch enabled/disabled a 3s bell sound and one enabled/disabled a light on the clear top of the device to glow red for 3s. Thus, the experimenter could determine whether the button presses caused a sound, a light, or both effects together (in sync for 3s). Procedure Each child was individually seated opposite the experimenter, with the device in between them on a table and one button on either side. The experimenter began with, “This is my special toy. It has two buttons. Let's figure out what the buttons do.” In order to keep the simultaneous button presses in sync, ALL button presses (in all conditions) were prompted by the experimenter saying, “One, two, three, go!” The four conditions are described below, and depicted in Figure 1 . In each condition, button A refers to the button that independently produced effect A more often. Button B refers to the button that independently produced effect B more often. The button that the child intervened on (in all conditions except the Observed Effects condition) was button A. Effect B was designated to be the “target” effect. The inclusion of an alternate effect ensured that all actions were associated with a positive outcome of one kind or another. This method – different from previous studies in which effects were either present or absent – further ensured that any sense children had that they caused the target effect did not arise from the simple expectation that all actions they perform must be efficacious. Focal Condition This condition was hypothesized to elicit the self-agency bias. The initial independent effects of the buttons were probabilistic. The child's button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect. The experimenter's button was strongly associated with the target effect, and weakly associated with the alternate effect. Simultaneous actions were then associated with both effects. So, the child pressed button A four times. The sequence of effects was AABA (e.g., light, light, sound, light). The experimenter pressed button B four times. The sequence of effects was BBAB (e.g., sound, sound, light, sound). Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously four times, each time the producing the combined effect (sound and light). The most straightforward interpretation of these events assumes that the independent actions are representative of the general behavior of the buttons: that button A causes effect A about 75% of the time and button B causes effect B about 75% of the time. However, the probabilistic nature of the effect makes the simultaneous actions causally ambiguous. Thus, we propose that children will be biased to treat their actions on button A as causing effect B during some (or all) of the simultaneous actions. Contrast 1: Deterministic Effects This condition provides the critical contrast to the Focal Condition above. In this condition all independent effects of the buttons were deterministic. Thus, all associations between the child's action and the target effect were spurious (occurred in the presence of a known, deterministic cause – the experimenter's action on the other button), though the number of associations was exactly the same as in the Focal Condition. So, the child pressed button A three times. The sequence of effects was AAA. Then the experimenter pressed button B three times. The sequence of effects was BBB. Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously five times, each time the producing the combined A and B effect. Under an evidence-based hypothesis children should weigh the effects of their own actions in light of all of the supporting evidence, including the actions of the experimenter. Thus, the simultaneous actions should have a clear interpretation due to the deterministic independent evidence: the child's action on button A is causing effect A whereas the experimenter's simultaneous action on button B is causing effect B. Contrast 2: Independent Effects In this condition the independent interventions on the buttons were identical to the target condition, but there were no simultaneous interventions. Thus the child pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then the experimenter pressed button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), and nothing else was done or shown. Again, an evidence-based bias predicts that children's inference in the Focal Condition is based in part on their interpretation of the simultaneous evidence. Thus, weak independent evidence of children's own efficacy (1 out of 4 successes) should not be sufficient to override strong evidence in favor of the experimenter's actions (3 out of 4 successes), and children should choose button B as the cause of effect B. Contrast 3: Observed Effects In this condition the pattern of independent and dependent probabilities was identical to those in the Focal Condition, but all of the actions were generated by another person (no self-agency). The experimenter pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), then both buttons simultaneously four times (resulting in the combined effect four times). Without self-agency to interfere, children should reason about the probabilistic evidence normatively. Thus, they should infer that the independent evidence is representative of the true causal strength of each button – that button A is the stronger cause of effect A, and button B is the stronger cause of effect B. At the end, each child was asked which button produced effect B (e.g., “Which button makes the sound?”), and his/her first choice was recorded. In all conditions, starting side (right or left) and button A's effect (sound or light) were counterbalanced. In the first three conditions in which the child was allowed to intervene, the starting intervener (child or experimenter) was counterbalanced. In the Observed Effects contrast, the effect mentioned in the question (“Which button makes the [sound/light]?”) was counterbalanced.  Participants Eighty 3- and 4-year-olds (40 Female; Mean = 4;0, SD = 6.8 months) from a Midwestern university town participated. The sample was predominantly middle- to upper-middle-class and white, reflecting the make up of this community at large. Twenty children were randomly assigned to each condition, with the constraint that the ages be roughly equal across conditions.  Materials The novel device was a white plastic cylinder (height = 4.25?, diameter = 2.5?). The bottom half was opaque and the top half was clear. Two identical buttons were attached to wires which were plugged into the device, and a control box was hidden under the table. The control box contained two sliding switches that determined the effects of the buttons. One sliding switch enabled/disabled a 3s bell sound and one enabled/disabled a light on the clear top of the device to glow red for 3s. Thus, the experimenter could determine whether the button presses caused a sound, a light, or both effects together (in sync for 3s).  Procedure Each child was individually seated opposite the experimenter, with the device in between them on a table and one button on either side. The experimenter began with, “This is my special toy. It has two buttons. Let's figure out what the buttons do.” In order to keep the simultaneous button presses in sync, ALL button presses (in all conditions) were prompted by the experimenter saying, “One, two, three, go!” The four conditions are described below, and depicted in Figure 1 . In each condition, button A refers to the button that independently produced effect A more often. Button B refers to the button that independently produced effect B more often. The button that the child intervened on (in all conditions except the Observed Effects condition) was button A. Effect B was designated to be the “target” effect. The inclusion of an alternate effect ensured that all actions were associated with a positive outcome of one kind or another. This method – different from previous studies in which effects were either present or absent – further ensured that any sense children had that they caused the target effect did not arise from the simple expectation that all actions they perform must be efficacious. Focal Condition This condition was hypothesized to elicit the self-agency bias. The initial independent effects of the buttons were probabilistic. The child's button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect. The experimenter's button was strongly associated with the target effect, and weakly associated with the alternate effect. Simultaneous actions were then associated with both effects. So, the child pressed button A four times. The sequence of effects was AABA (e.g., light, light, sound, light). The experimenter pressed button B four times. The sequence of effects was BBAB (e.g., sound, sound, light, sound). Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously four times, each time the producing the combined effect (sound and light). The most straightforward interpretation of these events assumes that the independent actions are representative of the general behavior of the buttons: that button A causes effect A about 75% of the time and button B causes effect B about 75% of the time. However, the probabilistic nature of the effect makes the simultaneous actions causally ambiguous. Thus, we propose that children will be biased to treat their actions on button A as causing effect B during some (or all) of the simultaneous actions. Contrast 1: Deterministic Effects This condition provides the critical contrast to the Focal Condition above. In this condition all independent effects of the buttons were deterministic. Thus, all associations between the child's action and the target effect were spurious (occurred in the presence of a known, deterministic cause – the experimenter's action on the other button), though the number of associations was exactly the same as in the Focal Condition. So, the child pressed button A three times. The sequence of effects was AAA. Then the experimenter pressed button B three times. The sequence of effects was BBB. Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously five times, each time the producing the combined A and B effect. Under an evidence-based hypothesis children should weigh the effects of their own actions in light of all of the supporting evidence, including the actions of the experimenter. Thus, the simultaneous actions should have a clear interpretation due to the deterministic independent evidence: the child's action on button A is causing effect A whereas the experimenter's simultaneous action on button B is causing effect B. Contrast 2: Independent Effects In this condition the independent interventions on the buttons were identical to the target condition, but there were no simultaneous interventions. Thus the child pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then the experimenter pressed button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), and nothing else was done or shown. Again, an evidence-based bias predicts that children's inference in the Focal Condition is based in part on their interpretation of the simultaneous evidence. Thus, weak independent evidence of children's own efficacy (1 out of 4 successes) should not be sufficient to override strong evidence in favor of the experimenter's actions (3 out of 4 successes), and children should choose button B as the cause of effect B. Contrast 3: Observed Effects In this condition the pattern of independent and dependent probabilities was identical to those in the Focal Condition, but all of the actions were generated by another person (no self-agency). The experimenter pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), then both buttons simultaneously four times (resulting in the combined effect four times). Without self-agency to interfere, children should reason about the probabilistic evidence normatively. Thus, they should infer that the independent evidence is representative of the true causal strength of each button – that button A is the stronger cause of effect A, and button B is the stronger cause of effect B. At the end, each child was asked which button produced effect B (e.g., “Which button makes the sound?”), and his/her first choice was recorded. In all conditions, starting side (right or left) and button A's effect (sound or light) were counterbalanced. In the first three conditions in which the child was allowed to intervene, the starting intervener (child or experimenter) was counterbalanced. In the Observed Effects contrast, the effect mentioned in the question (“Which button makes the [sound/light]?”) was counterbalanced.  Focal Condition This condition was hypothesized to elicit the self-agency bias. The initial independent effects of the buttons were probabilistic. The child's button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect. The experimenter's button was strongly associated with the target effect, and weakly associated with the alternate effect. Simultaneous actions were then associated with both effects. So, the child pressed button A four times. The sequence of effects was AABA (e.g., light, light, sound, light). The experimenter pressed button B four times. The sequence of effects was BBAB (e.g., sound, sound, light, sound). Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously four times, each time the producing the combined effect (sound and light). The most straightforward interpretation of these events assumes that the independent actions are representative of the general behavior of the buttons: that button A causes effect A about 75% of the time and button B causes effect B about 75% of the time. However, the probabilistic nature of the effect makes the simultaneous actions causally ambiguous. Thus, we propose that children will be biased to treat their actions on button A as causing effect B during some (or all) of the simultaneous actions.  Contrast 1: Deterministic Effects This condition provides the critical contrast to the Focal Condition above. In this condition all independent effects of the buttons were deterministic. Thus, all associations between the child's action and the target effect were spurious (occurred in the presence of a known, deterministic cause – the experimenter's action on the other button), though the number of associations was exactly the same as in the Focal Condition. So, the child pressed button A three times. The sequence of effects was AAA. Then the experimenter pressed button B three times. The sequence of effects was BBB. Then the child and experimenter pressed their buttons simultaneously five times, each time the producing the combined A and B effect. Under an evidence-based hypothesis children should weigh the effects of their own actions in light of all of the supporting evidence, including the actions of the experimenter. Thus, the simultaneous actions should have a clear interpretation due to the deterministic independent evidence: the child's action on button A is causing effect A whereas the experimenter's simultaneous action on button B is causing effect B.  Contrast 2: Independent Effects In this condition the independent interventions on the buttons were identical to the target condition, but there were no simultaneous interventions. Thus the child pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then the experimenter pressed button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), and nothing else was done or shown. Again, an evidence-based bias predicts that children's inference in the Focal Condition is based in part on their interpretation of the simultaneous evidence. Thus, weak independent evidence of children's own efficacy (1 out of 4 successes) should not be sufficient to override strong evidence in favor of the experimenter's actions (3 out of 4 successes), and children should choose button B as the cause of effect B.  Contrast 3: Observed Effects In this condition the pattern of independent and dependent probabilities was identical to those in the Focal Condition, but all of the actions were generated by another person (no self-agency). The experimenter pressed button A four times (resulting in the sequence AABA), then button B four times (resulting in the sequence BBAB), then both buttons simultaneously four times (resulting in the combined effect four times). Without self-agency to interfere, children should reason about the probabilistic evidence normatively. Thus, they should infer that the independent evidence is representative of the true causal strength of each button – that button A is the stronger cause of effect A, and button B is the stronger cause of effect B. At the end, each child was asked which button produced effect B (e.g., “Which button makes the sound?”), and his/her first choice was recorded. In all conditions, starting side (right or left) and button A's effect (sound or light) were counterbalanced. In the first three conditions in which the child was allowed to intervene, the starting intervener (child or experimenter) was counterbalanced. In the Observed Effects contrast, the effect mentioned in the question (“Which button makes the [sound/light]?”) was counterbalanced.  Results and Discussion The results provide evidence for an evidence-based self-agency bias that affects children's causal inferences. The proportion of children choosing button B as the cause of effect B in each condition is shown in Table 1 . In the Focal Condition, only 6 out of 20 children said that button B – the experimenter's button, and the button that was more often independently associated with effect B - was the cause of effect B. Instead, 14 out of 20 children claimed that their own button (button A) caused effect B. In contrast, in the Deterministic Effects contrast a significant majority of children (17 out of 20) said that button B caused effect B, binomial test, p < .01. Thus, as hypothesized, children were significantly more likely to choose button A (their own button) as the cause of effect B when the independent effects of the buttons were probabilistic (70% of children) rather than deterministic (15% of children), Fisher's exact test, p < .01. Thus, they did not base their judgments of self-agency on associative evidence alone. Moreover, this difference was not exclusively due to children producing the target outcome 1 out of 4 times independently of the experimenter's actions. In the Independent effects contrast, 14 out of 20 children (70%) chose button B as the cause, significantly more than in the Focal Condition, Fisher's exact test, p < .05. This contrast shows that children considered the strength of the probabilistic evidence against their own agency – they did not disregard frequency information based on being able to produce effect B once. Finally, a significant majority of children (18 out of 20) who merely observed the experimenter perform the same pattern of actions as in the Focal Condition chose button B as the cause of effect B, binomial test, p < .01. This was also significantly different from the Focal Condition, Fisher's exact test, p < .001. Thus children can, in general, make accurate causal inferences based on combinations of independent probabilistic actions and simultaneous actions. Overall, the contrasts show that children's self-agency bias affected their interpretation of the simultaneous actions in the Focal Condition. Strikingly, this occurred even though children knew that their button had another strong effect, effect A. This suggests that children's bias toward self-agency is quite strong, yet evidence-based, occurring only under conditions of uncertainty. An alternative interpretation of the findings, however, is that the salience of children's own actions makes them easier to attend to or encode, and that children gravitate towards causes that are more salient in ambiguous situations. The contrast conditions provide some evidence that speaks against this interpretation. Children's accurate responses in the Deterministic Effects contrast show that they do not simply disregard another's actions simply because their own actions may be more salient. The Observed Effects contrast shows that children can make accurate causal inferences based on probabilistic evidence when salience is equated (same agent presses both buttons). In Experiment 2, we explore this possibility further by asking whether children can make accurate inferences about the stronger cause when the weaker cause has a more salient agent – a puppet that they find more interesting and prefer to play with.  Methods Participants Fourteen 3- and 4-year-olds (5 Females; Mean = 4;2, SD = 9 months) from a Midwestern university town participated. The sample was predominantly middle to upper-middle-class and white. Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1, except that the experimenter introduced two puppets to the child and said they were going to press the buttons. One puppet (high-salience agent) was a life-like monkey (introduced as “Monkey”), and the other (low-salience agent) was made of two pieces of sewn-together brown felt in a gingerbread man shape (but without facial features, introduced as “Puppet”). Figure 2 shows the sequence of events. “Puppet's” button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect, exactly as was the child's button in the Focal Condition of Experiment 1. “Monkey's” button was strongly associated with the target effect, exactly as was the experimenter's button in the Focal Condition. The nature of the target effect (sound or light), the side of the toy of each puppet, and the starting puppet were all counterbalanced. Children were then asked two questions. The first was the same question from Experiment 1 (“Which button made [effect B]?”). The experimenter then asked “Did you like my puppets today? Which puppet would you like to play with?” This question validated that indeed “Monkey” was the preferred (more salient) causal agent: 11/14 children preferred to play with the Monkey puppet (binomial test, p < .05, one-tailed).  Participants Fourteen 3- and 4-year-olds (5 Females; Mean = 4;2, SD = 9 months) from a Midwestern university town participated. The sample was predominantly middle to upper-middle-class and white.  Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1, except that the experimenter introduced two puppets to the child and said they were going to press the buttons. One puppet (high-salience agent) was a life-like monkey (introduced as “Monkey”), and the other (low-salience agent) was made of two pieces of sewn-together brown felt in a gingerbread man shape (but without facial features, introduced as “Puppet”). Figure 2 shows the sequence of events. “Puppet's” button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect, exactly as was the child's button in the Focal Condition of Experiment 1. “Monkey's” button was strongly associated with the target effect, exactly as was the experimenter's button in the Focal Condition. The nature of the target effect (sound or light), the side of the toy of each puppet, and the starting puppet were all counterbalanced. Children were then asked two questions. The first was the same question from Experiment 1 (“Which button made [effect B]?”). The experimenter then asked “Did you like my puppets today? Which puppet would you like to play with?” This question validated that indeed “Monkey” was the preferred (more salient) causal agent: 11/14 children preferred to play with the Monkey puppet (binomial test, p < .05, one-tailed).  Results and Discussion The results demonstrate that children do not simply choose the most salient cause – in this case, a preferred agent – in ambiguous situations. A significant majority of children (11/14) correctly stated that button B was the cause of effect B (binomial test, p < .05, one-tailed) though it was operated by the less salient agent. Moreover, this response pattern is significantly different than the responses in the focal condition of experiment 1 (Fisher's exact test, p<.05). Importantly, children's causal responses were correct despite their play preferences: whereas 8 children who answered the causal question correctly then said they preferred to play with Monkey, no child who answered incorrectly (picking Monkey's button) preferred to play with Puppet (McNemar's test, p < .001).  Experiment 2 Methods Participants Fourteen 3- and 4-year-olds (5 Females; Mean = 4;2, SD = 9 months) from a Midwestern university town participated. The sample was predominantly middle to upper-middle-class and white. Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1, except that the experimenter introduced two puppets to the child and said they were going to press the buttons. One puppet (high-salience agent) was a life-like monkey (introduced as “Monkey”), and the other (low-salience agent) was made of two pieces of sewn-together brown felt in a gingerbread man shape (but without facial features, introduced as “Puppet”). Figure 2 shows the sequence of events. “Puppet's” button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect, exactly as was the child's button in the Focal Condition of Experiment 1. “Monkey's” button was strongly associated with the target effect, exactly as was the experimenter's button in the Focal Condition. The nature of the target effect (sound or light), the side of the toy of each puppet, and the starting puppet were all counterbalanced. Children were then asked two questions. The first was the same question from Experiment 1 (“Which button made [effect B]?”). The experimenter then asked “Did you like my puppets today? Which puppet would you like to play with?” This question validated that indeed “Monkey” was the preferred (more salient) causal agent: 11/14 children preferred to play with the Monkey puppet (binomial test, p < .05, one-tailed). Results and Discussion The results demonstrate that children do not simply choose the most salient cause – in this case, a preferred agent – in ambiguous situations. A significant majority of children (11/14) correctly stated that button B was the cause of effect B (binomial test, p < .05, one-tailed) though it was operated by the less salient agent. Moreover, this response pattern is significantly different than the responses in the focal condition of experiment 1 (Fisher's exact test, p<.05). Importantly, children's causal responses were correct despite their play preferences: whereas 8 children who answered the causal question correctly then said they preferred to play with Monkey, no child who answered incorrectly (picking Monkey's button) preferred to play with Puppet (McNemar's test, p < .001). General Discussion Taken together, these results support an evidence-based self-agency bias in preschool children – a tendency to weigh their own actions as more effective than the actions of others in ambiguous situations. The results suggest that this bias neither based on a wholesale preference for one's own actions, nor on an inability to evaluate probabilistic causal evidence, nor is it based on the salience of certain actions produced by certain agents. This finding has implications for everyday causal learning. Young children's inexperience makes them especially likely to encounter causal actions that are only probabilistically effective due to mitigating circumstances that they cannot perceive and/or do not fully understand. Moreover, young children's explorations of new or difficult situations are often facilitated by others ( Rogoff, 1990 ). In collaborative contexts, children's actions and the actions of others can occur simultaneously, by virtue of being motivated by common intentions and goals. Thus is may often be difficult for children to determine accurately which action causes a particular outcome. A self-agency bias which is evidence-based, and thus specific to these sorts of uncertain situations, may very well offer children a learning advantage, by helping them resolve confounding quickly, without generally compromising their ability to make accurate inferences. Children learn much about the causal structure of the world from intentional actions precisely because such actions are often effective controls for confounding. However, preschoolers have accumulated enough social knowledge to potentially understand the pitfalls of relying on others' actions for causal inference. Perhaps children make use of their knowledge of intentional action to remain skeptical about the causal actions of others, in particular when evidence is uncertain. They might implicitly assume that their own actions are more trustworthy - less likely to be confounded – than the actions of other people. It is not known for certain whether children (or adults for that matter) make such an assumption about the “trustworthiness” of their own actions. One way to explore this question would be to vary the expertise of the other actor. Children appropriately rely on evidence from knowledgeable sources in causal learning ( Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman, 2008 ). Varying another person's expertise should influence their trustworthiness as a source of evidence, and therefore such information should interact with a self-agency bias in a systematic way. The current investigation demonstrates one way in which children's own experience of action influences causal learning. It also contributes to the growing evidence that children are affected in important ways by the psychological and social context in which learning takes place.  Experiment 2 Methods Participants Fourteen 3- and 4-year-olds (5 Females; Mean = 4;2, SD = 9 months) from a Midwestern university town participated. The sample was predominantly middle to upper-middle-class and white. Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1, except that the experimenter introduced two puppets to the child and said they were going to press the buttons. One puppet (high-salience agent) was a life-like monkey (introduced as “Monkey”), and the other (low-salience agent) was made of two pieces of sewn-together brown felt in a gingerbread man shape (but without facial features, introduced as “Puppet”). Figure 2 shows the sequence of events. “Puppet's” button was weakly associated with the target effect, and strongly associated with the alternate effect, exactly as was the child's button in the Focal Condition of Experiment 1. “Monkey's” button was strongly associated with the target effect, exactly as was the experimenter's button in the Focal Condition. The nature of the target effect (sound or light), the side of the toy of each puppet, and the starting puppet were all counterbalanced. Children were then asked two questions. The first was the same question from Experiment 1 (“Which button made [effect B]?”). The experimenter then asked “Did you like my puppets today? Which puppet would you like to play with?” This question validated that indeed “Monkey” was the preferred (more salient) causal agent: 11/14 children preferred to play with the Monkey puppet (binomial test, p < .05, one-tailed). Results and Discussion The results demonstrate that children do not simply choose the most salient cause – in this case, a preferred agent – in ambiguous situations. A significant majority of children (11/14) correctly stated that button B was the cause of effect B (binomial test, p < .05, one-tailed) though it was operated by the less salient agent. Moreover, this response pattern is significantly different than the responses in the focal condition of experiment 1 (Fisher's exact test, p<.05). Importantly, children's causal responses were correct despite their play preferences: whereas 8 children who answered the causal question correctly then said they preferred to play with Monkey, no child who answered incorrectly (picking Monkey's button) preferred to play with Puppet (McNemar's test, p < .001). General Discussion Taken together, these results support an evidence-based self-agency bias in preschool children – a tendency to weigh their own actions as more effective than the actions of others in ambiguous situations. The results suggest that this bias neither based on a wholesale preference for one's own actions, nor on an inability to evaluate probabilistic causal evidence, nor is it based on the salience of certain actions produced by certain agents. This finding has implications for everyday causal learning. Young children's inexperience makes them especially likely to encounter causal actions that are only probabilistically effective due to mitigating circumstances that they cannot perceive and/or do not fully understand. Moreover, young children's explorations of new or difficult situations are often facilitated by others ( Rogoff, 1990 ). In collaborative contexts, children's actions and the actions of others can occur simultaneously, by virtue of being motivated by common intentions and goals. Thus is may often be difficult for children to determine accurately which action causes a particular outcome. A self-agency bias which is evidence-based, and thus specific to these sorts of uncertain situations, may very well offer children a learning advantage, by helping them resolve confounding quickly, without generally compromising their ability to make accurate inferences. Children learn much about the causal structure of the world from intentional actions precisely because such actions are often effective controls for confounding. However, preschoolers have accumulated enough social knowledge to potentially understand the pitfalls of relying on others' actions for causal inference. Perhaps children make use of their knowledge of intentional action to remain skeptical about the causal actions of others, in particular when evidence is uncertain. They might implicitly assume that their own actions are more trustworthy - less likely to be confounded – than the actions of other people. It is not known for certain whether children (or adults for that matter) make such an assumption about the “trustworthiness” of their own actions. One way to explore this question would be to vary the expertise of the other actor. Children appropriately rely on evidence from knowledgeable sources in causal learning ( Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman, 2008 ). Varying another person's expertise should influence their trustworthiness as a source of evidence, and therefore such information should interact with a self-agency bias in a systematic way. The current investigation demonstrates one way in which children's own experience of action influences causal learning. It also contributes to the growing evidence that children are affected in important ways by the psychological and social context in which learning takes place.  General Discussion Taken together, these results support an evidence-based self-agency bias in preschool children – a tendency to weigh their own actions as more effective than the actions of others in ambiguous situations. The results suggest that this bias neither based on a wholesale preference for one's own actions, nor on an inability to evaluate probabilistic causal evidence, nor is it based on the salience of certain actions produced by certain agents. This finding has implications for everyday causal learning. Young children's inexperience makes them especially likely to encounter causal actions that are only probabilistically effective due to mitigating circumstances that they cannot perceive and/or do not fully understand. Moreover, young children's explorations of new or difficult situations are often facilitated by others ( Rogoff, 1990 ). In collaborative contexts, children's actions and the actions of others can occur simultaneously, by virtue of being motivated by common intentions and goals. Thus is may often be difficult for children to determine accurately which action causes a particular outcome. A self-agency bias which is evidence-based, and thus specific to these sorts of uncertain situations, may very well offer children a learning advantage, by helping them resolve confounding quickly, without generally compromising their ability to make accurate inferences. Children learn much about the causal structure of the world from intentional actions precisely because such actions are often effective controls for confounding. However, preschoolers have accumulated enough social knowledge to potentially understand the pitfalls of relying on others' actions for causal inference. Perhaps children make use of their knowledge of intentional action to remain skeptical about the causal actions of others, in particular when evidence is uncertain. They might implicitly assume that their own actions are more trustworthy - less likely to be confounded – than the actions of other people. It is not known for certain whether children (or adults for that matter) make such an assumption about the “trustworthiness” of their own actions. One way to explore this question would be to vary the expertise of the other actor. Children appropriately rely on evidence from knowledgeable sources in causal learning ( Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman, 2008 ). Varying another person's expertise should influence their trustworthiness as a source of evidence, and therefore such information should interact with a self-agency bias in a systematic way. The current investigation demonstrates one way in which children's own experience of action influences causal learning. It also contributes to the growing evidence that children are affected in important ways by the psychological and social context in which learning takes place.  General Discussion Taken together, these results support an evidence-based self-agency bias in preschool children – a tendency to weigh their own actions as more effective than the actions of others in ambiguous situations. The results suggest that this bias neither based on a wholesale preference for one's own actions, nor on an inability to evaluate probabilistic causal evidence, nor is it based on the salience of certain actions produced by certain agents. This finding has implications for everyday causal learning. Young children's inexperience makes them especially likely to encounter causal actions that are only probabilistically effective due to mitigating circumstances that they cannot perceive and/or do not fully understand. Moreover, young children's explorations of new or difficult situations are often facilitated by others ( Rogoff, 1990 ). In collaborative contexts, children's actions and the actions of others can occur simultaneously, by virtue of being motivated by common intentions and goals. Thus is may often be difficult for children to determine accurately which action causes a particular outcome. A self-agency bias which is evidence-based, and thus specific to these sorts of uncertain situations, may very well offer children a learning advantage, by helping them resolve confounding quickly, without generally compromising their ability to make accurate inferences. Children learn much about the causal structure of the world from intentional actions precisely because such actions are often effective controls for confounding. However, preschoolers have accumulated enough social knowledge to potentially understand the pitfalls of relying on others' actions for causal inference. Perhaps children make use of their knowledge of intentional action to remain skeptical about the causal actions of others, in particular when evidence is uncertain. They might implicitly assume that their own actions are more trustworthy - less likely to be confounded – than the actions of other people. It is not known for certain whether children (or adults for that matter) make such an assumption about the “trustworthiness” of their own actions. One way to explore this question would be to vary the expertise of the other actor. Children appropriately rely on evidence from knowledgeable sources in causal learning ( Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman, 2008 ). Varying another person's expertise should influence their trustworthiness as a source of evidence, and therefore such information should interact with a self-agency bias in a systematic way. The current investigation demonstrates one way in which children's own experience of action influences causal learning. It also contributes to the growing evidence that children are affected in important ways by the psychological and social context in which learning takes place. 