DEFEAT – Heart Failure: A Guide to Management of Geriatric Heart Failure by Generalist Physicians Over 80% of all heart failure patients are 65 years and older. The diagnosis and management of heart failure in older adults can be challenging. However, with the correct clinical skill and experience, most geriatric heart failure can be properly diagnosed and managed. Management of geriatric heart failure can be simplified by following this useful mnemonic: DEFEAT–Heart Failure. This covers the essential aspects of geriatric heart failure management: D iagnosis, E tiology, F luid, E jection fr A cion, and T reatment. The process begins with a clinical D iagnosis, which must be established, before ordering an echocardiogram as nearly half of all geriatric heart failure patients have normal left ventricular ejection fraction. Because heart failure is a syndrome and not a disease, an underlying E tiology must be sought and determined. Determination of the F luid volume status by careful examination of the external jugular veins in the neck is vital to achieve euvolemia. An echocardiography should be ordered to obtain left ventricular E jection fr A ction to assess prognosis and guide T herapy. However, if left ventricular ejection fraction cannot be determined, as in many developing nations, all geriatric heart failure patients should be treated as if they have low ejection fraction, and should be prescribed an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a beta-blocker. Diuretic and digoxin should be prescribed for all symptomatic patients with heart failure. An aldosterone antagonist may be used in select patients with advanced systolic heart failure, carefully avoiding hyperkalemia.  Summary: DEFEAT – Heart Failure Management of geriatric heart failure may be simplified by the mnemonic DEFEAT: D iagnosis, E tiology, F luid volume status, E jection fr A cion, and T reatment. Careful history and physical examination often may help make a clinical D iagnosis of heart failure in older adults and determine an underlying E tiology of heart failure. Determination of F luid volume status by careful examination of the external jugular veins is the single most important physical examination during initial and subsequent visits. Determination of left ventricular E jection fr A ction is the single most important test after a clinical diagnosis of heart failure has been made, which should be used to guide T herapy. When ejection fraction cannot be determined, all heart failure patients should be treated as systolic heart failure, and should be prescribed an ACE inhibitor and a beta-blocker, and an aldosterone antagonist for selected patients with advanced heart failure. Low-dose digoxin should be prescribed for all heart failure patients who cannot afford or tolerate ACE inhibitors or beta-blockers. Diuretics should be used judiciously to achieve and maintain euvolemia.  Figure and Table Figure 1 Techniques for the estimation of jugular venous pressure (JVP) using external jugular veins (EJV) in older adults with chronic heart failure. The goal is to find a position between supine and sitting in which the top of the EJV pulsation is visible in the middle of neck (blue line in neck). Then the vertical distance between the top of the EJV pulsation and sternal angle is measured, to which is added (subtracted, if the top of the EJV pulsation is below the sternal angle) the position-appropriate distance between sternal angle and right atrium (5 cm at supine, 8 cm at 30 degrees and ? 10 cm at 45 degrees) (Adopted from Ahmed A, Jones L, Hays CI. DEFEAT heart failure: assessment and management of heart failure in nursing homes made easy. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2008;9:383–9.) Table 1 Despite differences in systolic and diastolic function between systolic and diastolic heart failure, both have low cardiac output, the hallmark of heart failure and very similar clinical presentation. All data based on left ventricle. (Adapted from Ahmed A. Clinical manifestations, diagnostic assessment, and etiology of heart failure in older adults. Clin Geriatr Med. 2007;23:11–30) LV EDV (ml) LV EF (%) LV SV (ml) HR (bpm) LV CO (l/min) Symptoms Normal 140 55% 80 65 5.2 None Systolic heart failure 200 25% 50 75 3.8 Dyspnea, fatigue, edema Diastolic heart failure 80 60% 50 75 3.8 Dyspnea, fatigue, edema All data based on left ventricle. Abbreviations: bpm, beats per minute; CO, cardiac output; EDV, end-diastolic volume; EF, ejection fraction; LV, left ventricular, HR, heart rate; SV, stroke volume. 