Identification of a small molecule(s) class to enhance cell-cell adhesion and attenuate prostate tumor growth and metastasis * Expression of calcitonin (CT) and its receptor (CTR) is elevated in advanced prostate cancer (PC), and activated CT-CTR autocrine axis plays a pivotal role in tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of multiple PC cell lines. Recent studies suggest that CT promotes PC metastasis by reducing cell-cell adhesion through the disassembly of tight and adherens junctions (TJs and AJs), and activation of ?-catenin signaling. We attempted to identify a class of molecules that enhances cell-cell adhesion of prostate cells, and reverses the disruptive actions of CT on TJs and AJs. Screening several compounds led to the emergence of phenyl-methylene hydantoin (PMH) as a lead candidate that can augment cell-cell adhesion and abolish disruptive actions of CT on junctional complexes. PMH reduced invasiveness of PC-3M cells and abolished proinvasive actions of CT. Importantly, PMH did not display significant cytotoxicity on PC-3M cells at the tested doses. Intraperitoneally administered PMH and its S- ethyl derivative (S-PMH) remarkably decreased orthotopic tumor growth and inhibited the formation of tumor micrometastases in distant organs of nude mice. PMH treatment also reduced the growth of spontaneous tumors in LPB-Tag mice to a significant extent without any obvious cytotoxic effects. By virtue of its ability to stabilize cell junctions, PMH could reverse the effect of CT on junctional disruption and metastasis, which strengthens the possibility of employing PMH as a potential drug candidate for CT-positive androgen independent PCs.  Materials and Methods Animals Nu/nu mice Male balb/c nu/nu mice (6–8 weeks old) were purchased from Harlan (Madison, WI), and housed two per cage in micro-isolator units under controlled temperature/humidity. The animals were fed ad lib on a standard sterilizable laboratory chow (Harlan Teklad), and quarantined for one week prior to their use. LPB-Tag Transgenic Mouse Line LPB- Tag transgenic mice (12T-7 fast) were provided by Dr. Robert J Matusik (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN). The colony of these mice was established in our facility, and newborn mice were identified by genotyping as previously described ( 17 ). Positive adult mice were used in the present study. All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the principles and procedures outlined by the NIH and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at University of Louisiana-Monroe. Surgical orthotopic implantation (SOI) The SOI on nu/nu mice was performed as described before ( 18 ). Briefly, the mice were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg)-xylazine (10 mg/kg), and placed in a supine position. A midline incision was made in the lower abdomen. Tumor cell suspensions (1×106 cells/20?l) were injected into the dorsal prostate using a 30-gauge needle (n=6 per molecule or diluent), and single-stitch sutures closed abdomen. The mice were periodically fluoroimaged with Kodak 4000 MM imaging station under anesthesia to monitor tumor growth and metastasis. The mice were sacrificed as described in the Results section, and organs were collected for further analysis. Cell Culture Since the goal of the present study was to identify novel molecules that inhibit CT-stimulated disruption of cell-cell adhesion and reduce invasive virulence of advanced PC, we chose PC-3M prostate cancer cells as a model cell line. This is because PC-3M cells are poorly differentiated, androgen-refractory, co-express CT and CTR and are highly metastatic ( 8 , 19 ). The cells were maintained in the complete medium (RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 IU/ml penicillin G and 100 mg/ml streptomycin) under standard culture conditions. Stable PC-3M-CT+ subline overexpresses CT and is more metastatic than PC-3M cells. This was generated by stable transfection of recombinant plasmid pcDNA 3.1 containing CT cDNA, and selected in G4 18. The cell line was extensively characterized in recent studies ( 9 ). Drugs Initially, phenyl-methylene hydantoin (PMH) was extracted from Hemimycale arabica (a Red Sea sponge) and characterized by spectral methods including full NMR analysis. Subsequently, PMH as well as its most potent analog S-ethyl PMH (S-PMH) were synthesized ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). Extracted PMH and synthetic PMH showed identical NMR profiles. They were tested in multiple in vitro assays and were found to be equipotent. Synthetic PMH was used in the present studies. <bold><italic>In vitro</italic> Assays:</bold> cell-cell adhesion Transepithelial Resistance (TER) Approximately 1×105 cells were plated and grown to confluency on 12-well transwell filters (0.4?m pore size) in complete medium for first 12 hours, and then in serum-free medium. Electrodes were placed at the upper and lower chambers and TER was measured in triplicate wells at multiple time points after CT/PMH addition with EVOM volt-ohm meter (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL). The TER values were normalized to the area of the monolayer filter, and calculated by subtracting the blank values derived from the filters containing only bathing medium. The integrity and cell density of monolayers was carefully monitored during TER measurement studies. Paracellular Permiability (PCP) This assay measured the diffusion of Tetramethyl rhodamine labeled-dextran (TMR-dextran, 4 kDa) across a cell layer grown on a membrane of transwell insert (PCP). PC-3M cells were seeded (1×105 cells/insert), and cultured to form a monolayer for 5 days. The culture media was then replaced with Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) a few minutes before the addition of TMR-dextran (1 mg/ml in HBSS). TMR-dextran was added to the upper chamber, and 100-?l of the samples was removed from the lower chamber after 1 hour. Fluorescence was measured on a Bio-Tek ELISA plate reader (Ex 530 nm/Em 590 nm). The diffusion of TMR-dextran across the insert without cells was also measured to ascertain the integrity of cell monolayers. Each data point was in quadruplicates. Preparation of cell lysates: Triton X-100-soluble and -insoluble fractions Confluent 100 mm plates of PC-3M cells were serum starved overnight, and treated with diluent/CT/PMH as described in the Results section. Triton X-100-soluble extract (cytosolic) was obtained by incubating cells with 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH-7.4 (containing 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 40 U/ml aprotinin, 15 ?g/ml leupeptin, 1% Nonidet P-40 and 1% Triton-X-100) for 30 minutes with occasional agitation. After washing the plates with TBS (containing protease inhibitors), the triton X-100-insoluble fraction (plasma mambrane-associated) was scraped out from the plates with TBS containing 0.5% SDS, 1% Nonidet P-40, 40 U/ml aprotinin and 15 ?g/ml leupeptin. The contents were homogenized, and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 5 min at 4 C to obtain triton X-100 insoluble fraction. Protein content of lysates was determined using Bio-Rad Reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Western Blotting The lysate fractions (100 ?g protein/lane) were boiled for 5 minutes in 2 x laemmli solution containing 20 mM DTT, loaded on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and fractionated proteins were electrically transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The blots were incubated with appropriate antisera as described in the Results section for 18 hours at 4° C. Following three washes, the blots were incubated with appropriate HRP-conjugated secondary antiserum (either anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG). The immune complexes were visualized on chemiluminiscence radiography film using Western Blot ECL detection system (Radiochemical Center, Amersham). The blots were then washed and reprobed for ?-tubulin or ?-actin. The same experiment was repeated two more times. In vitro Assays: cell growth and invasion Cell Proliferation assay The proliferation of PC cells was assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay using the kit purchased from ATCC. Exponentially growing PC-3M cells were plated in a 96-well plate at a density of 8 × 103 cells per well, and cultured for 24 hours. The complete growth medium was then replaced with 100 ?l of basal incubation medium (RPMI 1640 containing 0.1% BSA, 10 mM HEPES, 4 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin G and 100 mg/ml streptomycin) and incubation was continued for additional 24 hours. The cells were then treated with MTT solution at 37°C for 4 h, and then stop solution was added (100 ?l/well). Absorbance of the samples was determined at 595 nm with an ELISA plate reader (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). In vitro Invasion Assay Invasion experiments were conducted in 24-well, two compartmented, Matrigel™ invasion chambers (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA). Exponentially growing PC-3M cells were serum-starved for 24 hours with basal incubation medium, and then seeded at a density of 25 × 103 cells/well in the upper insert of the Matrigel™ chamber. The lower chamber received the chemoattractant medium, which consisted of 90% basal RPMI medium and 10% conditioned medium from the cultures of PC-3M cells expressing constitutively active G?s protein ( 20 ). The incubations were carried out for 24 hours, after which Matrigel™ (along with non-invading cells) was scraped off with cotton swabs, and outer side of the insert was fixed and stained using Diff Quick kit (Dade-Behring Diagnostics, Newark, DE). Invaded cells on under side of the insert were counted in six or more randomly selected 100X fields. The results were expressed as mean ± SEM invaded cells per 100X field. Each experiment was done in triplicates, and the experiment was repeated twice. Growth Correction Since PC-3M cells exhibit high proliferation rate, it is conceivable that the cells migrated during early part of the 24-hour incubation period could proliferate during the remaining period of incubation, causing a slight overestimation of final results. To correct this, we determined the growth rate of PC-3M cells under identical conditions. 25 × 103 cells were plated at hourly intervals in six-well dishes and cultured for 1–24 hours. Mean percent increase in cell number in each well was determined. The relative CT-induced increase of the pooled results of all time points was found to be 1.19 (vehicle control=1). This correction was applied to the results of invasion assays. Spheroid Disaggregation Assay Current evidence has shown that the cells of primary tumors in situ are released in clumps, which then attach to a favorable ECM, and are released gradually to migrate in all directions ( 21 , 22 ). Based on this model, we have established spheroid disaggregation assay, where we first produce spheroids of PC cells, then place them on an ECM, and monitor their disaggregation and radial cell migration of tumor cells over a period of 48 hours ( 23 ). In our experience, this model reliably predicts relative metastatic potential of PC cell lines. We examined the effect of PMH and S-PMH on metastatic potential of PC-3M cells in spheroid disaggregation assay. In brief, 100 ?l suspension of 5 × 104/ml PC-3M cells in RPMI 1640 serum-free medium was placed on 96-well low-attachment tissue culture plates. The plates were rocked on gyrotory shaker in a CO2 incubator at 37° C for 2 days, at the end of which the spheroids measuring 150–300 ?m diameter (~4 × 104 cells/spheroid) were formed. A single spheroid was then placed in the center of each well of ECM-coated 24-well microplate in 200 ?l of serum-free medium, and was allowed to attach to the ECM for 1 hour, and digitally photographed (t=0). The spheroids were then cultured at 37°C for 48 h, fixed, stained with Diff-Quik™ (Dade-Behring), and re-photographed. The diameter of the area covered with cells was measured in a microscope calibrated with a stage and ocular micrometer. The results are presented as ?m migration ± SEM, where migration= (diameter of the area covering migrated cells ? diameter of the spheroid)/2 from three separate experiments, totaling 5–10 spheroids. <italic>In vivo</italic> Assays: orthotopic tumor growth and metastasis Stable expression of red fluorescence protein (RFP) in PC-3M cells To detect micrometastases of implanted tumor cells in mice, we stably transfected PC-3M cells with DsRed-MCherry-Hyg-N1, a mammalian expression vector that encodes DsRed-MCherry, a derivative of red flourescent protein (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA). Hygromycin resistant colonies were selected, and observed over a period of four weeks. All cell lines expressed strong red fluorescence at a steady level over the duration of the observation period. These cells were then used for orthotopic implantation in nu/nu mice. Administration of PMH/S-PMH in mice Nu/nu Mice PMH (or S-PMH) solution was prepared at 100X concentration in 10% DMSO and diluted to 1X with normal saline. The molecules were administered intraperitoneally to a group of six animals per molecule or a diluent as described in the Results section. The doses for PMH and S-PMH were 200 ?g/100 ?l/day or 5 ?g/g body weight/day and 40 ?g/day or 1 ?g/g body weight/day respectively. These were the maximal doses for each molecule without apparent cytotoxic effects as determined by initial studies. Tumor growth and metastases were monitored every three days beginning after day 25 post-implantation by fluoroimaging with Kodak 4000 MM image station. The scanned fluorescent images were quantitated with Molecular Imaging software version 6.05 f7 (Kodak). LPB-Tag mice S-PMH solution was administered at the dose of 80 ?g/week or 2 ?g/g body weight/week-intraperitoneally. The treatment was started at the age of 30 days post-natal, and continued until day 90. The mice were sacrificed on day 90, their male resproductive organs were isolated, weighed and fixed for histology. Histology At the necropsy, primary tumor and other organs were harvested, weighed. Wet sections of organs were examined for the presence of RFP. Fluorescent images of tumor cells were acquired with a charge-coupled device Retiga 2000 RT digital camera connected to a microscope (Nikon Optiphot 2) and a computer. The images were then processed with IPLab™ Image Analysis software (BD Biosciences). Remaining tissue portions were fixed in neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. The 5-?m thick sections of the tumors were processed for H&E staining. Statistical Analysis The results were statistically evaluated by One-Way ANOVA or other analyses as described in the Results section, and significance was derived from Newman-Keuls test. The difference was considered statistically significant when p < 0.05.  Animals Nu/nu mice Male balb/c nu/nu mice (6–8 weeks old) were purchased from Harlan (Madison, WI), and housed two per cage in micro-isolator units under controlled temperature/humidity. The animals were fed ad lib on a standard sterilizable laboratory chow (Harlan Teklad), and quarantined for one week prior to their use. LPB-Tag Transgenic Mouse Line LPB- Tag transgenic mice (12T-7 fast) were provided by Dr. Robert J Matusik (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN). The colony of these mice was established in our facility, and newborn mice were identified by genotyping as previously described ( 17 ). Positive adult mice were used in the present study. All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the principles and procedures outlined by the NIH and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at University of Louisiana-Monroe. Surgical orthotopic implantation (SOI) The SOI on nu/nu mice was performed as described before ( 18 ). Briefly, the mice were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg)-xylazine (10 mg/kg), and placed in a supine position. A midline incision was made in the lower abdomen. Tumor cell suspensions (1×106 cells/20?l) were injected into the dorsal prostate using a 30-gauge needle (n=6 per molecule or diluent), and single-stitch sutures closed abdomen. The mice were periodically fluoroimaged with Kodak 4000 MM imaging station under anesthesia to monitor tumor growth and metastasis. The mice were sacrificed as described in the Results section, and organs were collected for further analysis. Cell Culture Since the goal of the present study was to identify novel molecules that inhibit CT-stimulated disruption of cell-cell adhesion and reduce invasive virulence of advanced PC, we chose PC-3M prostate cancer cells as a model cell line. This is because PC-3M cells are poorly differentiated, androgen-refractory, co-express CT and CTR and are highly metastatic ( 8 , 19 ). The cells were maintained in the complete medium (RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 IU/ml penicillin G and 100 mg/ml streptomycin) under standard culture conditions. Stable PC-3M-CT+ subline overexpresses CT and is more metastatic than PC-3M cells. This was generated by stable transfection of recombinant plasmid pcDNA 3.1 containing CT cDNA, and selected in G4 18. The cell line was extensively characterized in recent studies ( 9 ). Drugs Initially, phenyl-methylene hydantoin (PMH) was extracted from Hemimycale arabica (a Red Sea sponge) and characterized by spectral methods including full NMR analysis. Subsequently, PMH as well as its most potent analog S-ethyl PMH (S-PMH) were synthesized ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). Extracted PMH and synthetic PMH showed identical NMR profiles. They were tested in multiple in vitro assays and were found to be equipotent. Synthetic PMH was used in the present studies.  Nu/nu mice Male balb/c nu/nu mice (6–8 weeks old) were purchased from Harlan (Madison, WI), and housed two per cage in micro-isolator units under controlled temperature/humidity. The animals were fed ad lib on a standard sterilizable laboratory chow (Harlan Teklad), and quarantined for one week prior to their use.  LPB-Tag Transgenic Mouse Line LPB- Tag transgenic mice (12T-7 fast) were provided by Dr. Robert J Matusik (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN). The colony of these mice was established in our facility, and newborn mice were identified by genotyping as previously described ( 17 ). Positive adult mice were used in the present study. All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the principles and procedures outlined by the NIH and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at University of Louisiana-Monroe.  Surgical orthotopic implantation (SOI) The SOI on nu/nu mice was performed as described before ( 18 ). Briefly, the mice were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg)-xylazine (10 mg/kg), and placed in a supine position. A midline incision was made in the lower abdomen. Tumor cell suspensions (1×106 cells/20?l) were injected into the dorsal prostate using a 30-gauge needle (n=6 per molecule or diluent), and single-stitch sutures closed abdomen. The mice were periodically fluoroimaged with Kodak 4000 MM imaging station under anesthesia to monitor tumor growth and metastasis. The mice were sacrificed as described in the Results section, and organs were collected for further analysis.  Cell Culture Since the goal of the present study was to identify novel molecules that inhibit CT-stimulated disruption of cell-cell adhesion and reduce invasive virulence of advanced PC, we chose PC-3M prostate cancer cells as a model cell line. This is because PC-3M cells are poorly differentiated, androgen-refractory, co-express CT and CTR and are highly metastatic ( 8 , 19 ). The cells were maintained in the complete medium (RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 IU/ml penicillin G and 100 mg/ml streptomycin) under standard culture conditions. Stable PC-3M-CT+ subline overexpresses CT and is more metastatic than PC-3M cells. This was generated by stable transfection of recombinant plasmid pcDNA 3.1 containing CT cDNA, and selected in G4 18. The cell line was extensively characterized in recent studies ( 9 ).  Drugs Initially, phenyl-methylene hydantoin (PMH) was extracted from Hemimycale arabica (a Red Sea sponge) and characterized by spectral methods including full NMR analysis. Subsequently, PMH as well as its most potent analog S-ethyl PMH (S-PMH) were synthesized ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). Extracted PMH and synthetic PMH showed identical NMR profiles. They were tested in multiple in vitro assays and were found to be equipotent. Synthetic PMH was used in the present studies.  <bold><italic>In vitro</italic> Assays:</bold> cell-cell adhesion Transepithelial Resistance (TER) Approximately 1×105 cells were plated and grown to confluency on 12-well transwell filters (0.4?m pore size) in complete medium for first 12 hours, and then in serum-free medium. Electrodes were placed at the upper and lower chambers and TER was measured in triplicate wells at multiple time points after CT/PMH addition with EVOM volt-ohm meter (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL). The TER values were normalized to the area of the monolayer filter, and calculated by subtracting the blank values derived from the filters containing only bathing medium. The integrity and cell density of monolayers was carefully monitored during TER measurement studies. Paracellular Permiability (PCP) This assay measured the diffusion of Tetramethyl rhodamine labeled-dextran (TMR-dextran, 4 kDa) across a cell layer grown on a membrane of transwell insert (PCP). PC-3M cells were seeded (1×105 cells/insert), and cultured to form a monolayer for 5 days. The culture media was then replaced with Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) a few minutes before the addition of TMR-dextran (1 mg/ml in HBSS). TMR-dextran was added to the upper chamber, and 100-?l of the samples was removed from the lower chamber after 1 hour. Fluorescence was measured on a Bio-Tek ELISA plate reader (Ex 530 nm/Em 590 nm). The diffusion of TMR-dextran across the insert without cells was also measured to ascertain the integrity of cell monolayers. Each data point was in quadruplicates. Preparation of cell lysates: Triton X-100-soluble and -insoluble fractions Confluent 100 mm plates of PC-3M cells were serum starved overnight, and treated with diluent/CT/PMH as described in the Results section. Triton X-100-soluble extract (cytosolic) was obtained by incubating cells with 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH-7.4 (containing 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 40 U/ml aprotinin, 15 ?g/ml leupeptin, 1% Nonidet P-40 and 1% Triton-X-100) for 30 minutes with occasional agitation. After washing the plates with TBS (containing protease inhibitors), the triton X-100-insoluble fraction (plasma mambrane-associated) was scraped out from the plates with TBS containing 0.5% SDS, 1% Nonidet P-40, 40 U/ml aprotinin and 15 ?g/ml leupeptin. The contents were homogenized, and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 5 min at 4 C to obtain triton X-100 insoluble fraction. Protein content of lysates was determined using Bio-Rad Reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Western Blotting The lysate fractions (100 ?g protein/lane) were boiled for 5 minutes in 2 x laemmli solution containing 20 mM DTT, loaded on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and fractionated proteins were electrically transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The blots were incubated with appropriate antisera as described in the Results section for 18 hours at 4° C. Following three washes, the blots were incubated with appropriate HRP-conjugated secondary antiserum (either anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG). The immune complexes were visualized on chemiluminiscence radiography film using Western Blot ECL detection system (Radiochemical Center, Amersham). The blots were then washed and reprobed for ?-tubulin or ?-actin. The same experiment was repeated two more times.  Transepithelial Resistance (TER) Approximately 1×105 cells were plated and grown to confluency on 12-well transwell filters (0.4?m pore size) in complete medium for first 12 hours, and then in serum-free medium. Electrodes were placed at the upper and lower chambers and TER was measured in triplicate wells at multiple time points after CT/PMH addition with EVOM volt-ohm meter (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL). The TER values were normalized to the area of the monolayer filter, and calculated by subtracting the blank values derived from the filters containing only bathing medium. The integrity and cell density of monolayers was carefully monitored during TER measurement studies.  Paracellular Permiability (PCP) This assay measured the diffusion of Tetramethyl rhodamine labeled-dextran (TMR-dextran, 4 kDa) across a cell layer grown on a membrane of transwell insert (PCP). PC-3M cells were seeded (1×105 cells/insert), and cultured to form a monolayer for 5 days. The culture media was then replaced with Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) a few minutes before the addition of TMR-dextran (1 mg/ml in HBSS). TMR-dextran was added to the upper chamber, and 100-?l of the samples was removed from the lower chamber after 1 hour. Fluorescence was measured on a Bio-Tek ELISA plate reader (Ex 530 nm/Em 590 nm). The diffusion of TMR-dextran across the insert without cells was also measured to ascertain the integrity of cell monolayers. Each data point was in quadruplicates.  Preparation of cell lysates: Triton X-100-soluble and -insoluble fractions Confluent 100 mm plates of PC-3M cells were serum starved overnight, and treated with diluent/CT/PMH as described in the Results section. Triton X-100-soluble extract (cytosolic) was obtained by incubating cells with 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH-7.4 (containing 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 40 U/ml aprotinin, 15 ?g/ml leupeptin, 1% Nonidet P-40 and 1% Triton-X-100) for 30 minutes with occasional agitation. After washing the plates with TBS (containing protease inhibitors), the triton X-100-insoluble fraction (plasma mambrane-associated) was scraped out from the plates with TBS containing 0.5% SDS, 1% Nonidet P-40, 40 U/ml aprotinin and 15 ?g/ml leupeptin. The contents were homogenized, and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 5 min at 4 C to obtain triton X-100 insoluble fraction. Protein content of lysates was determined using Bio-Rad Reagent (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).  Western Blotting The lysate fractions (100 ?g protein/lane) were boiled for 5 minutes in 2 x laemmli solution containing 20 mM DTT, loaded on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and fractionated proteins were electrically transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The blots were incubated with appropriate antisera as described in the Results section for 18 hours at 4° C. Following three washes, the blots were incubated with appropriate HRP-conjugated secondary antiserum (either anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG). The immune complexes were visualized on chemiluminiscence radiography film using Western Blot ECL detection system (Radiochemical Center, Amersham). The blots were then washed and reprobed for ?-tubulin or ?-actin. The same experiment was repeated two more times.  In vitro Assays: cell growth and invasion Cell Proliferation assay The proliferation of PC cells was assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay using the kit purchased from ATCC. Exponentially growing PC-3M cells were plated in a 96-well plate at a density of 8 × 103 cells per well, and cultured for 24 hours. The complete growth medium was then replaced with 100 ?l of basal incubation medium (RPMI 1640 containing 0.1% BSA, 10 mM HEPES, 4 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin G and 100 mg/ml streptomycin) and incubation was continued for additional 24 hours. The cells were then treated with MTT solution at 37°C for 4 h, and then stop solution was added (100 ?l/well). Absorbance of the samples was determined at 595 nm with an ELISA plate reader (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). In vitro Invasion Assay Invasion experiments were conducted in 24-well, two compartmented, Matrigel™ invasion chambers (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA). Exponentially growing PC-3M cells were serum-starved for 24 hours with basal incubation medium, and then seeded at a density of 25 × 103 cells/well in the upper insert of the Matrigel™ chamber. The lower chamber received the chemoattractant medium, which consisted of 90% basal RPMI medium and 10% conditioned medium from the cultures of PC-3M cells expressing constitutively active G?s protein ( 20 ). The incubations were carried out for 24 hours, after which Matrigel™ (along with non-invading cells) was scraped off with cotton swabs, and outer side of the insert was fixed and stained using Diff Quick kit (Dade-Behring Diagnostics, Newark, DE). Invaded cells on under side of the insert were counted in six or more randomly selected 100X fields. The results were expressed as mean ± SEM invaded cells per 100X field. Each experiment was done in triplicates, and the experiment was repeated twice. Growth Correction Since PC-3M cells exhibit high proliferation rate, it is conceivable that the cells migrated during early part of the 24-hour incubation period could proliferate during the remaining period of incubation, causing a slight overestimation of final results. To correct this, we determined the growth rate of PC-3M cells under identical conditions. 25 × 103 cells were plated at hourly intervals in six-well dishes and cultured for 1–24 hours. Mean percent increase in cell number in each well was determined. The relative CT-induced increase of the pooled results of all time points was found to be 1.19 (vehicle control=1). This correction was applied to the results of invasion assays. Spheroid Disaggregation Assay Current evidence has shown that the cells of primary tumors in situ are released in clumps, which then attach to a favorable ECM, and are released gradually to migrate in all directions ( 21 , 22 ). Based on this model, we have established spheroid disaggregation assay, where we first produce spheroids of PC cells, then place them on an ECM, and monitor their disaggregation and radial cell migration of tumor cells over a period of 48 hours ( 23 ). In our experience, this model reliably predicts relative metastatic potential of PC cell lines. We examined the effect of PMH and S-PMH on metastatic potential of PC-3M cells in spheroid disaggregation assay. In brief, 100 ?l suspension of 5 × 104/ml PC-3M cells in RPMI 1640 serum-free medium was placed on 96-well low-attachment tissue culture plates. The plates were rocked on gyrotory shaker in a CO2 incubator at 37° C for 2 days, at the end of which the spheroids measuring 150–300 ?m diameter (~4 × 104 cells/spheroid) were formed. A single spheroid was then placed in the center of each well of ECM-coated 24-well microplate in 200 ?l of serum-free medium, and was allowed to attach to the ECM for 1 hour, and digitally photographed (t=0). The spheroids were then cultured at 37°C for 48 h, fixed, stained with Diff-Quik™ (Dade-Behring), and re-photographed. The diameter of the area covered with cells was measured in a microscope calibrated with a stage and ocular micrometer. The results are presented as ?m migration ± SEM, where migration= (diameter of the area covering migrated cells ? diameter of the spheroid)/2 from three separate experiments, totaling 5–10 spheroids.  Cell Proliferation assay The proliferation of PC cells was assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay using the kit purchased from ATCC. Exponentially growing PC-3M cells were plated in a 96-well plate at a density of 8 × 103 cells per well, and cultured for 24 hours. The complete growth medium was then replaced with 100 ?l of basal incubation medium (RPMI 1640 containing 0.1% BSA, 10 mM HEPES, 4 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin G and 100 mg/ml streptomycin) and incubation was continued for additional 24 hours. The cells were then treated with MTT solution at 37°C for 4 h, and then stop solution was added (100 ?l/well). Absorbance of the samples was determined at 595 nm with an ELISA plate reader (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).  In vitro Invasion Assay Invasion experiments were conducted in 24-well, two compartmented, Matrigel™ invasion chambers (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA). Exponentially growing PC-3M cells were serum-starved for 24 hours with basal incubation medium, and then seeded at a density of 25 × 103 cells/well in the upper insert of the Matrigel™ chamber. The lower chamber received the chemoattractant medium, which consisted of 90% basal RPMI medium and 10% conditioned medium from the cultures of PC-3M cells expressing constitutively active G?s protein ( 20 ). The incubations were carried out for 24 hours, after which Matrigel™ (along with non-invading cells) was scraped off with cotton swabs, and outer side of the insert was fixed and stained using Diff Quick kit (Dade-Behring Diagnostics, Newark, DE). Invaded cells on under side of the insert were counted in six or more randomly selected 100X fields. The results were expressed as mean ± SEM invaded cells per 100X field. Each experiment was done in triplicates, and the experiment was repeated twice.  Growth Correction Since PC-3M cells exhibit high proliferation rate, it is conceivable that the cells migrated during early part of the 24-hour incubation period could proliferate during the remaining period of incubation, causing a slight overestimation of final results. To correct this, we determined the growth rate of PC-3M cells under identical conditions. 25 × 103 cells were plated at hourly intervals in six-well dishes and cultured for 1–24 hours. Mean percent increase in cell number in each well was determined. The relative CT-induced increase of the pooled results of all time points was found to be 1.19 (vehicle control=1). This correction was applied to the results of invasion assays.  Spheroid Disaggregation Assay Current evidence has shown that the cells of primary tumors in situ are released in clumps, which then attach to a favorable ECM, and are released gradually to migrate in all directions ( 21 , 22 ). Based on this model, we have established spheroid disaggregation assay, where we first produce spheroids of PC cells, then place them on an ECM, and monitor their disaggregation and radial cell migration of tumor cells over a period of 48 hours ( 23 ). In our experience, this model reliably predicts relative metastatic potential of PC cell lines. We examined the effect of PMH and S-PMH on metastatic potential of PC-3M cells in spheroid disaggregation assay. In brief, 100 ?l suspension of 5 × 104/ml PC-3M cells in RPMI 1640 serum-free medium was placed on 96-well low-attachment tissue culture plates. The plates were rocked on gyrotory shaker in a CO2 incubator at 37° C for 2 days, at the end of which the spheroids measuring 150–300 ?m diameter (~4 × 104 cells/spheroid) were formed. A single spheroid was then placed in the center of each well of ECM-coated 24-well microplate in 200 ?l of serum-free medium, and was allowed to attach to the ECM for 1 hour, and digitally photographed (t=0). The spheroids were then cultured at 37°C for 48 h, fixed, stained with Diff-Quik™ (Dade-Behring), and re-photographed. The diameter of the area covered with cells was measured in a microscope calibrated with a stage and ocular micrometer. The results are presented as ?m migration ± SEM, where migration= (diameter of the area covering migrated cells ? diameter of the spheroid)/2 from three separate experiments, totaling 5–10 spheroids.  <italic>In vivo</italic> Assays: orthotopic tumor growth and metastasis Stable expression of red fluorescence protein (RFP) in PC-3M cells To detect micrometastases of implanted tumor cells in mice, we stably transfected PC-3M cells with DsRed-MCherry-Hyg-N1, a mammalian expression vector that encodes DsRed-MCherry, a derivative of red flourescent protein (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA). Hygromycin resistant colonies were selected, and observed over a period of four weeks. All cell lines expressed strong red fluorescence at a steady level over the duration of the observation period. These cells were then used for orthotopic implantation in nu/nu mice.  Stable expression of red fluorescence protein (RFP) in PC-3M cells To detect micrometastases of implanted tumor cells in mice, we stably transfected PC-3M cells with DsRed-MCherry-Hyg-N1, a mammalian expression vector that encodes DsRed-MCherry, a derivative of red flourescent protein (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA). Hygromycin resistant colonies were selected, and observed over a period of four weeks. All cell lines expressed strong red fluorescence at a steady level over the duration of the observation period. These cells were then used for orthotopic implantation in nu/nu mice.  Administration of PMH/S-PMH in mice Nu/nu Mice PMH (or S-PMH) solution was prepared at 100X concentration in 10% DMSO and diluted to 1X with normal saline. The molecules were administered intraperitoneally to a group of six animals per molecule or a diluent as described in the Results section. The doses for PMH and S-PMH were 200 ?g/100 ?l/day or 5 ?g/g body weight/day and 40 ?g/day or 1 ?g/g body weight/day respectively. These were the maximal doses for each molecule without apparent cytotoxic effects as determined by initial studies. Tumor growth and metastases were monitored every three days beginning after day 25 post-implantation by fluoroimaging with Kodak 4000 MM image station. The scanned fluorescent images were quantitated with Molecular Imaging software version 6.05 f7 (Kodak). LPB-Tag mice S-PMH solution was administered at the dose of 80 ?g/week or 2 ?g/g body weight/week-intraperitoneally. The treatment was started at the age of 30 days post-natal, and continued until day 90. The mice were sacrificed on day 90, their male resproductive organs were isolated, weighed and fixed for histology. Histology At the necropsy, primary tumor and other organs were harvested, weighed. Wet sections of organs were examined for the presence of RFP. Fluorescent images of tumor cells were acquired with a charge-coupled device Retiga 2000 RT digital camera connected to a microscope (Nikon Optiphot 2) and a computer. The images were then processed with IPLab™ Image Analysis software (BD Biosciences). Remaining tissue portions were fixed in neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. The 5-?m thick sections of the tumors were processed for H&E staining. Statistical Analysis The results were statistically evaluated by One-Way ANOVA or other analyses as described in the Results section, and significance was derived from Newman-Keuls test. The difference was considered statistically significant when p < 0.05.  Nu/nu Mice PMH (or S-PMH) solution was prepared at 100X concentration in 10% DMSO and diluted to 1X with normal saline. The molecules were administered intraperitoneally to a group of six animals per molecule or a diluent as described in the Results section. The doses for PMH and S-PMH were 200 ?g/100 ?l/day or 5 ?g/g body weight/day and 40 ?g/day or 1 ?g/g body weight/day respectively. These were the maximal doses for each molecule without apparent cytotoxic effects as determined by initial studies. Tumor growth and metastases were monitored every three days beginning after day 25 post-implantation by fluoroimaging with Kodak 4000 MM image station. The scanned fluorescent images were quantitated with Molecular Imaging software version 6.05 f7 (Kodak).  LPB-Tag mice S-PMH solution was administered at the dose of 80 ?g/week or 2 ?g/g body weight/week-intraperitoneally. The treatment was started at the age of 30 days post-natal, and continued until day 90. The mice were sacrificed on day 90, their male resproductive organs were isolated, weighed and fixed for histology.  Histology At the necropsy, primary tumor and other organs were harvested, weighed. Wet sections of organs were examined for the presence of RFP. Fluorescent images of tumor cells were acquired with a charge-coupled device Retiga 2000 RT digital camera connected to a microscope (Nikon Optiphot 2) and a computer. The images were then processed with IPLab™ Image Analysis software (BD Biosciences). Remaining tissue portions were fixed in neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. The 5-?m thick sections of the tumors were processed for H&E staining.  Statistical Analysis The results were statistically evaluated by One-Way ANOVA or other analyses as described in the Results section, and significance was derived from Newman-Keuls test. The difference was considered statistically significant when p < 0.05.  Results CT disrupts tight and adherens junctions (TJs and AJs) in polarized PC-3M cells, and PMH abolishes this action A primary function of epithelia is to create a barrier that separates distinct tissue compartments by forming gap junctions, desmosomes, AJs and TJs. TJs are located on most apical region of the cell membrane, while AJs are located immediately basal to TJs. AJs maintain cell-cell adhesion, while TJs function as a “fence” by sealing the spaces between adjacent cells and maintain apico-basal polarity and as a “barrier” by regulating paracellular permeability to control the diffusion of electrolytes and small molecules ( 24 – 26 ). We have recently reported that CT promotes PC metastasis by disrupting cell-cell adhesion through the disassembly of TJs and AJs ( 16 ). Therefore, we screened several molecules and identified PMH as a molecule that reverses the actions of CT on TJs and AJs. PMH and transepithelial resistance (TER) of polarized PC-3M cells The optimal concentrations of CT, PMH and S-PMH were chosen by previous experimentation. We observed that 50 ?M PMH was most beneficial for the enhancement of TJ/AJ function, whereas 50 nM CT had most disruptive effect. These concentrations were then used in all in vitro studies. We first examined the effect of PMH on TER of diluent- and CT-treated polarized PC-3M cells. TER of PC-3M cultures steadily increased up to 48 hours, and then it stabilized ( Figure 1A ). CT significantly reduced TER. In contrast, PMH significantly increased TER of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cultures, suggesting that PMH has beneficial effects on TJs, and it completely reverses the actions of CT on TER. PMH and paracellular permeability (PCP) of polarized PC-3M cells Barrier function of TJs of PC-3M cultures can be examined by the ability of TMR-dextran to penetrate through the cell layer. Since PMH promoted TJ formation and reversed the action of CT on TER, we examined its effect on PCP of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cell layers. As expected CT caused almost two-fold increase in PCP ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, PMH decreased baseline PCP and abolished CT-induced increase. PMH and translocation of key junction proteins from triton X-100-insoluble to triton X-100-soluble compartment Cell-cell adhesion is controlled by key AJ and TJ proteins that are located either on the membrane (such as claudins, occludins or E-cadherin) or on the intracellular side of the membrane (such as zonula occludens-1 or ?-catenin). Disruption of these junctions causes internalization of integral membrane proteins into cytoplasm, which can be identified by the change in their solubility in triton X-100 (membrane proteins are triton X-100-insoluble and cytoplasmic ones are soluble) ( 27 ). Since the results of Figures 1A and 1B suggested PMH attenuated CT-stimulated disassembly of junctions, we verified this by testing the effect of PMH on CT-stimulated changes in the solubility of key TJ proteins such as zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) and occludin; and AJ proteins such as E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Equal amounts of cell lysate proteins of triton X-100-insoluble or -soluble fractions were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin, and ?-catenin. Occludin and E-cadherin were predominantly present in triton X-100-insoluble fraction (Lanes 1 of Figures 1C, 1D ), whereas ZO-1 and ?-catenin were present in triton X-100-insoluble as well as soluble fractions (Lanes 1 of Figures 2C, 2D ). CT increased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100 (Lanes 2 of Figures 1C, 1D ). Interestingly, PMH decreased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100, under baseline as well as CT-stimulated conditions (Lanes 3, 4 of Figures 1C, 1D ). These results confirm the results of Figures 1A/1B and demonstrate that PMH augments cell-cell adhesion by enhancing TJs and AJs, and by abolishing the destabilizing actions of CT on these complexes. Effect of PMH on PC tumor growth/metastasis Our recent studies have shown that CT significantly increases tumor growth and metastasis of PC cell lines; and these effects may be mediated by the disruption of cell-cell adhesion ( 15 , 16 ). Since PMH reversed the disruptive actions of CT on cell-cell adhesion, we tested the hypothesis that PMH attenuates CT-stimulated tumor growth/metastasis. PMH and PC-3M cell proliferation PMH caused a small but significant decline in the rate of baseline PC-3M cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). CT [50 nM, an optimal dose for stimulation of cell proliferation/invasion as determined in ( 11 , 28 )] caused a modest but significance increase in PC-3M proliferation, and PMH remarkably reduced CT-stimulated increase. Moreover, PMH (50 ?M) displayed minimal cytotoxic effect on PC-3M cells as suggested by no decrease in cell viability in its presence. PMH and PC-3M cell invasion PC-3M cells displayed high rate of invasion, and CT (50 nM) caused almost two-fold increase in invaded cells ( Figure 2B ). PMH (50 ?M) had minimal effect on baseline invasion, but almost attenuated CT-stimulated increase. Effect of PMH on metastatic potential: spheroid disaggregation assay To avoid repeated addition of exogenous CT during long incubation period of 48 hours in a spheroid disaggregation assay, we used PC-3M-CT+ cells, which secrete large amounts of CT and have CTR ( 9 ). We first examined the migration of cells from diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on vitronectin (VN), fibronectin (FN), collagen and laminin ( Figure 2C ). This is because the migration of cancer cells depends on surface integrins and integrins have preferential affinity for different ECM proteins ( 29 ). PC-3M-CT+ cells displayed maximal migration on VN and minimal migration on laminin. These results are consistent with our earlier observation that CT increases surface activity ?v?3 integrins, which serve as VN receptors ( 23 ). Considering the involvement of ?v?3 in bone metastasis ( 30 , 31 ), we thought it was important to examine whether PMH and S-PMH affect CT-stimulated spheroid disaggregation on VN. Interestingly, PMH as well as S-PMH maintained integrity of spheroids ( Figure 2E ), blocked spheroid disaggregation and attachment of the cells to VN, and to smaller extent to other various extracellular matrix proteins ( Figure 2C ). Therefore, all subsequent assays were performed on VN. The experiment was then repeated at multiple doses of PMH and S-PMH. Both molecules inhibited spheroid disaggregation/cell migration in a dose-dependent manner with EC50 concentration of 150 ?M for PMH ( Figure 2D ). S-PMH was approximately three times more potent than PMH in inhibiting PC-3M-CT+ spheroid dispersal/cell migration on VN, suggesting that both drugs blocked CT-stimulated ?v?3 activity, a key factor in bone metastasis ( 23 , 32 ). Figure 2E depicts a typical example of untreated/S-PMH-treated PC-3M spheroids after 48 hour. The untreated spheroid is disaggregated as demonstrated by the large circle of migrated cells around the spheroid. However, the presence of S-PMH (50 ?M) completely prevented the spheroidal disaggregation. Figure 2F provides the quantitative data of Figure 2E . PMH and in vivo tumor growth and metastasis: orthotopic PC-3M xenografts in nude mice Orthotopic microenvironment of mouse prostate is more suitable to study tumor growth/metastatic potential of human PC cells than the ectopic microenvironment ( 19 ). We used orthotopic xenograft model to test the effect of PMH/S-PMH on tumor growth/metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells. PC-3M-CT+ tumors grew fairly quickly and metastasized to several host organs as suggested by the fluorograms and growth curves generated from tumor cell fluorescence in diluent-treated mice ( Figures 3A, 3B ). However, fluorograms as well as growth curves suggest that tumors of PMH- and S-PMH-treated mice were remarkably smaller than diluent-treated mice and remained localized within the abdominal cavity. Tumor burden of diluent-treated mice became very large within sixty days after implantation, and the mice displayed signs of morbidity such as immobility and remarkably decreased food intake. At the necropsy, tumors of diluent-treated mice weighed 2.673 g ± 0.268 (n=6). The corresponding tumor masses of PMH-treated and S-PMH-treated mice were significantly lower, and were 1.597 g ± 0.138 (n=12), and 1.405 g ± 0.305 (n=8) respectively ( Figure 3C ). Although PMH and S-PMH displayed similar antitumor activity, that of S-PMH was more robust as it was administered only at 20% of PMH dose. Survival curves of these mice suggest that the treatment with PMH extended the lifespan of mice from 50–57 to 56–65, and that with S-PMH to 65–70 ( Figure 3D ). PMH/S-PMH reduce the formation of distant micrometastases in nu/nu mice Since we implanted PC-3M-CT+ cells expressing red fluorescence protein (RFP), we could detect the presence of fluorescent micrometastases in wet sections of organs. We examined several organs for fluorescent tumor cell colonies, and metastases were graded from ? (no cells) to ++++ (large tumor mass) as depicted in Table 1A . Both, PMH and S-PMH significantly reduced incidents of metastases in several organs ( Table 1B ). Figures 4A–4B provide representative fluromicrographs of different organs of diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated mice. Diluent-treated mice showed large tumor cell colonies in lymph node, seminal vesicles, bone, lungs and smaller tumor cell numbers in other organs including brain. Both, PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells in most organs, and reduced the size of tumor cell colonies in organs where metastases were present. Comparatively, S-PMH seemed more anti-metastatic than PMH. H&E staining of these organs confirmed the presence of micrometastases in these organs ( Supplementary Figures 2 ). S-PMH and tumor growth/metastasis in LPB-Tag mice Because S-PMH displayed potent anti-metastatic effects in orthotopic xenograft model, we tested this molecule in LPB-Tag mice ( 33 ). This line of transgenic mice was established as a model for prostate cancer. The mice develop spontaneous prostate tumors around day 30 post-natal. The mice were administered with 2 ?g S-PMH/g body weight/week intraperitoneally in three equally divided doses per week beginning at Day 30. The treatment was continued for the period of next 60 days, and was terminated on Day 90. Reproductive organs of the mice were harvested and weighed. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produced prostate tumors as depicted in Figure 5A . However, S-PMH-treatment reduced the organ growth by 65% ( Figures 5B ). H&E staining of prostate sections suggest the presence of large tumor mass in the prostate of diluent-treated mice. In contrast, S-PMH-treated mice displayed relatively normal prostate epithelium ( Figure 5C–5D ).  Results CT disrupts tight and adherens junctions (TJs and AJs) in polarized PC-3M cells, and PMH abolishes this action A primary function of epithelia is to create a barrier that separates distinct tissue compartments by forming gap junctions, desmosomes, AJs and TJs. TJs are located on most apical region of the cell membrane, while AJs are located immediately basal to TJs. AJs maintain cell-cell adhesion, while TJs function as a “fence” by sealing the spaces between adjacent cells and maintain apico-basal polarity and as a “barrier” by regulating paracellular permeability to control the diffusion of electrolytes and small molecules ( 24 – 26 ). We have recently reported that CT promotes PC metastasis by disrupting cell-cell adhesion through the disassembly of TJs and AJs ( 16 ). Therefore, we screened several molecules and identified PMH as a molecule that reverses the actions of CT on TJs and AJs. PMH and transepithelial resistance (TER) of polarized PC-3M cells The optimal concentrations of CT, PMH and S-PMH were chosen by previous experimentation. We observed that 50 ?M PMH was most beneficial for the enhancement of TJ/AJ function, whereas 50 nM CT had most disruptive effect. These concentrations were then used in all in vitro studies. We first examined the effect of PMH on TER of diluent- and CT-treated polarized PC-3M cells. TER of PC-3M cultures steadily increased up to 48 hours, and then it stabilized ( Figure 1A ). CT significantly reduced TER. In contrast, PMH significantly increased TER of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cultures, suggesting that PMH has beneficial effects on TJs, and it completely reverses the actions of CT on TER. PMH and paracellular permeability (PCP) of polarized PC-3M cells Barrier function of TJs of PC-3M cultures can be examined by the ability of TMR-dextran to penetrate through the cell layer. Since PMH promoted TJ formation and reversed the action of CT on TER, we examined its effect on PCP of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cell layers. As expected CT caused almost two-fold increase in PCP ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, PMH decreased baseline PCP and abolished CT-induced increase. PMH and translocation of key junction proteins from triton X-100-insoluble to triton X-100-soluble compartment Cell-cell adhesion is controlled by key AJ and TJ proteins that are located either on the membrane (such as claudins, occludins or E-cadherin) or on the intracellular side of the membrane (such as zonula occludens-1 or ?-catenin). Disruption of these junctions causes internalization of integral membrane proteins into cytoplasm, which can be identified by the change in their solubility in triton X-100 (membrane proteins are triton X-100-insoluble and cytoplasmic ones are soluble) ( 27 ). Since the results of Figures 1A and 1B suggested PMH attenuated CT-stimulated disassembly of junctions, we verified this by testing the effect of PMH on CT-stimulated changes in the solubility of key TJ proteins such as zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) and occludin; and AJ proteins such as E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Equal amounts of cell lysate proteins of triton X-100-insoluble or -soluble fractions were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin, and ?-catenin. Occludin and E-cadherin were predominantly present in triton X-100-insoluble fraction (Lanes 1 of Figures 1C, 1D ), whereas ZO-1 and ?-catenin were present in triton X-100-insoluble as well as soluble fractions (Lanes 1 of Figures 2C, 2D ). CT increased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100 (Lanes 2 of Figures 1C, 1D ). Interestingly, PMH decreased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100, under baseline as well as CT-stimulated conditions (Lanes 3, 4 of Figures 1C, 1D ). These results confirm the results of Figures 1A/1B and demonstrate that PMH augments cell-cell adhesion by enhancing TJs and AJs, and by abolishing the destabilizing actions of CT on these complexes. Effect of PMH on PC tumor growth/metastasis Our recent studies have shown that CT significantly increases tumor growth and metastasis of PC cell lines; and these effects may be mediated by the disruption of cell-cell adhesion ( 15 , 16 ). Since PMH reversed the disruptive actions of CT on cell-cell adhesion, we tested the hypothesis that PMH attenuates CT-stimulated tumor growth/metastasis. PMH and PC-3M cell proliferation PMH caused a small but significant decline in the rate of baseline PC-3M cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). CT [50 nM, an optimal dose for stimulation of cell proliferation/invasion as determined in ( 11 , 28 )] caused a modest but significance increase in PC-3M proliferation, and PMH remarkably reduced CT-stimulated increase. Moreover, PMH (50 ?M) displayed minimal cytotoxic effect on PC-3M cells as suggested by no decrease in cell viability in its presence. PMH and PC-3M cell invasion PC-3M cells displayed high rate of invasion, and CT (50 nM) caused almost two-fold increase in invaded cells ( Figure 2B ). PMH (50 ?M) had minimal effect on baseline invasion, but almost attenuated CT-stimulated increase. Effect of PMH on metastatic potential: spheroid disaggregation assay To avoid repeated addition of exogenous CT during long incubation period of 48 hours in a spheroid disaggregation assay, we used PC-3M-CT+ cells, which secrete large amounts of CT and have CTR ( 9 ). We first examined the migration of cells from diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on vitronectin (VN), fibronectin (FN), collagen and laminin ( Figure 2C ). This is because the migration of cancer cells depends on surface integrins and integrins have preferential affinity for different ECM proteins ( 29 ). PC-3M-CT+ cells displayed maximal migration on VN and minimal migration on laminin. These results are consistent with our earlier observation that CT increases surface activity ?v?3 integrins, which serve as VN receptors ( 23 ). Considering the involvement of ?v?3 in bone metastasis ( 30 , 31 ), we thought it was important to examine whether PMH and S-PMH affect CT-stimulated spheroid disaggregation on VN. Interestingly, PMH as well as S-PMH maintained integrity of spheroids ( Figure 2E ), blocked spheroid disaggregation and attachment of the cells to VN, and to smaller extent to other various extracellular matrix proteins ( Figure 2C ). Therefore, all subsequent assays were performed on VN. The experiment was then repeated at multiple doses of PMH and S-PMH. Both molecules inhibited spheroid disaggregation/cell migration in a dose-dependent manner with EC50 concentration of 150 ?M for PMH ( Figure 2D ). S-PMH was approximately three times more potent than PMH in inhibiting PC-3M-CT+ spheroid dispersal/cell migration on VN, suggesting that both drugs blocked CT-stimulated ?v?3 activity, a key factor in bone metastasis ( 23 , 32 ). Figure 2E depicts a typical example of untreated/S-PMH-treated PC-3M spheroids after 48 hour. The untreated spheroid is disaggregated as demonstrated by the large circle of migrated cells around the spheroid. However, the presence of S-PMH (50 ?M) completely prevented the spheroidal disaggregation. Figure 2F provides the quantitative data of Figure 2E . PMH and in vivo tumor growth and metastasis: orthotopic PC-3M xenografts in nude mice Orthotopic microenvironment of mouse prostate is more suitable to study tumor growth/metastatic potential of human PC cells than the ectopic microenvironment ( 19 ). We used orthotopic xenograft model to test the effect of PMH/S-PMH on tumor growth/metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells. PC-3M-CT+ tumors grew fairly quickly and metastasized to several host organs as suggested by the fluorograms and growth curves generated from tumor cell fluorescence in diluent-treated mice ( Figures 3A, 3B ). However, fluorograms as well as growth curves suggest that tumors of PMH- and S-PMH-treated mice were remarkably smaller than diluent-treated mice and remained localized within the abdominal cavity. Tumor burden of diluent-treated mice became very large within sixty days after implantation, and the mice displayed signs of morbidity such as immobility and remarkably decreased food intake. At the necropsy, tumors of diluent-treated mice weighed 2.673 g ± 0.268 (n=6). The corresponding tumor masses of PMH-treated and S-PMH-treated mice were significantly lower, and were 1.597 g ± 0.138 (n=12), and 1.405 g ± 0.305 (n=8) respectively ( Figure 3C ). Although PMH and S-PMH displayed similar antitumor activity, that of S-PMH was more robust as it was administered only at 20% of PMH dose. Survival curves of these mice suggest that the treatment with PMH extended the lifespan of mice from 50–57 to 56–65, and that with S-PMH to 65–70 ( Figure 3D ). PMH/S-PMH reduce the formation of distant micrometastases in nu/nu mice Since we implanted PC-3M-CT+ cells expressing red fluorescence protein (RFP), we could detect the presence of fluorescent micrometastases in wet sections of organs. We examined several organs for fluorescent tumor cell colonies, and metastases were graded from ? (no cells) to ++++ (large tumor mass) as depicted in Table 1A . Both, PMH and S-PMH significantly reduced incidents of metastases in several organs ( Table 1B ). Figures 4A–4B provide representative fluromicrographs of different organs of diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated mice. Diluent-treated mice showed large tumor cell colonies in lymph node, seminal vesicles, bone, lungs and smaller tumor cell numbers in other organs including brain. Both, PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells in most organs, and reduced the size of tumor cell colonies in organs where metastases were present. Comparatively, S-PMH seemed more anti-metastatic than PMH. H&E staining of these organs confirmed the presence of micrometastases in these organs ( Supplementary Figures 2 ). S-PMH and tumor growth/metastasis in LPB-Tag mice Because S-PMH displayed potent anti-metastatic effects in orthotopic xenograft model, we tested this molecule in LPB-Tag mice ( 33 ). This line of transgenic mice was established as a model for prostate cancer. The mice develop spontaneous prostate tumors around day 30 post-natal. The mice were administered with 2 ?g S-PMH/g body weight/week intraperitoneally in three equally divided doses per week beginning at Day 30. The treatment was continued for the period of next 60 days, and was terminated on Day 90. Reproductive organs of the mice were harvested and weighed. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produced prostate tumors as depicted in Figure 5A . However, S-PMH-treatment reduced the organ growth by 65% ( Figures 5B ). H&E staining of prostate sections suggest the presence of large tumor mass in the prostate of diluent-treated mice. In contrast, S-PMH-treated mice displayed relatively normal prostate epithelium ( Figure 5C–5D ).  CT disrupts tight and adherens junctions (TJs and AJs) in polarized PC-3M cells, and PMH abolishes this action A primary function of epithelia is to create a barrier that separates distinct tissue compartments by forming gap junctions, desmosomes, AJs and TJs. TJs are located on most apical region of the cell membrane, while AJs are located immediately basal to TJs. AJs maintain cell-cell adhesion, while TJs function as a “fence” by sealing the spaces between adjacent cells and maintain apico-basal polarity and as a “barrier” by regulating paracellular permeability to control the diffusion of electrolytes and small molecules ( 24 – 26 ). We have recently reported that CT promotes PC metastasis by disrupting cell-cell adhesion through the disassembly of TJs and AJs ( 16 ). Therefore, we screened several molecules and identified PMH as a molecule that reverses the actions of CT on TJs and AJs. PMH and transepithelial resistance (TER) of polarized PC-3M cells The optimal concentrations of CT, PMH and S-PMH were chosen by previous experimentation. We observed that 50 ?M PMH was most beneficial for the enhancement of TJ/AJ function, whereas 50 nM CT had most disruptive effect. These concentrations were then used in all in vitro studies. We first examined the effect of PMH on TER of diluent- and CT-treated polarized PC-3M cells. TER of PC-3M cultures steadily increased up to 48 hours, and then it stabilized ( Figure 1A ). CT significantly reduced TER. In contrast, PMH significantly increased TER of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cultures, suggesting that PMH has beneficial effects on TJs, and it completely reverses the actions of CT on TER. PMH and paracellular permeability (PCP) of polarized PC-3M cells Barrier function of TJs of PC-3M cultures can be examined by the ability of TMR-dextran to penetrate through the cell layer. Since PMH promoted TJ formation and reversed the action of CT on TER, we examined its effect on PCP of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cell layers. As expected CT caused almost two-fold increase in PCP ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, PMH decreased baseline PCP and abolished CT-induced increase. PMH and translocation of key junction proteins from triton X-100-insoluble to triton X-100-soluble compartment Cell-cell adhesion is controlled by key AJ and TJ proteins that are located either on the membrane (such as claudins, occludins or E-cadherin) or on the intracellular side of the membrane (such as zonula occludens-1 or ?-catenin). Disruption of these junctions causes internalization of integral membrane proteins into cytoplasm, which can be identified by the change in their solubility in triton X-100 (membrane proteins are triton X-100-insoluble and cytoplasmic ones are soluble) ( 27 ). Since the results of Figures 1A and 1B suggested PMH attenuated CT-stimulated disassembly of junctions, we verified this by testing the effect of PMH on CT-stimulated changes in the solubility of key TJ proteins such as zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) and occludin; and AJ proteins such as E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Equal amounts of cell lysate proteins of triton X-100-insoluble or -soluble fractions were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin, and ?-catenin. Occludin and E-cadherin were predominantly present in triton X-100-insoluble fraction (Lanes 1 of Figures 1C, 1D ), whereas ZO-1 and ?-catenin were present in triton X-100-insoluble as well as soluble fractions (Lanes 1 of Figures 2C, 2D ). CT increased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100 (Lanes 2 of Figures 1C, 1D ). Interestingly, PMH decreased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100, under baseline as well as CT-stimulated conditions (Lanes 3, 4 of Figures 1C, 1D ). These results confirm the results of Figures 1A/1B and demonstrate that PMH augments cell-cell adhesion by enhancing TJs and AJs, and by abolishing the destabilizing actions of CT on these complexes.  CT disrupts tight and adherens junctions (TJs and AJs) in polarized PC-3M cells, and PMH abolishes this action A primary function of epithelia is to create a barrier that separates distinct tissue compartments by forming gap junctions, desmosomes, AJs and TJs. TJs are located on most apical region of the cell membrane, while AJs are located immediately basal to TJs. AJs maintain cell-cell adhesion, while TJs function as a “fence” by sealing the spaces between adjacent cells and maintain apico-basal polarity and as a “barrier” by regulating paracellular permeability to control the diffusion of electrolytes and small molecules ( 24 – 26 ). We have recently reported that CT promotes PC metastasis by disrupting cell-cell adhesion through the disassembly of TJs and AJs ( 16 ). Therefore, we screened several molecules and identified PMH as a molecule that reverses the actions of CT on TJs and AJs. PMH and transepithelial resistance (TER) of polarized PC-3M cells The optimal concentrations of CT, PMH and S-PMH were chosen by previous experimentation. We observed that 50 ?M PMH was most beneficial for the enhancement of TJ/AJ function, whereas 50 nM CT had most disruptive effect. These concentrations were then used in all in vitro studies. We first examined the effect of PMH on TER of diluent- and CT-treated polarized PC-3M cells. TER of PC-3M cultures steadily increased up to 48 hours, and then it stabilized ( Figure 1A ). CT significantly reduced TER. In contrast, PMH significantly increased TER of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cultures, suggesting that PMH has beneficial effects on TJs, and it completely reverses the actions of CT on TER. PMH and paracellular permeability (PCP) of polarized PC-3M cells Barrier function of TJs of PC-3M cultures can be examined by the ability of TMR-dextran to penetrate through the cell layer. Since PMH promoted TJ formation and reversed the action of CT on TER, we examined its effect on PCP of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cell layers. As expected CT caused almost two-fold increase in PCP ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, PMH decreased baseline PCP and abolished CT-induced increase. PMH and translocation of key junction proteins from triton X-100-insoluble to triton X-100-soluble compartment Cell-cell adhesion is controlled by key AJ and TJ proteins that are located either on the membrane (such as claudins, occludins or E-cadherin) or on the intracellular side of the membrane (such as zonula occludens-1 or ?-catenin). Disruption of these junctions causes internalization of integral membrane proteins into cytoplasm, which can be identified by the change in their solubility in triton X-100 (membrane proteins are triton X-100-insoluble and cytoplasmic ones are soluble) ( 27 ). Since the results of Figures 1A and 1B suggested PMH attenuated CT-stimulated disassembly of junctions, we verified this by testing the effect of PMH on CT-stimulated changes in the solubility of key TJ proteins such as zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) and occludin; and AJ proteins such as E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Equal amounts of cell lysate proteins of triton X-100-insoluble or -soluble fractions were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin, and ?-catenin. Occludin and E-cadherin were predominantly present in triton X-100-insoluble fraction (Lanes 1 of Figures 1C, 1D ), whereas ZO-1 and ?-catenin were present in triton X-100-insoluble as well as soluble fractions (Lanes 1 of Figures 2C, 2D ). CT increased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100 (Lanes 2 of Figures 1C, 1D ). Interestingly, PMH decreased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100, under baseline as well as CT-stimulated conditions (Lanes 3, 4 of Figures 1C, 1D ). These results confirm the results of Figures 1A/1B and demonstrate that PMH augments cell-cell adhesion by enhancing TJs and AJs, and by abolishing the destabilizing actions of CT on these complexes.  PMH and transepithelial resistance (TER) of polarized PC-3M cells The optimal concentrations of CT, PMH and S-PMH were chosen by previous experimentation. We observed that 50 ?M PMH was most beneficial for the enhancement of TJ/AJ function, whereas 50 nM CT had most disruptive effect. These concentrations were then used in all in vitro studies. We first examined the effect of PMH on TER of diluent- and CT-treated polarized PC-3M cells. TER of PC-3M cultures steadily increased up to 48 hours, and then it stabilized ( Figure 1A ). CT significantly reduced TER. In contrast, PMH significantly increased TER of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cultures, suggesting that PMH has beneficial effects on TJs, and it completely reverses the actions of CT on TER.  PMH and transepithelial resistance (TER) of polarized PC-3M cells The optimal concentrations of CT, PMH and S-PMH were chosen by previous experimentation. We observed that 50 ?M PMH was most beneficial for the enhancement of TJ/AJ function, whereas 50 nM CT had most disruptive effect. These concentrations were then used in all in vitro studies. We first examined the effect of PMH on TER of diluent- and CT-treated polarized PC-3M cells. TER of PC-3M cultures steadily increased up to 48 hours, and then it stabilized ( Figure 1A ). CT significantly reduced TER. In contrast, PMH significantly increased TER of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cultures, suggesting that PMH has beneficial effects on TJs, and it completely reverses the actions of CT on TER.  PMH and paracellular permeability (PCP) of polarized PC-3M cells Barrier function of TJs of PC-3M cultures can be examined by the ability of TMR-dextran to penetrate through the cell layer. Since PMH promoted TJ formation and reversed the action of CT on TER, we examined its effect on PCP of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cell layers. As expected CT caused almost two-fold increase in PCP ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, PMH decreased baseline PCP and abolished CT-induced increase.  PMH and paracellular permeability (PCP) of polarized PC-3M cells Barrier function of TJs of PC-3M cultures can be examined by the ability of TMR-dextran to penetrate through the cell layer. Since PMH promoted TJ formation and reversed the action of CT on TER, we examined its effect on PCP of diluent- and CT-treated PC-3M cell layers. As expected CT caused almost two-fold increase in PCP ( Figure 1B ). In contrast, PMH decreased baseline PCP and abolished CT-induced increase.  PMH and translocation of key junction proteins from triton X-100-insoluble to triton X-100-soluble compartment Cell-cell adhesion is controlled by key AJ and TJ proteins that are located either on the membrane (such as claudins, occludins or E-cadherin) or on the intracellular side of the membrane (such as zonula occludens-1 or ?-catenin). Disruption of these junctions causes internalization of integral membrane proteins into cytoplasm, which can be identified by the change in their solubility in triton X-100 (membrane proteins are triton X-100-insoluble and cytoplasmic ones are soluble) ( 27 ). Since the results of Figures 1A and 1B suggested PMH attenuated CT-stimulated disassembly of junctions, we verified this by testing the effect of PMH on CT-stimulated changes in the solubility of key TJ proteins such as zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) and occludin; and AJ proteins such as E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Equal amounts of cell lysate proteins of triton X-100-insoluble or -soluble fractions were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin, and ?-catenin. Occludin and E-cadherin were predominantly present in triton X-100-insoluble fraction (Lanes 1 of Figures 1C, 1D ), whereas ZO-1 and ?-catenin were present in triton X-100-insoluble as well as soluble fractions (Lanes 1 of Figures 2C, 2D ). CT increased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100 (Lanes 2 of Figures 1C, 1D ). Interestingly, PMH decreased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100, under baseline as well as CT-stimulated conditions (Lanes 3, 4 of Figures 1C, 1D ). These results confirm the results of Figures 1A/1B and demonstrate that PMH augments cell-cell adhesion by enhancing TJs and AJs, and by abolishing the destabilizing actions of CT on these complexes.  PMH and translocation of key junction proteins from triton X-100-insoluble to triton X-100-soluble compartment Cell-cell adhesion is controlled by key AJ and TJ proteins that are located either on the membrane (such as claudins, occludins or E-cadherin) or on the intracellular side of the membrane (such as zonula occludens-1 or ?-catenin). Disruption of these junctions causes internalization of integral membrane proteins into cytoplasm, which can be identified by the change in their solubility in triton X-100 (membrane proteins are triton X-100-insoluble and cytoplasmic ones are soluble) ( 27 ). Since the results of Figures 1A and 1B suggested PMH attenuated CT-stimulated disassembly of junctions, we verified this by testing the effect of PMH on CT-stimulated changes in the solubility of key TJ proteins such as zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) and occludin; and AJ proteins such as E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Equal amounts of cell lysate proteins of triton X-100-insoluble or -soluble fractions were loaded onto a SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin, and ?-catenin. Occludin and E-cadherin were predominantly present in triton X-100-insoluble fraction (Lanes 1 of Figures 1C, 1D ), whereas ZO-1 and ?-catenin were present in triton X-100-insoluble as well as soluble fractions (Lanes 1 of Figures 2C, 2D ). CT increased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100 (Lanes 2 of Figures 1C, 1D ). Interestingly, PMH decreased the solubility of all four proteins in triton X-100, under baseline as well as CT-stimulated conditions (Lanes 3, 4 of Figures 1C, 1D ). These results confirm the results of Figures 1A/1B and demonstrate that PMH augments cell-cell adhesion by enhancing TJs and AJs, and by abolishing the destabilizing actions of CT on these complexes.  Effect of PMH on PC tumor growth/metastasis Our recent studies have shown that CT significantly increases tumor growth and metastasis of PC cell lines; and these effects may be mediated by the disruption of cell-cell adhesion ( 15 , 16 ). Since PMH reversed the disruptive actions of CT on cell-cell adhesion, we tested the hypothesis that PMH attenuates CT-stimulated tumor growth/metastasis. PMH and PC-3M cell proliferation PMH caused a small but significant decline in the rate of baseline PC-3M cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). CT [50 nM, an optimal dose for stimulation of cell proliferation/invasion as determined in ( 11 , 28 )] caused a modest but significance increase in PC-3M proliferation, and PMH remarkably reduced CT-stimulated increase. Moreover, PMH (50 ?M) displayed minimal cytotoxic effect on PC-3M cells as suggested by no decrease in cell viability in its presence. PMH and PC-3M cell invasion PC-3M cells displayed high rate of invasion, and CT (50 nM) caused almost two-fold increase in invaded cells ( Figure 2B ). PMH (50 ?M) had minimal effect on baseline invasion, but almost attenuated CT-stimulated increase. Effect of PMH on metastatic potential: spheroid disaggregation assay To avoid repeated addition of exogenous CT during long incubation period of 48 hours in a spheroid disaggregation assay, we used PC-3M-CT+ cells, which secrete large amounts of CT and have CTR ( 9 ). We first examined the migration of cells from diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on vitronectin (VN), fibronectin (FN), collagen and laminin ( Figure 2C ). This is because the migration of cancer cells depends on surface integrins and integrins have preferential affinity for different ECM proteins ( 29 ). PC-3M-CT+ cells displayed maximal migration on VN and minimal migration on laminin. These results are consistent with our earlier observation that CT increases surface activity ?v?3 integrins, which serve as VN receptors ( 23 ). Considering the involvement of ?v?3 in bone metastasis ( 30 , 31 ), we thought it was important to examine whether PMH and S-PMH affect CT-stimulated spheroid disaggregation on VN. Interestingly, PMH as well as S-PMH maintained integrity of spheroids ( Figure 2E ), blocked spheroid disaggregation and attachment of the cells to VN, and to smaller extent to other various extracellular matrix proteins ( Figure 2C ). Therefore, all subsequent assays were performed on VN. The experiment was then repeated at multiple doses of PMH and S-PMH. Both molecules inhibited spheroid disaggregation/cell migration in a dose-dependent manner with EC50 concentration of 150 ?M for PMH ( Figure 2D ). S-PMH was approximately three times more potent than PMH in inhibiting PC-3M-CT+ spheroid dispersal/cell migration on VN, suggesting that both drugs blocked CT-stimulated ?v?3 activity, a key factor in bone metastasis ( 23 , 32 ). Figure 2E depicts a typical example of untreated/S-PMH-treated PC-3M spheroids after 48 hour. The untreated spheroid is disaggregated as demonstrated by the large circle of migrated cells around the spheroid. However, the presence of S-PMH (50 ?M) completely prevented the spheroidal disaggregation. Figure 2F provides the quantitative data of Figure 2E . PMH and in vivo tumor growth and metastasis: orthotopic PC-3M xenografts in nude mice Orthotopic microenvironment of mouse prostate is more suitable to study tumor growth/metastatic potential of human PC cells than the ectopic microenvironment ( 19 ). We used orthotopic xenograft model to test the effect of PMH/S-PMH on tumor growth/metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells. PC-3M-CT+ tumors grew fairly quickly and metastasized to several host organs as suggested by the fluorograms and growth curves generated from tumor cell fluorescence in diluent-treated mice ( Figures 3A, 3B ). However, fluorograms as well as growth curves suggest that tumors of PMH- and S-PMH-treated mice were remarkably smaller than diluent-treated mice and remained localized within the abdominal cavity. Tumor burden of diluent-treated mice became very large within sixty days after implantation, and the mice displayed signs of morbidity such as immobility and remarkably decreased food intake. At the necropsy, tumors of diluent-treated mice weighed 2.673 g ± 0.268 (n=6). The corresponding tumor masses of PMH-treated and S-PMH-treated mice were significantly lower, and were 1.597 g ± 0.138 (n=12), and 1.405 g ± 0.305 (n=8) respectively ( Figure 3C ). Although PMH and S-PMH displayed similar antitumor activity, that of S-PMH was more robust as it was administered only at 20% of PMH dose. Survival curves of these mice suggest that the treatment with PMH extended the lifespan of mice from 50–57 to 56–65, and that with S-PMH to 65–70 ( Figure 3D ). PMH/S-PMH reduce the formation of distant micrometastases in nu/nu mice Since we implanted PC-3M-CT+ cells expressing red fluorescence protein (RFP), we could detect the presence of fluorescent micrometastases in wet sections of organs. We examined several organs for fluorescent tumor cell colonies, and metastases were graded from ? (no cells) to ++++ (large tumor mass) as depicted in Table 1A . Both, PMH and S-PMH significantly reduced incidents of metastases in several organs ( Table 1B ). Figures 4A–4B provide representative fluromicrographs of different organs of diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated mice. Diluent-treated mice showed large tumor cell colonies in lymph node, seminal vesicles, bone, lungs and smaller tumor cell numbers in other organs including brain. Both, PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells in most organs, and reduced the size of tumor cell colonies in organs where metastases were present. Comparatively, S-PMH seemed more anti-metastatic than PMH. H&E staining of these organs confirmed the presence of micrometastases in these organs ( Supplementary Figures 2 ). S-PMH and tumor growth/metastasis in LPB-Tag mice Because S-PMH displayed potent anti-metastatic effects in orthotopic xenograft model, we tested this molecule in LPB-Tag mice ( 33 ). This line of transgenic mice was established as a model for prostate cancer. The mice develop spontaneous prostate tumors around day 30 post-natal. The mice were administered with 2 ?g S-PMH/g body weight/week intraperitoneally in three equally divided doses per week beginning at Day 30. The treatment was continued for the period of next 60 days, and was terminated on Day 90. Reproductive organs of the mice were harvested and weighed. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produced prostate tumors as depicted in Figure 5A . However, S-PMH-treatment reduced the organ growth by 65% ( Figures 5B ). H&E staining of prostate sections suggest the presence of large tumor mass in the prostate of diluent-treated mice. In contrast, S-PMH-treated mice displayed relatively normal prostate epithelium ( Figure 5C–5D ).  Effect of PMH on PC tumor growth/metastasis Our recent studies have shown that CT significantly increases tumor growth and metastasis of PC cell lines; and these effects may be mediated by the disruption of cell-cell adhesion ( 15 , 16 ). Since PMH reversed the disruptive actions of CT on cell-cell adhesion, we tested the hypothesis that PMH attenuates CT-stimulated tumor growth/metastasis. PMH and PC-3M cell proliferation PMH caused a small but significant decline in the rate of baseline PC-3M cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). CT [50 nM, an optimal dose for stimulation of cell proliferation/invasion as determined in ( 11 , 28 )] caused a modest but significance increase in PC-3M proliferation, and PMH remarkably reduced CT-stimulated increase. Moreover, PMH (50 ?M) displayed minimal cytotoxic effect on PC-3M cells as suggested by no decrease in cell viability in its presence. PMH and PC-3M cell invasion PC-3M cells displayed high rate of invasion, and CT (50 nM) caused almost two-fold increase in invaded cells ( Figure 2B ). PMH (50 ?M) had minimal effect on baseline invasion, but almost attenuated CT-stimulated increase. Effect of PMH on metastatic potential: spheroid disaggregation assay To avoid repeated addition of exogenous CT during long incubation period of 48 hours in a spheroid disaggregation assay, we used PC-3M-CT+ cells, which secrete large amounts of CT and have CTR ( 9 ). We first examined the migration of cells from diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on vitronectin (VN), fibronectin (FN), collagen and laminin ( Figure 2C ). This is because the migration of cancer cells depends on surface integrins and integrins have preferential affinity for different ECM proteins ( 29 ). PC-3M-CT+ cells displayed maximal migration on VN and minimal migration on laminin. These results are consistent with our earlier observation that CT increases surface activity ?v?3 integrins, which serve as VN receptors ( 23 ). Considering the involvement of ?v?3 in bone metastasis ( 30 , 31 ), we thought it was important to examine whether PMH and S-PMH affect CT-stimulated spheroid disaggregation on VN. Interestingly, PMH as well as S-PMH maintained integrity of spheroids ( Figure 2E ), blocked spheroid disaggregation and attachment of the cells to VN, and to smaller extent to other various extracellular matrix proteins ( Figure 2C ). Therefore, all subsequent assays were performed on VN. The experiment was then repeated at multiple doses of PMH and S-PMH. Both molecules inhibited spheroid disaggregation/cell migration in a dose-dependent manner with EC50 concentration of 150 ?M for PMH ( Figure 2D ). S-PMH was approximately three times more potent than PMH in inhibiting PC-3M-CT+ spheroid dispersal/cell migration on VN, suggesting that both drugs blocked CT-stimulated ?v?3 activity, a key factor in bone metastasis ( 23 , 32 ). Figure 2E depicts a typical example of untreated/S-PMH-treated PC-3M spheroids after 48 hour. The untreated spheroid is disaggregated as demonstrated by the large circle of migrated cells around the spheroid. However, the presence of S-PMH (50 ?M) completely prevented the spheroidal disaggregation. Figure 2F provides the quantitative data of Figure 2E . PMH and in vivo tumor growth and metastasis: orthotopic PC-3M xenografts in nude mice Orthotopic microenvironment of mouse prostate is more suitable to study tumor growth/metastatic potential of human PC cells than the ectopic microenvironment ( 19 ). We used orthotopic xenograft model to test the effect of PMH/S-PMH on tumor growth/metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells. PC-3M-CT+ tumors grew fairly quickly and metastasized to several host organs as suggested by the fluorograms and growth curves generated from tumor cell fluorescence in diluent-treated mice ( Figures 3A, 3B ). However, fluorograms as well as growth curves suggest that tumors of PMH- and S-PMH-treated mice were remarkably smaller than diluent-treated mice and remained localized within the abdominal cavity. Tumor burden of diluent-treated mice became very large within sixty days after implantation, and the mice displayed signs of morbidity such as immobility and remarkably decreased food intake. At the necropsy, tumors of diluent-treated mice weighed 2.673 g ± 0.268 (n=6). The corresponding tumor masses of PMH-treated and S-PMH-treated mice were significantly lower, and were 1.597 g ± 0.138 (n=12), and 1.405 g ± 0.305 (n=8) respectively ( Figure 3C ). Although PMH and S-PMH displayed similar antitumor activity, that of S-PMH was more robust as it was administered only at 20% of PMH dose. Survival curves of these mice suggest that the treatment with PMH extended the lifespan of mice from 50–57 to 56–65, and that with S-PMH to 65–70 ( Figure 3D ). PMH/S-PMH reduce the formation of distant micrometastases in nu/nu mice Since we implanted PC-3M-CT+ cells expressing red fluorescence protein (RFP), we could detect the presence of fluorescent micrometastases in wet sections of organs. We examined several organs for fluorescent tumor cell colonies, and metastases were graded from ? (no cells) to ++++ (large tumor mass) as depicted in Table 1A . Both, PMH and S-PMH significantly reduced incidents of metastases in several organs ( Table 1B ). Figures 4A–4B provide representative fluromicrographs of different organs of diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated mice. Diluent-treated mice showed large tumor cell colonies in lymph node, seminal vesicles, bone, lungs and smaller tumor cell numbers in other organs including brain. Both, PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells in most organs, and reduced the size of tumor cell colonies in organs where metastases were present. Comparatively, S-PMH seemed more anti-metastatic than PMH. H&E staining of these organs confirmed the presence of micrometastases in these organs ( Supplementary Figures 2 ). S-PMH and tumor growth/metastasis in LPB-Tag mice Because S-PMH displayed potent anti-metastatic effects in orthotopic xenograft model, we tested this molecule in LPB-Tag mice ( 33 ). This line of transgenic mice was established as a model for prostate cancer. The mice develop spontaneous prostate tumors around day 30 post-natal. The mice were administered with 2 ?g S-PMH/g body weight/week intraperitoneally in three equally divided doses per week beginning at Day 30. The treatment was continued for the period of next 60 days, and was terminated on Day 90. Reproductive organs of the mice were harvested and weighed. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produced prostate tumors as depicted in Figure 5A . However, S-PMH-treatment reduced the organ growth by 65% ( Figures 5B ). H&E staining of prostate sections suggest the presence of large tumor mass in the prostate of diluent-treated mice. In contrast, S-PMH-treated mice displayed relatively normal prostate epithelium ( Figure 5C–5D ).  PMH and PC-3M cell proliferation PMH caused a small but significant decline in the rate of baseline PC-3M cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). CT [50 nM, an optimal dose for stimulation of cell proliferation/invasion as determined in ( 11 , 28 )] caused a modest but significance increase in PC-3M proliferation, and PMH remarkably reduced CT-stimulated increase. Moreover, PMH (50 ?M) displayed minimal cytotoxic effect on PC-3M cells as suggested by no decrease in cell viability in its presence.  PMH and PC-3M cell proliferation PMH caused a small but significant decline in the rate of baseline PC-3M cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). CT [50 nM, an optimal dose for stimulation of cell proliferation/invasion as determined in ( 11 , 28 )] caused a modest but significance increase in PC-3M proliferation, and PMH remarkably reduced CT-stimulated increase. Moreover, PMH (50 ?M) displayed minimal cytotoxic effect on PC-3M cells as suggested by no decrease in cell viability in its presence.  PMH and PC-3M cell invasion PC-3M cells displayed high rate of invasion, and CT (50 nM) caused almost two-fold increase in invaded cells ( Figure 2B ). PMH (50 ?M) had minimal effect on baseline invasion, but almost attenuated CT-stimulated increase.  PMH and PC-3M cell invasion PC-3M cells displayed high rate of invasion, and CT (50 nM) caused almost two-fold increase in invaded cells ( Figure 2B ). PMH (50 ?M) had minimal effect on baseline invasion, but almost attenuated CT-stimulated increase.  Effect of PMH on metastatic potential: spheroid disaggregation assay To avoid repeated addition of exogenous CT during long incubation period of 48 hours in a spheroid disaggregation assay, we used PC-3M-CT+ cells, which secrete large amounts of CT and have CTR ( 9 ). We first examined the migration of cells from diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on vitronectin (VN), fibronectin (FN), collagen and laminin ( Figure 2C ). This is because the migration of cancer cells depends on surface integrins and integrins have preferential affinity for different ECM proteins ( 29 ). PC-3M-CT+ cells displayed maximal migration on VN and minimal migration on laminin. These results are consistent with our earlier observation that CT increases surface activity ?v?3 integrins, which serve as VN receptors ( 23 ). Considering the involvement of ?v?3 in bone metastasis ( 30 , 31 ), we thought it was important to examine whether PMH and S-PMH affect CT-stimulated spheroid disaggregation on VN. Interestingly, PMH as well as S-PMH maintained integrity of spheroids ( Figure 2E ), blocked spheroid disaggregation and attachment of the cells to VN, and to smaller extent to other various extracellular matrix proteins ( Figure 2C ). Therefore, all subsequent assays were performed on VN. The experiment was then repeated at multiple doses of PMH and S-PMH. Both molecules inhibited spheroid disaggregation/cell migration in a dose-dependent manner with EC50 concentration of 150 ?M for PMH ( Figure 2D ). S-PMH was approximately three times more potent than PMH in inhibiting PC-3M-CT+ spheroid dispersal/cell migration on VN, suggesting that both drugs blocked CT-stimulated ?v?3 activity, a key factor in bone metastasis ( 23 , 32 ). Figure 2E depicts a typical example of untreated/S-PMH-treated PC-3M spheroids after 48 hour. The untreated spheroid is disaggregated as demonstrated by the large circle of migrated cells around the spheroid. However, the presence of S-PMH (50 ?M) completely prevented the spheroidal disaggregation. Figure 2F provides the quantitative data of Figure 2E .  Effect of PMH on metastatic potential: spheroid disaggregation assay To avoid repeated addition of exogenous CT during long incubation period of 48 hours in a spheroid disaggregation assay, we used PC-3M-CT+ cells, which secrete large amounts of CT and have CTR ( 9 ). We first examined the migration of cells from diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on vitronectin (VN), fibronectin (FN), collagen and laminin ( Figure 2C ). This is because the migration of cancer cells depends on surface integrins and integrins have preferential affinity for different ECM proteins ( 29 ). PC-3M-CT+ cells displayed maximal migration on VN and minimal migration on laminin. These results are consistent with our earlier observation that CT increases surface activity ?v?3 integrins, which serve as VN receptors ( 23 ). Considering the involvement of ?v?3 in bone metastasis ( 30 , 31 ), we thought it was important to examine whether PMH and S-PMH affect CT-stimulated spheroid disaggregation on VN. Interestingly, PMH as well as S-PMH maintained integrity of spheroids ( Figure 2E ), blocked spheroid disaggregation and attachment of the cells to VN, and to smaller extent to other various extracellular matrix proteins ( Figure 2C ). Therefore, all subsequent assays were performed on VN. The experiment was then repeated at multiple doses of PMH and S-PMH. Both molecules inhibited spheroid disaggregation/cell migration in a dose-dependent manner with EC50 concentration of 150 ?M for PMH ( Figure 2D ). S-PMH was approximately three times more potent than PMH in inhibiting PC-3M-CT+ spheroid dispersal/cell migration on VN, suggesting that both drugs blocked CT-stimulated ?v?3 activity, a key factor in bone metastasis ( 23 , 32 ). Figure 2E depicts a typical example of untreated/S-PMH-treated PC-3M spheroids after 48 hour. The untreated spheroid is disaggregated as demonstrated by the large circle of migrated cells around the spheroid. However, the presence of S-PMH (50 ?M) completely prevented the spheroidal disaggregation. Figure 2F provides the quantitative data of Figure 2E .  PMH and in vivo tumor growth and metastasis: orthotopic PC-3M xenografts in nude mice Orthotopic microenvironment of mouse prostate is more suitable to study tumor growth/metastatic potential of human PC cells than the ectopic microenvironment ( 19 ). We used orthotopic xenograft model to test the effect of PMH/S-PMH on tumor growth/metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells. PC-3M-CT+ tumors grew fairly quickly and metastasized to several host organs as suggested by the fluorograms and growth curves generated from tumor cell fluorescence in diluent-treated mice ( Figures 3A, 3B ). However, fluorograms as well as growth curves suggest that tumors of PMH- and S-PMH-treated mice were remarkably smaller than diluent-treated mice and remained localized within the abdominal cavity. Tumor burden of diluent-treated mice became very large within sixty days after implantation, and the mice displayed signs of morbidity such as immobility and remarkably decreased food intake. At the necropsy, tumors of diluent-treated mice weighed 2.673 g ± 0.268 (n=6). The corresponding tumor masses of PMH-treated and S-PMH-treated mice were significantly lower, and were 1.597 g ± 0.138 (n=12), and 1.405 g ± 0.305 (n=8) respectively ( Figure 3C ). Although PMH and S-PMH displayed similar antitumor activity, that of S-PMH was more robust as it was administered only at 20% of PMH dose. Survival curves of these mice suggest that the treatment with PMH extended the lifespan of mice from 50–57 to 56–65, and that with S-PMH to 65–70 ( Figure 3D ).  PMH and in vivo tumor growth and metastasis: orthotopic PC-3M xenografts in nude mice Orthotopic microenvironment of mouse prostate is more suitable to study tumor growth/metastatic potential of human PC cells than the ectopic microenvironment ( 19 ). We used orthotopic xenograft model to test the effect of PMH/S-PMH on tumor growth/metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells. PC-3M-CT+ tumors grew fairly quickly and metastasized to several host organs as suggested by the fluorograms and growth curves generated from tumor cell fluorescence in diluent-treated mice ( Figures 3A, 3B ). However, fluorograms as well as growth curves suggest that tumors of PMH- and S-PMH-treated mice were remarkably smaller than diluent-treated mice and remained localized within the abdominal cavity. Tumor burden of diluent-treated mice became very large within sixty days after implantation, and the mice displayed signs of morbidity such as immobility and remarkably decreased food intake. At the necropsy, tumors of diluent-treated mice weighed 2.673 g ± 0.268 (n=6). The corresponding tumor masses of PMH-treated and S-PMH-treated mice were significantly lower, and were 1.597 g ± 0.138 (n=12), and 1.405 g ± 0.305 (n=8) respectively ( Figure 3C ). Although PMH and S-PMH displayed similar antitumor activity, that of S-PMH was more robust as it was administered only at 20% of PMH dose. Survival curves of these mice suggest that the treatment with PMH extended the lifespan of mice from 50–57 to 56–65, and that with S-PMH to 65–70 ( Figure 3D ).  PMH/S-PMH reduce the formation of distant micrometastases in nu/nu mice Since we implanted PC-3M-CT+ cells expressing red fluorescence protein (RFP), we could detect the presence of fluorescent micrometastases in wet sections of organs. We examined several organs for fluorescent tumor cell colonies, and metastases were graded from ? (no cells) to ++++ (large tumor mass) as depicted in Table 1A . Both, PMH and S-PMH significantly reduced incidents of metastases in several organs ( Table 1B ). Figures 4A–4B provide representative fluromicrographs of different organs of diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated mice. Diluent-treated mice showed large tumor cell colonies in lymph node, seminal vesicles, bone, lungs and smaller tumor cell numbers in other organs including brain. Both, PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells in most organs, and reduced the size of tumor cell colonies in organs where metastases were present. Comparatively, S-PMH seemed more anti-metastatic than PMH. H&E staining of these organs confirmed the presence of micrometastases in these organs ( Supplementary Figures 2 ).  PMH/S-PMH reduce the formation of distant micrometastases in nu/nu mice Since we implanted PC-3M-CT+ cells expressing red fluorescence protein (RFP), we could detect the presence of fluorescent micrometastases in wet sections of organs. We examined several organs for fluorescent tumor cell colonies, and metastases were graded from ? (no cells) to ++++ (large tumor mass) as depicted in Table 1A . Both, PMH and S-PMH significantly reduced incidents of metastases in several organs ( Table 1B ). Figures 4A–4B provide representative fluromicrographs of different organs of diluent/PMH/S-PMH-treated mice. Diluent-treated mice showed large tumor cell colonies in lymph node, seminal vesicles, bone, lungs and smaller tumor cell numbers in other organs including brain. Both, PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased metastasis of PC-3M-CT+ cells in most organs, and reduced the size of tumor cell colonies in organs where metastases were present. Comparatively, S-PMH seemed more anti-metastatic than PMH. H&E staining of these organs confirmed the presence of micrometastases in these organs ( Supplementary Figures 2 ).  S-PMH and tumor growth/metastasis in LPB-Tag mice Because S-PMH displayed potent anti-metastatic effects in orthotopic xenograft model, we tested this molecule in LPB-Tag mice ( 33 ). This line of transgenic mice was established as a model for prostate cancer. The mice develop spontaneous prostate tumors around day 30 post-natal. The mice were administered with 2 ?g S-PMH/g body weight/week intraperitoneally in three equally divided doses per week beginning at Day 30. The treatment was continued for the period of next 60 days, and was terminated on Day 90. Reproductive organs of the mice were harvested and weighed. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produced prostate tumors as depicted in Figure 5A . However, S-PMH-treatment reduced the organ growth by 65% ( Figures 5B ). H&E staining of prostate sections suggest the presence of large tumor mass in the prostate of diluent-treated mice. In contrast, S-PMH-treated mice displayed relatively normal prostate epithelium ( Figure 5C–5D ).  S-PMH and tumor growth/metastasis in LPB-Tag mice Because S-PMH displayed potent anti-metastatic effects in orthotopic xenograft model, we tested this molecule in LPB-Tag mice ( 33 ). This line of transgenic mice was established as a model for prostate cancer. The mice develop spontaneous prostate tumors around day 30 post-natal. The mice were administered with 2 ?g S-PMH/g body weight/week intraperitoneally in three equally divided doses per week beginning at Day 30. The treatment was continued for the period of next 60 days, and was terminated on Day 90. Reproductive organs of the mice were harvested and weighed. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produced prostate tumors as depicted in Figure 5A . However, S-PMH-treatment reduced the organ growth by 65% ( Figures 5B ). H&E staining of prostate sections suggest the presence of large tumor mass in the prostate of diluent-treated mice. In contrast, S-PMH-treated mice displayed relatively normal prostate epithelium ( Figure 5C–5D ).  Discussion Expression of CT and its receptor (CTR) is elevated in advanced prostate cancer (PC), and activated CT-CTR autocrine axis increases tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of multiple PC cell lines ( 8 – 10 ). Recent results from this laboratory suggest that CT promotes PC metastasis by reducing cell-cell adhesion through the disassembly of TJs and AJs, and activation of ?-catenin signaling. The TJs are occluding junctions, which seal cells together in an epithelial sheet, and are critical for the determination of epithelial cell polarity. Either disassembly or remodeling of TJs can cause a loss of cell polarity and increase in motility ( 34 , 35 ). Adherens junctions (AJs) are adhesive contacts, which hold cells together in fixed position within the tissue. It has been shown that TJ along with AJ and desmosomes provide tissue integrity and promote cellular polarity, and AJ plays a pivotal role in regulating the entire activity of junctional complex ( 36 – 38 ). There is increasing evidence for the association between the loss cell-cell adhesion structures and metastasis of several other epithelial cancers ( 39 , 40 ). Therefore, primary objective of the present study was to identify a class of molecules that enhances cell-cell adhesion of prostate cells, and abolishes disruptive actions of CT on TJs and AJs. PMH increased TER, decreased paracellular permeability and prevented the translocation of key integral TJ and AJ membrane proteins in to cytoplasm, suggesting that PMH enhanced TJs and AJs. More importantly, PMH attenuated the disruptive effects of CT on TER, paracellular permability and internalization of key AJ and TJ proteins such as ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Cell adhesion, proteolytic degradation and cell migration are interrelated processes responsible for invasion and metastasis of cancer ( 41 – 43 ). Since PMH attenuated the disruptive actions of CT on cell-cell adhesion complexes, we tested a second hypothesis that PMH reduces invasiveness of highly metastatic PC-3M cells. We used a combination of in vitro and in vivo models to test this hypothesis. The results from cell proliferation assays revealed that PMH did not significantly alter baseline proliferation of PC-3M cells, but abolished CT-stimulated cell proliferation. More importantly, PMH did not display significant cytotoxicity on PC-3M cells at the tested doses, but reduced invasiveness of PC-3M cells and attenuated proinvasive actions of CT as assessed by Matrigel™ invasion assays and spheroid disaggregation assays. If cell-cell adhesion plays a key role in tumor metastasis, PMH should attenuate the metastatic potential of PC-3M sublines. We tested this possibility in two in vivo models. It has been shown that in vitro invasion assays are useful for studying early events of metastasis. However, the formation of distant metastases require not only invasiveness of tumor cells, but also additional characteristics like the capacity to survive during the process of intravasation into blood and lymphatic vasculature, extravasation into parenchyma of distant tissues, and ability to grow in ectopic environment ( 11 , 44 , 45 ). These characteristics can only be examined in animal models. In addition, in vivo assays provide other key information such as the stability of the therapeutic molecule in the body, its ability to reach the target organ and produce intended beneficial effects. First, we tested the effect of PMH and S-PMH on tumor metastasis in orthotopic xenograft model. As expected, PC-3M-CT+ cells formed large orthotopic tumors and distant metastases in multiple organs of nude mice. Intraperitoneally administered PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased orthotopic tumor growth and inhibited the formation of tumor micrometastases in distant organs. More importantly, the mice tolerated therapy well, did not display apparent cytotoxic effects of PMH and S-PMH at the tested doses, but produced remarkable beneficial responses such as decreased morbidity and increased survival, reinforcing a possibility that the disassembly of junctional complexes may be a key event in the progression of a localized prostate tumor to its metastatic form, and PMH can attenuate this process. Since S-PMH was more potent in attenuating PC-3M-CT+ xenograft growth and metastasis, it can potentially be useful for the treatment of patients with invasive or high CT prostate tumors. However, human tumors are not homogenous like PC-3M-CT+ xenografts. Therefore, we tested S-PMH therapy in LPB-Tag mice, a transgenic model developed to study prostate carcinogenesis ( 46 ). Prostate tumors of LPB-Tag mice display significant similarities with human tumors including tumor heterogeneity, neuroendocrine features and relatively slower tumor growth ( 46 ). Our results show that S-PMH therapy was effective in LPB-Tag mice as assessed by a remarkably reduced growth of prostate tumors. These results strongly support S-PMH as a novel candidate therapeutic molecule for metastatic prostate cancer and a chemopreventive agent. PMH has been tested for a possible anti-convulsant activity in experimental animals, but no beneficial therapeutic effects have been reported. In contrast, S-PMH is a novel molecule. There have also been a few reports on pharmacological activity of molecules that are structurally-related to PMH/S-PMH. For example, cyclic imide hydantoins class of compounds have been investigated for anticonvulsant activity ( 47 ). Pharmacological activity of hydantoins could be significantly modulated by substitution of active groups to produce fungicidal, herbicidal, anti-inflammatory, anti-HIV, anti-hypertensive, and hypolipedemic activities ( 47 ). Hydantoin analogs such as substituted diisopropylbenzylidene hydantoins and 2-thiohydantoins were patented for the inhibition of tyrosine kinase and antiallergic activities ( 48 ). But, the compounds were potent only at a superpharmacological dose of 100 mM in guinea pigs ( 48 ). Propanoic acid, 2-[4-[(5-oxo-2-thioxo-4-imidazolidinylidene)methyl] phenoxy] and related analogs were recently patented for their ability to suppress cell proliferation and inhibit binding between extracellular signal-regulated kinases and their substrates ( 49 ). Imidazol-2-amine, 5-chloro- N -(4-methylphenyl)-4-(phenylmethylene) was patented for in vitro anti-melanoma activity ( 50 ). However, present report for the first time demonstrates potent anti-metastatic effects of PMH and S-PMH on PC in multiple in vitro and in vivo model systems through the enhancement of cell-cell adhesion. Although additional studies are required to identify specific targets of PMH and precise molecular events through which PMH enhances junctional complexes, the present results suggest that S-PMH can potentially serve as a novel therapeutic molecule for treatment of advanced PC, and cell-cell adhesion can be an important paradigm to screen or develop new class of therapeutic molecules for the treatment of advanced PC, and possibly other epithelial tumors.  Discussion Expression of CT and its receptor (CTR) is elevated in advanced prostate cancer (PC), and activated CT-CTR autocrine axis increases tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of multiple PC cell lines ( 8 – 10 ). Recent results from this laboratory suggest that CT promotes PC metastasis by reducing cell-cell adhesion through the disassembly of TJs and AJs, and activation of ?-catenin signaling. The TJs are occluding junctions, which seal cells together in an epithelial sheet, and are critical for the determination of epithelial cell polarity. Either disassembly or remodeling of TJs can cause a loss of cell polarity and increase in motility ( 34 , 35 ). Adherens junctions (AJs) are adhesive contacts, which hold cells together in fixed position within the tissue. It has been shown that TJ along with AJ and desmosomes provide tissue integrity and promote cellular polarity, and AJ plays a pivotal role in regulating the entire activity of junctional complex ( 36 – 38 ). There is increasing evidence for the association between the loss cell-cell adhesion structures and metastasis of several other epithelial cancers ( 39 , 40 ). Therefore, primary objective of the present study was to identify a class of molecules that enhances cell-cell adhesion of prostate cells, and abolishes disruptive actions of CT on TJs and AJs. PMH increased TER, decreased paracellular permeability and prevented the translocation of key integral TJ and AJ membrane proteins in to cytoplasm, suggesting that PMH enhanced TJs and AJs. More importantly, PMH attenuated the disruptive effects of CT on TER, paracellular permability and internalization of key AJ and TJ proteins such as ZO-1, occludin, E-cadherin and ?-catenin. Cell adhesion, proteolytic degradation and cell migration are interrelated processes responsible for invasion and metastasis of cancer ( 41 – 43 ). Since PMH attenuated the disruptive actions of CT on cell-cell adhesion complexes, we tested a second hypothesis that PMH reduces invasiveness of highly metastatic PC-3M cells. We used a combination of in vitro and in vivo models to test this hypothesis. The results from cell proliferation assays revealed that PMH did not significantly alter baseline proliferation of PC-3M cells, but abolished CT-stimulated cell proliferation. More importantly, PMH did not display significant cytotoxicity on PC-3M cells at the tested doses, but reduced invasiveness of PC-3M cells and attenuated proinvasive actions of CT as assessed by Matrigel™ invasion assays and spheroid disaggregation assays. If cell-cell adhesion plays a key role in tumor metastasis, PMH should attenuate the metastatic potential of PC-3M sublines. We tested this possibility in two in vivo models. It has been shown that in vitro invasion assays are useful for studying early events of metastasis. However, the formation of distant metastases require not only invasiveness of tumor cells, but also additional characteristics like the capacity to survive during the process of intravasation into blood and lymphatic vasculature, extravasation into parenchyma of distant tissues, and ability to grow in ectopic environment ( 11 , 44 , 45 ). These characteristics can only be examined in animal models. In addition, in vivo assays provide other key information such as the stability of the therapeutic molecule in the body, its ability to reach the target organ and produce intended beneficial effects. First, we tested the effect of PMH and S-PMH on tumor metastasis in orthotopic xenograft model. As expected, PC-3M-CT+ cells formed large orthotopic tumors and distant metastases in multiple organs of nude mice. Intraperitoneally administered PMH and S-PMH remarkably decreased orthotopic tumor growth and inhibited the formation of tumor micrometastases in distant organs. More importantly, the mice tolerated therapy well, did not display apparent cytotoxic effects of PMH and S-PMH at the tested doses, but produced remarkable beneficial responses such as decreased morbidity and increased survival, reinforcing a possibility that the disassembly of junctional complexes may be a key event in the progression of a localized prostate tumor to its metastatic form, and PMH can attenuate this process. Since S-PMH was more potent in attenuating PC-3M-CT+ xenograft growth and metastasis, it can potentially be useful for the treatment of patients with invasive or high CT prostate tumors. However, human tumors are not homogenous like PC-3M-CT+ xenografts. Therefore, we tested S-PMH therapy in LPB-Tag mice, a transgenic model developed to study prostate carcinogenesis ( 46 ). Prostate tumors of LPB-Tag mice display significant similarities with human tumors including tumor heterogeneity, neuroendocrine features and relatively slower tumor growth ( 46 ). Our results show that S-PMH therapy was effective in LPB-Tag mice as assessed by a remarkably reduced growth of prostate tumors. These results strongly support S-PMH as a novel candidate therapeutic molecule for metastatic prostate cancer and a chemopreventive agent. PMH has been tested for a possible anti-convulsant activity in experimental animals, but no beneficial therapeutic effects have been reported. In contrast, S-PMH is a novel molecule. There have also been a few reports on pharmacological activity of molecules that are structurally-related to PMH/S-PMH. For example, cyclic imide hydantoins class of compounds have been investigated for anticonvulsant activity ( 47 ). Pharmacological activity of hydantoins could be significantly modulated by substitution of active groups to produce fungicidal, herbicidal, anti-inflammatory, anti-HIV, anti-hypertensive, and hypolipedemic activities ( 47 ). Hydantoin analogs such as substituted diisopropylbenzylidene hydantoins and 2-thiohydantoins were patented for the inhibition of tyrosine kinase and antiallergic activities ( 48 ). But, the compounds were potent only at a superpharmacological dose of 100 mM in guinea pigs ( 48 ). Propanoic acid, 2-[4-[(5-oxo-2-thioxo-4-imidazolidinylidene)methyl] phenoxy] and related analogs were recently patented for their ability to suppress cell proliferation and inhibit binding between extracellular signal-regulated kinases and their substrates ( 49 ). Imidazol-2-amine, 5-chloro- N -(4-methylphenyl)-4-(phenylmethylene) was patented for in vitro anti-melanoma activity ( 50 ). However, present report for the first time demonstrates potent anti-metastatic effects of PMH and S-PMH on PC in multiple in vitro and in vivo model systems through the enhancement of cell-cell adhesion. Although additional studies are required to identify specific targets of PMH and precise molecular events through which PMH enhances junctional complexes, the present results suggest that S-PMH can potentially serve as a novel therapeutic molecule for treatment of advanced PC, and cell-cell adhesion can be an important paradigm to screen or develop new class of therapeutic molecules for the treatment of advanced PC, and possibly other epithelial tumors.  Supplementary Material supplementary Supplementary Figure 1 : Chemical structures of PMH and S-PMH Supplementary Figures 2 : H&E sections of tumor metastases from Figures 4A–4B .  Supplementary Material supplementary Supplementary Figure 1 : Chemical structures of PMH and S-PMH Supplementary Figures 2 : H&E sections of tumor metastases from Figures 4A–4B .  Figures and Table Figure 1 PMH and Cell-cell adhesion A. TER Polarized monolayer cultures of PC-3M cells were exposed to diluent, 50 nM CT, 50 nM PMH and 50 nM PMH with 50 nM CT 24 hours after plating. TER values were measured from 5 minutes to 48 hours after CT treatments. Results are mean TER ± SEM (n=3) normalized to control monolayers of PC-3M cells at each time point. Data were compiled from three separate experiments. B. Paracellular Permeability Polarized monolayer cultures of PC-3M cells treated with 50 nM CT for 1h. The cells were then treated with TMR-dextran (500?l of 1 mg/ml solution) in the upper chamber. After 1h, 100?l of media was drawn from the lower chamber and assayed for fluorescence using spectrophotometer at 530 nm excitation and 590 nm emission. * p <0.05 significantly different from their respective controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). ^, significantly different from CT treated p < 0.01 (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keul’s test). C. Localization of junctional proteins: Imunoblotting Confluent monolayers of PC-3M cells were treated with cytosolic lysis buffer for 30 minutes to collect cytosolic fraction. Then the cells were lysed in membrane lysis buffer. Western blot analysis for ZO-1, occludin, ?-catenin and E-cadherin was carried out after loading 40 ?g of cytosolic proteins and 20 ?g of membrane proteins. ?-tubulin and ?-actin was used as loading controls for membrane and cytoplasmic fractions respectively. The experiment was repeated three separate times. Figure 2 Effect of PMH on the growth and invasion of PC cells A: PC-3M cells were cultured for 3 days. After 2 days, complete growth medium was replaced with serum-free basal medium. Cells were then treated with diluent, 50 nM CT, 50 nM PMH, and 50 nM PMH with 50 nM CT for 24 hours. Their cell proliferation was assessed by the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. Absorbance at 595 nm was measured, and error bars signify the mean ± SEM of four independent experiments (n=8). *, significantly increased over the untreated PC-3M values; P < 0.05 (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). B: Invasion of PC-3M cells treated with diluent, 50 nM CT, 50 ?M PMH and 50 ?M PMH with 50 nM CT was examined as described in the Methods section. Triplicate experiments were performed, and six 100x fields were counted for each data point. Results are expressed as mean +/? SEM for cells per 100x field (n=3 independent experiments × 6 fields). *, significantly different from the control (diluent treated) p < 0.01 (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keul’s test). C: Disaggregation/migration of PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on different ECMs in the presence/absence of PMH/S-PMH Radial migration of spheroids under each condition (with and without the treatment of PMH or S-PMH on vitronectin (VN), fibrinogen (FN), collagen and Laminin) was quantitated as described in the Methods section and graphed. The cell outgrowth was measured after 48 hours of incubation. The results are presented as mean ?m radial migration ± SEM for n=4. *p<0.05, significantly different from their respective controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). D: Effect of different concentrations of PMH/S-PMH on disaggregation/migration of PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on VN Spheroids prepared from PC-3M-CT+, were treated with different concentrations of PMH and S-PMH, and their disaggregation/migration was examined on VN. The cell outgrowth was measured after 48 hours of incubation. The results are presented as mean ?m radial migration ± SEM for n=4. *p<0.05, significantly different from their respective controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). E: Typical photomicrographs of PC-3M-CT+ spheroids at the end of the experiment. Cell migration of spheroids prepared with PC-3M-CT+ cells was examined in the absence/presence of 50 ?M S-PMH on VN as described in the Methods section. F: The cell outgrowth was measured and photographed after 48 hours of incubation. *p<0.05, significantly different from vehicle treated controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). Figure 3 Growth of PC-3M-CT + xenografts in nu/nu mice PC-3M-CT+-RFP cells (1× 106) were orthotopicaly implanted in prostate. Periodically, the tumor growth was monitored by fluoroimaging. The experiment was terminated 60 days after cell implantation, the tumors were removed, cleaned and weighed. A. Fluorographs of diluent-, PMH and S-PMH-treated mice on day 41 post-implantation. B. Growth curves of tumors computed from quantitation of fluorographs through the course of the experiment (mean ± SEM of n=6 for each group). C. The bar graphs present final weights of tumors at the termination of experiments (mean g tumor weight ± SEM for n = 6). *, significantly different from diluent-treated tumors; p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). D: Kaplan-Meier survival curves of diluent- and drug-treated mice Figure 4 Metastasis of PC-3M-CT + cells in organs of nu/nu mice A: Fluorescent micrographs of tumor micrometastases of diluent- and PMH-treated mouse organs RFP-expressing PC-3M-CT+ cells (1×106) were orthotopicaly implanted into the prostate of nude mice. Animals were sacrificed 5 weeks after implantation, fresh organs were removed from mice, and were observed directly under fluorescent microscope. Most micrometastases could not be seen under bright-field microscopy (data not shown). The images were captured at 100X magnification. B. Fluorescent micrographs of tumor micrometastases of diluent- and S-PMH-treated mice (as described in Figure 4A) Figure 5 Treatment of LPB-Tag mice with S-PMH Adult LPB-Tag mice between ages of 30–90 days were injected with S-PMH ip three times a week as described in the Methods section. The mice were sacrificed at 90 days of age, tumors were removed, cleaned and weighed. A. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produce prostate tumors as depicted in diluent-treated mice. S-PMH treatment remarkably reduced the organ mass. B. The bar graphs represent final weights of organs (prostate + seminal vesicles) at necropsy (mean g tumor weight ± SEM for n = 6). *, Significant change from diluent; p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). C. H&E sections of prostates from diluent-treated and S-PMH-treated mice. Table 1 Table 1A; Micrometastases of PC-3M cells in host organs Organs Diluent PMH S-PMH Seminal Vesicles ++++ ++ + Testis ++++ +++ + Lymph Nodes +++ ++ + Bone ++++ ? ? Lungs ++ ? ? Liver ++ ? ? Mesentary ++ ? ? Kidneys ++ ? ? Brain ++ ? ? Table 1B: Frequency of micrometastases in host organs Organ Diluent PMH S-PMH n Seminal Vesicles 6 3 2 6 Testis 6 2 1 6 Lymph nodes 5 2 0 6 Bone 4 0 0 6 Lungs 3 0 0 6 Liver 2 0 0 6 Liver 2 0 0 6 Mesentery 2 0 0 6 Kidneys 2 0 0 6 Brain 1 0 0 6 - no tumor cells; + isolated tumor cells; ++ few tumor cell colonies; +++ several tumor cell colonies concentrated in one area of the organ; ++++ tumor cell colonies spread throughout the organ One Way ANOVA: Level of Significance: p <0.001 (PMH v diluent) p<0.001 (S-PMH v diluent) p>0.05 (PMH v S-PMH)  Figures and Table Figure 1 PMH and Cell-cell adhesion A. TER Polarized monolayer cultures of PC-3M cells were exposed to diluent, 50 nM CT, 50 nM PMH and 50 nM PMH with 50 nM CT 24 hours after plating. TER values were measured from 5 minutes to 48 hours after CT treatments. Results are mean TER ± SEM (n=3) normalized to control monolayers of PC-3M cells at each time point. Data were compiled from three separate experiments. B. Paracellular Permeability Polarized monolayer cultures of PC-3M cells treated with 50 nM CT for 1h. The cells were then treated with TMR-dextran (500?l of 1 mg/ml solution) in the upper chamber. After 1h, 100?l of media was drawn from the lower chamber and assayed for fluorescence using spectrophotometer at 530 nm excitation and 590 nm emission. * p <0.05 significantly different from their respective controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). ^, significantly different from CT treated p < 0.01 (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keul’s test). C. Localization of junctional proteins: Imunoblotting Confluent monolayers of PC-3M cells were treated with cytosolic lysis buffer for 30 minutes to collect cytosolic fraction. Then the cells were lysed in membrane lysis buffer. Western blot analysis for ZO-1, occludin, ?-catenin and E-cadherin was carried out after loading 40 ?g of cytosolic proteins and 20 ?g of membrane proteins. ?-tubulin and ?-actin was used as loading controls for membrane and cytoplasmic fractions respectively. The experiment was repeated three separate times. Figure 2 Effect of PMH on the growth and invasion of PC cells A: PC-3M cells were cultured for 3 days. After 2 days, complete growth medium was replaced with serum-free basal medium. Cells were then treated with diluent, 50 nM CT, 50 nM PMH, and 50 nM PMH with 50 nM CT for 24 hours. Their cell proliferation was assessed by the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. Absorbance at 595 nm was measured, and error bars signify the mean ± SEM of four independent experiments (n=8). *, significantly increased over the untreated PC-3M values; P < 0.05 (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). B: Invasion of PC-3M cells treated with diluent, 50 nM CT, 50 ?M PMH and 50 ?M PMH with 50 nM CT was examined as described in the Methods section. Triplicate experiments were performed, and six 100x fields were counted for each data point. Results are expressed as mean +/? SEM for cells per 100x field (n=3 independent experiments × 6 fields). *, significantly different from the control (diluent treated) p < 0.01 (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keul’s test). C: Disaggregation/migration of PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on different ECMs in the presence/absence of PMH/S-PMH Radial migration of spheroids under each condition (with and without the treatment of PMH or S-PMH on vitronectin (VN), fibrinogen (FN), collagen and Laminin) was quantitated as described in the Methods section and graphed. The cell outgrowth was measured after 48 hours of incubation. The results are presented as mean ?m radial migration ± SEM for n=4. *p<0.05, significantly different from their respective controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). D: Effect of different concentrations of PMH/S-PMH on disaggregation/migration of PC-3M-CT+ spheroids on VN Spheroids prepared from PC-3M-CT+, were treated with different concentrations of PMH and S-PMH, and their disaggregation/migration was examined on VN. The cell outgrowth was measured after 48 hours of incubation. The results are presented as mean ?m radial migration ± SEM for n=4. *p<0.05, significantly different from their respective controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). E: Typical photomicrographs of PC-3M-CT+ spheroids at the end of the experiment. Cell migration of spheroids prepared with PC-3M-CT+ cells was examined in the absence/presence of 50 ?M S-PMH on VN as described in the Methods section. F: The cell outgrowth was measured and photographed after 48 hours of incubation. *p<0.05, significantly different from vehicle treated controls (One way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). Figure 3 Growth of PC-3M-CT + xenografts in nu/nu mice PC-3M-CT+-RFP cells (1× 106) were orthotopicaly implanted in prostate. Periodically, the tumor growth was monitored by fluoroimaging. The experiment was terminated 60 days after cell implantation, the tumors were removed, cleaned and weighed. A. Fluorographs of diluent-, PMH and S-PMH-treated mice on day 41 post-implantation. B. Growth curves of tumors computed from quantitation of fluorographs through the course of the experiment (mean ± SEM of n=6 for each group). C. The bar graphs present final weights of tumors at the termination of experiments (mean g tumor weight ± SEM for n = 6). *, significantly different from diluent-treated tumors; p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). D: Kaplan-Meier survival curves of diluent- and drug-treated mice Figure 4 Metastasis of PC-3M-CT + cells in organs of nu/nu mice A: Fluorescent micrographs of tumor micrometastases of diluent- and PMH-treated mouse organs RFP-expressing PC-3M-CT+ cells (1×106) were orthotopicaly implanted into the prostate of nude mice. Animals were sacrificed 5 weeks after implantation, fresh organs were removed from mice, and were observed directly under fluorescent microscope. Most micrometastases could not be seen under bright-field microscopy (data not shown). The images were captured at 100X magnification. B. Fluorescent micrographs of tumor micrometastases of diluent- and S-PMH-treated mice (as described in Figure 4A) Figure 5 Treatment of LPB-Tag mice with S-PMH Adult LPB-Tag mice between ages of 30–90 days were injected with S-PMH ip three times a week as described in the Methods section. The mice were sacrificed at 90 days of age, tumors were removed, cleaned and weighed. A. All LPB-Tag mice spontaneously produce prostate tumors as depicted in diluent-treated mice. S-PMH treatment remarkably reduced the organ mass. B. The bar graphs represent final weights of organs (prostate + seminal vesicles) at necropsy (mean g tumor weight ± SEM for n = 6). *, Significant change from diluent; p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA and Newman-Keuls test). C. H&E sections of prostates from diluent-treated and S-PMH-treated mice. Table 1 Table 1A; Micrometastases of PC-3M cells in host organs Organs Diluent PMH S-PMH Seminal Vesicles ++++ ++ + Testis ++++ +++ + Lymph Nodes +++ ++ + Bone ++++ ? ? Lungs ++ ? ? Liver ++ ? ? Mesentary ++ ? ? Kidneys ++ ? ? Brain ++ ? ? Table 1B: Frequency of micrometastases in host organs Organ Diluent PMH S-PMH n Seminal Vesicles 6 3 2 6 Testis 6 2 1 6 Lymph nodes 5 2 0 6 Bone 4 0 0 6 Lungs 3 0 0 6 Liver 2 0 0 6 Liver 2 0 0 6 Mesentery 2 0 0 6 Kidneys 2 0 0 6 Brain 1 0 0 6 - no tumor cells; + isolated tumor cells; ++ few tumor cell colonies; +++ several tumor cell colonies concentrated in one area of the organ; ++++ tumor cell colonies spread throughout the organ One Way ANOVA: Level of Significance: p <0.001 (PMH v diluent) p<0.001 (S-PMH v diluent) p>0.05 (PMH v S-PMH) 