ABCG2-mediated dyecycle violet efflux defined side population in benign and malignant prostate The efflux of Hoechst 33342 by ATP-binding cassette protein G2 (ABCG2) membrane pump allows reproducible identification of a subpopulation of cells by flow cytometric analysis termed the “side population” (SP). The SP identified by constitutive Hoechst efflux contains the stem/progenitor cell population from bone marrow and many solid organs, including prostate. DyeCycle Violet (DCV) is a cell membrane permeable, fluorescent vital dye that intercalates into DNA and is a substrate for ABCG2-mediated efflux. Therefore, DCV was evaluated in this study as a tool for identification of the SP from prostate cancer cell lines and from freshly harvested human prostate tissue. SPs that demonstrated ABCG2-mediated efflux of DCV were identified in the human prostate cancer cell lines CWR-R1, DU-145 and RWPE-1, but not in the BPH-1, LAPC-4 or PC-3 cell lines. Additionally, a SP was identified in enzymatically disaggregated prostate tumors from Transgenic Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate (TRAMP), human benign prostate tissue and human prostate cancer tissue. The causal role of ABCG2-mediated efflux of DCV in the identification of the SP was confirmed by loss of the SP by incubation with the specific inhibitor of ABCG2, Fumitremorgin C. Expression of ABCG2 in the SP cells was confirmed by qRT-PCR and immunofluorescence analysis. Consequently, DCV represents an important new tool for isolation of viable candidate stem cells/cancer stem cells as a SP from cultured prostate cell lines, and prostate tissue specimens, without the requirement for instrumentation with ultra-violet excitation capability and minimizing the risk of damage to DNA in the sorted population.  Introduction The “side-population” (SP) was defined originally in flow cytometric analyses by the ability of a small subpopulation from bone marrow to efflux the vital DNA dye, Hoechst 33342. Efflux of the dye was attributed to members of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of ATP-dependent membrane pumps, with ABCB1 (MDR-1a/b in mice) and ABCG2 (Bcrp in mice) identified as likely mechanisms for Hoechst efflux. 1 , 2 Ultimately, ABCG2 (breast cancer resistance protein, BCRP) was identified as the principal contributor to the SP phenotype in mouse bone marrow, and later mammary gland, by analysis of maintenance of the SP in ABCG2/Bcrp and ABCB1/MDR-1a/b deficient mice. 3 , 4 ABCG2 was identified initially as a mechanism for efflux of a diversity of chemotherapeutic agents through its identification in multi-drug resistant breast cancer cells, and later was associated with drug resistance in leukemia, gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas, endometrial and lung carcinomas, and myeloma. 5 , 6 In addition to efflux of chemotherapeutic agents, ABCG2 was demonstrated to mediate-efflux of toxins and porphyrins, protecting from cell death caused by accumulation of porphyrins in a hypoxic environment and in response to radiation. 7 – 10 Characterization of the SP relied on the unique fluorescence emission characteristics of Hoechst 33342 when excited with UV light. Recent studies have demonstrated that DyeCycle Violet (DCV), a membrane permeable vital dye, and an ABCG2 substrate, also provided identification of the SP in bone marrow and cultured cell lines. 11 , 12 In contrast to Hoechst dye, DCV does not require UV excitation, allowing flow microfluorometric analysis and fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) on instruments equipped with solid state or diode lasers, and minimizing the potential for genetic damage induced by UV-excitation of the Hoechst dye intercalated into the genomic DNA. The stem cell characteristics of multipotency, self-renewal and unlimited proliferative potential are present in the SP cells isolated by FACS from many tissues, including: bone marrow, skeletal muscle, mammary gland and neural tissue. 1 , 13 – 15 ABCG2 expression was downregulated as the immediate progeny of the bone marrow stem cells upregulated expression of CD34 and entered the transit/amplifying (T/A) compartment in preparation for differentiation. 2 , 16 Consistent with a mechanistic role in maintenance and expansion of the stem cell phenotype, overexpression of ABCG2 in bone marrow cells blocked hematopoietic differentiation and resulted in decreased re-population of the erythroid and myeloid compartments. 16 The demonstration that the SP contained benign stem cells led to the investigation of whether a SP from tumors contained a “cancer stem cell” (CSC) capable of tumor formation, metastatic growth at distant sites, and the capability to serially generate tumors that recapitulate the original tumor. 21 SPs were identified in several tumors, including: neuroblastoma, adenocarcinoma of the prostate, ovarian cancer and sarcomas. 17 – 20 Consistent with this hypothesis, not only was an increased SP in sarcomas correlated with higher tumor grade, but only cells from the SP were capable of serial generation of tumors. 20 Furthermore, the SP isolated from a range of tumorigenic cell lines possessed 100–1,000 fold higher tumor initiating capability than the parental cell lines. 18 – 20 , 22 We reported ABCG2 was a phenotypic and mechanistic marker of putative stem cells in both benign and malignant human prostate tissue, in primary xenografts of benign human prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue, in TRAMP prostate cancers, and in cultured rat prostate progenitor cells. 23 In immunohistochemical analyses, the ABCG2-positive population comprised approximately 1% of the cells localized in the epithelial compartment in tissues, or in prostate cell populations in culture. Consistent with our data, Brown et al. reported a SP characterized by verapamil sensitive Hoechst 33342 dye efflux comprised 0.93 ± 0.12% and 0.57 ± 0.11% of the total epithelial population from benign and malignant prostates, respectively. 17 Similarly, a putative prostate SP was identified based upon efflux of Hoechst 33342 in prostate tissue obtained from patients undergoing trans-urethral resection of the prostate (TURP) for benign and malignant disease. 17 , 24 The SP and non-side population (NSP) cells isolated from benign and malignant tissues formed spheroids, with no statistical difference in sphere forming efficiency observed between SP and NSP from benign or malignant tissue. 17 Affymetrix Array analysis indicated that there was considerable overlap of gene expression between the SP isolated by FACS and by selection of ABCG2-expressing cells using magnetic beads conjugated to an antibody against ABCG2. 25 The ABC transporters, ABCG1, ABCG2, ABCB1 and ABCE1 were expressed at higher levels in the SP than in the ABCG2 expressing cells. 25 Most of the identified ABC transporters efflux steroids, and ABCG2 and ABCB1 have been demonstrated to efflux cholesterol metabolites, dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and estrogen. 23 , 26 – 28 Therefore, ABC transporters may protect prostate stem cells from steroid signals, isolating stem cells from changes in androgen levels, such as induced by androgen ablation therapy. The present study examines the utility of the fluorescent vital dye and ABCG2 substrate, DCV, to identify and facilitate isolation of viable SP cells from prostate cell lines and from enzymatically disaggregated fresh prostate tissue. The advantage of DCV compared to Hoechst 33342 is that DCV can be excited by a violet diode laser, instead of the UV excitation required for Hoechst 33342, allowing analysis and FACS using less expensive and more widely available instrumentation, and reducing the risk of DNA damage in the sorted population.  SP analysis of human prostate tissue The validated DCV labeling protocol and SP analysis by flow microfluorimetry was utilized subsequently to search for ABCG2-mediated SPs in single cell suspensions generated by enzymatic disaggregation of prostate tumors from TRAMP mice, and from fresh human prostate surgical specimens harvested from patients undergoing radical prostatectomy. The characteristic SP profile was difficult to resolve in freshly digested tissue due to the large amount of debris, as well as proteases, lipids and DNA from damaged cells that caused clumping of cells. To facilitate single cell preparations for analysis and sorting, the enzymatic digests were processed through a HISTOPAQUE-1077 density gradient to sediment erythrocytes, granulocytes and debris, and concentrate the intact single cells from the tissue digests. Prostate tumors from TRAMP mice contained a SP that comprised 1.0% of the total viable cells ( Fig. 4A ). Similarly, SPs were observed in cell populations recovered from human prostate tissue digests of un-involved (benign) areas of human prostates and digests of human prostate cancers. Figure 4C and E present typical flow cytograms of digested human prostate tissue: the gated SPs decreased when the enzymatic disaggregates were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 4D and F ). The SP comprised an average of 1.6 ± 0.30 percent of the viable cells in 15 specimens of benign human prostate and 2.8 ± 0.85 percent in 9 prostate cancer specimens ( Table 1 ). The average yield of viable SP cells from enzymatically disaggregated human prostate tissue specimens was approximately 2,550 cells/gram for benign tissue and 9,200 cells/gram of prostate cancer tissue.  Evaluation of ABCG2 expression and phenotype of the SP and NSP cells Expression of ABCG2 in the FACS isolated SP, and NSP, cells from human benign prostate tissue ( Fig. 4C ) and prostate cancer tissue ( Fig. 4E ) was evaluated by qRT-PCR analysis. ABCG2 mRNA was detected in both SP and NSP cells isolated from both benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue. The relative expression level of ABCG2 mRNA was 66-fold and 32-fold greater in the benign and tumor SPs compared to the benign NSP, ( Fig. 4G ), for patient 492. ABCG2 expression was examined at the protein level by immunofluorescence analysis of the SP cells isolated from benign prostate tissue ( Fig. 5A ). ABCG2 protein ( Fig. 5C ) was localized to the membrane of SP cells isolated by FACS as visualized using an antibody against human ABCG2 (BXP-21), confirming that ABCG2 protein expression was concordant with DCV efflux in flow cytometric analyses. The size of cells in the SP and NSP were estimated by size analysis of forward angle light scatter (FALS) based upon calibration of the FACS instrument using beads that ranged in size from 4.3 ?m to 10.8 ?m. SP cells were determined to have a diameter of approximately 12.48 ?m ( Fig. 6C ), and NSP cells to have a diameter of approximately 15.13 ?m ( Fig. 6D ), based on the trendline from a plot of mean forward angle light scatter (FALS) intensity vs. bead size. In addition to the small size, SP cells demonstrated large nuclei and low cytoplasmic complexity and granularity, that contributed to a low level of large angle light scatter, also called side scatter or 90° scatter (LALS) [ Fig. 6C (inset) and D (inset)].  Materials and Methods Mice All experiments using laboratory animals were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the National Institutes of Health. Male TRAMP mice [C57BL/6 TRAMP X FVB] F1+/? were obtained from the colony maintained at Roswell Park Cancer Institute (RPCI). TRAMP mice were bred and genotypically screened as described in Kaplen-Lefko et al. 42 Twelve-week-old TRAMP mice were castrated by radical orchiectomy, and palpable prostate tumors were collected upon necropsy, usually in animals between ~20–24 weeks of age. Fresh mouse bone marrow cells were harvested from femurs and tibias of a CBySmn.CB17-Prkdc (SCID) mouse, and were suspended in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) medium (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) buffer at 37°C until DCV labeling. Cell lines HEK 293 cells stably transfected with the pcDNA empty vector, or vector containing cDNA coding for ABCG2 (R482G), were maintained in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) media (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), 2 mM L-glutamine (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), penicillin (100 U/ml) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), streptomycin (100 ?g/ml) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), and 0.5 mg/ml G418 (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA). MCF-7 cells were maintained in MEM with 10% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA). RWPE-1 cells (obtained from ATCC, Manassas, VA) were maintained in Keratinocyte Serum Free Medium supplemented with 0.05 mg/ml bovine pituitary extract and 5 ng/ml epidermal growth factor (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). BPH-1, DU-145, LAPC-4 and PC-3 cells were maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 media (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), penicillin (100 U/ml)), and streptomycin (100 ?g/ml). CWR-R1 cells were maintained in Richter’s improved MEM (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 2% FBS, 20 mM HEPES, 10 mg/ml ITS (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), 100 ?g/ml of epidermal growth factor (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) 0.9 mg/L linoleic acid (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 1.2 g/L nicotinamide (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). All cell lines were cultured at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cells were grown to 90% confluence and harvested by incubation with trypsin-EDTA (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA). Prostate tissue digestion A 0.3 gram tumor from a TRAMP mouse prostate was cut into pieces of 3–5 mm3 with a sterile scalpel, and the pieces were washed once in Ca2+/Mg2+ free Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) containing penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 ?g/ml). The tissue pieces were digested for 3 hours in Collagenase type II (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) at 120 U/ml in DMEM medium (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) containing 2% FBS on a shaking platform at 37°C. The digested tissue was filtered through a 100 micron pore nylon mesh cell strainer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), an equal volume of Hank’s Buffered Salt Solution (HBSS) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) with 5% FBS added, the cells pelleted, the supernatant removed and the pellet resuspended in 15 ml of HBSS with 5% FBS. HISTOPAQUE-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) (15 ml) was layered over an equal volumes of the cell suspension, and the tubes centrifuged at 2,000 rpm at room temperature for 30 minutes. The opaque interface that contained the cells of interest was transferred into a clean conical centrifuge tube, 10 ml of HBSS with 5% FBS (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) added, and the cells pelleted. The supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellet was resuspended in HBSS with 5% FBS. Finally, the epithelial cells from the TRAMP tumor were pelleted, washed and suspended in DMEM medium with 2% FBS and 10 mM HEPES buffer (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Fresh human benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue harvested from radical prostatectomy surgical specimens in ice-cold Viaspan transplant media (4°C) (Barr Laboratories Inc., Pomona, NY) was obtained from the Pathology Resource Network at RPCI in accordance with NIH guidelines on the use of human subjects, and with the approval of the Internal Research Board at RPCI. Areas of radical prostatectomy tissue specimens that were greater then 90% cancer were identified by a Pathologist in the Pathology Resource Network by analysis of frozen sections prepared from the freshly resected tissue. Tissue specimens verified as prostate cancer were used for SP isolation. Enzymatic tissue digestion was performed as described. 43 Briefly, tissue specimens were minced finely into 3–5 mm3 pieces and the pieces gently washed with Ca2+/Mg2+ free PBS supplemented with penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 ?g/ml) at 4°C, for 15 minutes. The supernatant was aspirated and the minced tissue was digested with Dispase (InVitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 2.4 U/ml in Ca2+/Mg2+ free PBS supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin for 16 hrs at 4°C. The tissue digest was strained through a 40 micron pore cell strainer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), washed twice with HBSS supplemented with 5% FBS, and the cells pelleted. The cell pellet was resuspended in 6 ml of HBSS supplemented with 5% FBS, divided into two conical centrifuge tubes, an equal volume (3 ml) of HISTOPAQUE-1077 layered over the cell suspension in each tube, and the tubes centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 30 minutes at room temperature. The cell interface was transferred into a fresh tube, resuspended in 10 ml of HBSS supplemented with 5% FBS, and the cells pelleted. The final cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of PrEBM medium (Lonza Biologics Inc., Portsmouth, NH) with 2% FBS, and passed through a 40 micron strainer to assure a single cell suspension. DyeCycle violet labeling Mouse bone marrow, and all prostate cell lines and tissue preparations, were labeled with DCV (InVitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to a protocol modified from Telford et al. 11 Briefly, cells were suspended in appropriate medium and warmed to 37°C for 15 minutes. Before incubation with DCV, if appropriate, cells (1 × 106 cells/500 ?l) were pre-incubated for 30 minutes in 10 ?M Fumitremorgin C (FTC) (Alexis Biochemicals, AXXORA, LLC, San Diego, CA) at 37°C. Subsequently, DCV (10 ?M) was added to all cell preparations and the cells were incubated at 37°C for 90 minutes. After incubation with DCV, cells were pelleted and resuspended in cold SP buffer (HBSS containing 2% FBS and 2 mM HEPES buffer), and 7-amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD, Beckman-Coulter, Inc., Fullerton, CA) was added to identify nonviable cells in the FACS analysis. DCV labeled cells were stored on ice until analyzed on either a BD™ LSR II cytometer, or flow sorted on a BD FACSAria™ (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Multi-parametric analysis and gating strategy The characteristic emission profile of DCV demonstrates strong maxima in both the blue and red and regions of the spectra. With excitation by a violet diode laser at 408 nm (Coherent, Inc.,), the DCV-specific blue fluorescence was collected through a 450/40 nm bandpass (BP) filter and the DCV-specific red fluorescence was collected through a 650 nm longpass (LP) filter. For sorting, non-viable cells were excluded based upon uptake of 7-AAD. A 488 nm Sapphire™ laser was utilized to excite 7-AAD, with emission monitored through a 695/40 nm bandpass filter. The gating strategy for analysis or flow sorting of the SP was the same. Dual-parametric analysis of FALS versus LALS was the primary gate used to identify cells in the appropriate size range, and to eliminate debris. Cells falling in the primary gate subsequently were evaluated by analysis of LALS height versus LALS width, followed by FALS height vs. FALS width, for doublet discrimination. In addition, cells within the primary gate were evaluated for 7AAD uptake to eliminate dead cells. Finally, the live, singlet cells were displayed in a dual-parametric presentation of DCV red fluorescence (x-axis) vs. DCV blue fluorescence (y-axis), and the location of the SP determined based upon loss of the putative SP in a cohort population pre-incubated with FTC. Data was analyzed using the FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Size standard beads (Bangs Laboratories, Inc., Fishers, IN) of size 4.3 ?m, 6.8 ?m, 7.9 ?m, 8.7 ?m and 10.8 ?m were evaluated on the BD™ LSR II cytometer using the same laser source and settings as used for DCV analysis. Bead size was plotted against mean FALS and the size of SP and NSP cell size interpolated from the standard curve. Size analysis of the SP and NSP cells from human prostate tissue Cytospin slides of the sorted SP and NSP cells were prepared by centrifugation onto VECTABOND™ coated slides (Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA) at 3,000 rpm for 3 min. The sample chambers of the cytospin centrifuge (Cytospin 3, Shandon) were pre-washed for 1 min with 60 ?l of phosphate buffered saline containing 1% FBS. The dried immobilized cells were stained with hematoxylin (EMD Chemicals, Inc., Gibbstown, NJ) and visualized using a Zeiss Axiovert25 microscope. qRT-PCR analysis Total RNA was isolated from the sorted populations using the RNeasy Micro kit according to the manufacturers’ protocol (Qiagen, Chatsworth, CA). All RNA samples were stored at ?80°C, or immediately converted to cDNA according to manufacturers’ protocol, using the SuperScript III/RNaseOUT First Strand Synthesis System SuperMix Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Gene expression was assessed with TaqMan® Gene Expression Assay 53790 (ABI) amplification of a region spanning exons 3–4 with an ACTB TaqMan® control (ABI) on an Applied Biosystems 7300 Real Time PCR System, using the default profile. qRT-PCR-based relative gene expression was calculated using the comparative ??Ct method. RQ represents the relative expression level (fold change) compared to the reference sample of the benign NSP. Immunofluoresence For immunofluorescence analysis of ABCG2 protein in cells, sorted SP cells were plated in wells of a chamber slide and grown to approximately 70–80% confluence. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MD) in 1X Tris Buffered Saline (TBS) solution, pH 7.8 [8.4 mM Na2HPO4·H2O (Mallinckrodt Baker, Inc., Paris, Kentucky); 3.5 mM KH2PO4 (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ); 120 mM NaCl (Mallinckrodt Baker, Inc., Phillipsburg, NJ); 10 mM Tris (MP BIiomedicals, Inc., Solon, Ohio)] for 30 minutes, and were permeabilized for 10 minutes with 0.1%Tritron X-100 in 1X Tris buffer pH 7.8. Fixed/permeabilized cells were washed with TBS and incubated for 30 minutes in 1% BSA (OmniPur, EMD, Darmstadt, Germany) in 1X TBS pH 7.8. Primary antibody against ABCG2 (1:40 dilution; BXP-21/MAB4146, Chemicon, Temecula, CA) was applied to the slides and incubated overnight at 4°C. Slides were incubated with anti-mouse secondary antibody conjugated with Alexafluor 488 nm (1/300 dilution; InVitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for 2 hours. Matched incubations were performed in the absence of the primary antibody as a negative control. Nuclei were counter-stained with DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), the slides mounted with fluorescent mounting media (Dako Cytomation, Inc., Carpinteria, CA), and visualized using a Zeiss Axiovert25 microscope.  Mice All experiments using laboratory animals were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the National Institutes of Health. Male TRAMP mice [C57BL/6 TRAMP X FVB] F1+/? were obtained from the colony maintained at Roswell Park Cancer Institute (RPCI). TRAMP mice were bred and genotypically screened as described in Kaplen-Lefko et al. 42 Twelve-week-old TRAMP mice were castrated by radical orchiectomy, and palpable prostate tumors were collected upon necropsy, usually in animals between ~20–24 weeks of age. Fresh mouse bone marrow cells were harvested from femurs and tibias of a CBySmn.CB17-Prkdc (SCID) mouse, and were suspended in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) medium (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) buffer at 37°C until DCV labeling.  Cell lines HEK 293 cells stably transfected with the pcDNA empty vector, or vector containing cDNA coding for ABCG2 (R482G), were maintained in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) media (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), 2 mM L-glutamine (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), penicillin (100 U/ml) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), streptomycin (100 ?g/ml) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), and 0.5 mg/ml G418 (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA). MCF-7 cells were maintained in MEM with 10% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA). RWPE-1 cells (obtained from ATCC, Manassas, VA) were maintained in Keratinocyte Serum Free Medium supplemented with 0.05 mg/ml bovine pituitary extract and 5 ng/ml epidermal growth factor (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). BPH-1, DU-145, LAPC-4 and PC-3 cells were maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 media (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA), penicillin (100 U/ml)), and streptomycin (100 ?g/ml). CWR-R1 cells were maintained in Richter’s improved MEM (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 2% FBS, 20 mM HEPES, 10 mg/ml ITS (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), 100 ?g/ml of epidermal growth factor (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) 0.9 mg/L linoleic acid (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 1.2 g/L nicotinamide (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). All cell lines were cultured at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cells were grown to 90% confluence and harvested by incubation with trypsin-EDTA (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA).  Prostate tissue digestion A 0.3 gram tumor from a TRAMP mouse prostate was cut into pieces of 3–5 mm3 with a sterile scalpel, and the pieces were washed once in Ca2+/Mg2+ free Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) containing penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 ?g/ml). The tissue pieces were digested for 3 hours in Collagenase type II (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) at 120 U/ml in DMEM medium (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) containing 2% FBS on a shaking platform at 37°C. The digested tissue was filtered through a 100 micron pore nylon mesh cell strainer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), an equal volume of Hank’s Buffered Salt Solution (HBSS) (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) with 5% FBS added, the cells pelleted, the supernatant removed and the pellet resuspended in 15 ml of HBSS with 5% FBS. HISTOPAQUE-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) (15 ml) was layered over an equal volumes of the cell suspension, and the tubes centrifuged at 2,000 rpm at room temperature for 30 minutes. The opaque interface that contained the cells of interest was transferred into a clean conical centrifuge tube, 10 ml of HBSS with 5% FBS (Mediatech Inc., Herndon, VA) added, and the cells pelleted. The supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellet was resuspended in HBSS with 5% FBS. Finally, the epithelial cells from the TRAMP tumor were pelleted, washed and suspended in DMEM medium with 2% FBS and 10 mM HEPES buffer (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA). Fresh human benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue harvested from radical prostatectomy surgical specimens in ice-cold Viaspan transplant media (4°C) (Barr Laboratories Inc., Pomona, NY) was obtained from the Pathology Resource Network at RPCI in accordance with NIH guidelines on the use of human subjects, and with the approval of the Internal Research Board at RPCI. Areas of radical prostatectomy tissue specimens that were greater then 90% cancer were identified by a Pathologist in the Pathology Resource Network by analysis of frozen sections prepared from the freshly resected tissue. Tissue specimens verified as prostate cancer were used for SP isolation. Enzymatic tissue digestion was performed as described. 43 Briefly, tissue specimens were minced finely into 3–5 mm3 pieces and the pieces gently washed with Ca2+/Mg2+ free PBS supplemented with penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 ?g/ml) at 4°C, for 15 minutes. The supernatant was aspirated and the minced tissue was digested with Dispase (InVitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 2.4 U/ml in Ca2+/Mg2+ free PBS supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin for 16 hrs at 4°C. The tissue digest was strained through a 40 micron pore cell strainer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), washed twice with HBSS supplemented with 5% FBS, and the cells pelleted. The cell pellet was resuspended in 6 ml of HBSS supplemented with 5% FBS, divided into two conical centrifuge tubes, an equal volume (3 ml) of HISTOPAQUE-1077 layered over the cell suspension in each tube, and the tubes centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 30 minutes at room temperature. The cell interface was transferred into a fresh tube, resuspended in 10 ml of HBSS supplemented with 5% FBS, and the cells pelleted. The final cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of PrEBM medium (Lonza Biologics Inc., Portsmouth, NH) with 2% FBS, and passed through a 40 micron strainer to assure a single cell suspension.  DyeCycle violet labeling Mouse bone marrow, and all prostate cell lines and tissue preparations, were labeled with DCV (InVitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to a protocol modified from Telford et al. 11 Briefly, cells were suspended in appropriate medium and warmed to 37°C for 15 minutes. Before incubation with DCV, if appropriate, cells (1 × 106 cells/500 ?l) were pre-incubated for 30 minutes in 10 ?M Fumitremorgin C (FTC) (Alexis Biochemicals, AXXORA, LLC, San Diego, CA) at 37°C. Subsequently, DCV (10 ?M) was added to all cell preparations and the cells were incubated at 37°C for 90 minutes. After incubation with DCV, cells were pelleted and resuspended in cold SP buffer (HBSS containing 2% FBS and 2 mM HEPES buffer), and 7-amino-actinomycin D (7-AAD, Beckman-Coulter, Inc., Fullerton, CA) was added to identify nonviable cells in the FACS analysis. DCV labeled cells were stored on ice until analyzed on either a BD™ LSR II cytometer, or flow sorted on a BD FACSAria™ (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).  Multi-parametric analysis and gating strategy The characteristic emission profile of DCV demonstrates strong maxima in both the blue and red and regions of the spectra. With excitation by a violet diode laser at 408 nm (Coherent, Inc.,), the DCV-specific blue fluorescence was collected through a 450/40 nm bandpass (BP) filter and the DCV-specific red fluorescence was collected through a 650 nm longpass (LP) filter. For sorting, non-viable cells were excluded based upon uptake of 7-AAD. A 488 nm Sapphire™ laser was utilized to excite 7-AAD, with emission monitored through a 695/40 nm bandpass filter. The gating strategy for analysis or flow sorting of the SP was the same. Dual-parametric analysis of FALS versus LALS was the primary gate used to identify cells in the appropriate size range, and to eliminate debris. Cells falling in the primary gate subsequently were evaluated by analysis of LALS height versus LALS width, followed by FALS height vs. FALS width, for doublet discrimination. In addition, cells within the primary gate were evaluated for 7AAD uptake to eliminate dead cells. Finally, the live, singlet cells were displayed in a dual-parametric presentation of DCV red fluorescence (x-axis) vs. DCV blue fluorescence (y-axis), and the location of the SP determined based upon loss of the putative SP in a cohort population pre-incubated with FTC. Data was analyzed using the FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Size standard beads (Bangs Laboratories, Inc., Fishers, IN) of size 4.3 ?m, 6.8 ?m, 7.9 ?m, 8.7 ?m and 10.8 ?m were evaluated on the BD™ LSR II cytometer using the same laser source and settings as used for DCV analysis. Bead size was plotted against mean FALS and the size of SP and NSP cell size interpolated from the standard curve.  Size analysis of the SP and NSP cells from human prostate tissue Cytospin slides of the sorted SP and NSP cells were prepared by centrifugation onto VECTABOND™ coated slides (Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA) at 3,000 rpm for 3 min. The sample chambers of the cytospin centrifuge (Cytospin 3, Shandon) were pre-washed for 1 min with 60 ?l of phosphate buffered saline containing 1% FBS. The dried immobilized cells were stained with hematoxylin (EMD Chemicals, Inc., Gibbstown, NJ) and visualized using a Zeiss Axiovert25 microscope.  qRT-PCR analysis Total RNA was isolated from the sorted populations using the RNeasy Micro kit according to the manufacturers’ protocol (Qiagen, Chatsworth, CA). All RNA samples were stored at ?80°C, or immediately converted to cDNA according to manufacturers’ protocol, using the SuperScript III/RNaseOUT First Strand Synthesis System SuperMix Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Gene expression was assessed with TaqMan® Gene Expression Assay 53790 (ABI) amplification of a region spanning exons 3–4 with an ACTB TaqMan® control (ABI) on an Applied Biosystems 7300 Real Time PCR System, using the default profile. qRT-PCR-based relative gene expression was calculated using the comparative ??Ct method. RQ represents the relative expression level (fold change) compared to the reference sample of the benign NSP.  Immunofluoresence For immunofluorescence analysis of ABCG2 protein in cells, sorted SP cells were plated in wells of a chamber slide and grown to approximately 70–80% confluence. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MD) in 1X Tris Buffered Saline (TBS) solution, pH 7.8 [8.4 mM Na2HPO4·H2O (Mallinckrodt Baker, Inc., Paris, Kentucky); 3.5 mM KH2PO4 (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ); 120 mM NaCl (Mallinckrodt Baker, Inc., Phillipsburg, NJ); 10 mM Tris (MP BIiomedicals, Inc., Solon, Ohio)] for 30 minutes, and were permeabilized for 10 minutes with 0.1%Tritron X-100 in 1X Tris buffer pH 7.8. Fixed/permeabilized cells were washed with TBS and incubated for 30 minutes in 1% BSA (OmniPur, EMD, Darmstadt, Germany) in 1X TBS pH 7.8. Primary antibody against ABCG2 (1:40 dilution; BXP-21/MAB4146, Chemicon, Temecula, CA) was applied to the slides and incubated overnight at 4°C. Slides were incubated with anti-mouse secondary antibody conjugated with Alexafluor 488 nm (1/300 dilution; InVitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for 2 hours. Matched incubations were performed in the absence of the primary antibody as a negative control. Nuclei were counter-stained with DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), the slides mounted with fluorescent mounting media (Dako Cytomation, Inc., Carpinteria, CA), and visualized using a Zeiss Axiovert25 microscope.  Figures and Table Figure 1 DCV-based SP profile in mouse bone marrow and control cell lines expressing ABCG2. The SP gated populations are displayed as scatter plots for red (650 nm LP) vs. blue (450/40 nm BP) emissions of DCV (excited with 405 nm laser source). The SP is present in mouse bone marrow (A); in the MCF-7 cell line (C); and in the HEK 293 (R482G) cell line (E). The loss of the SP population due to inhibition of the ABCG2 pump by FTC is observed in mouse bone marrow (B); in the MCF-7 cell line (D); and in the HEK 293 (R482G) cell line (F). SP analysis of the HEK 293 (vector control) cell line negative for ABCG2 expression labeled with DCV in the presence (H) or absence (G) of FTC. The ratio of the SP cells to total viable cells is indicated as percentage on each scatter plot. Figure 2 DCV SP profile in prostate cancer cell lines. SP population profile in the RWPE-1 cell line (A) and cells pre-treated with FTC (B); in the DU-145 cell line (E) and cells pre-treated with FTC (F); and in CWR-R1 cell line (I) and cells pre-treated with FTC (K). SP and NSP gates (I and K) identify the cells sorted by FACS. DCV-based analyses failed to identify a SP in BPH-1 cells labeled with DCV in the presence (D) or absence of FTC (C); LAPC-4 cells labeled with DCV in the presence (H) or absence of FTC (G). PC-3 cells demonstrated a small SP when labeled with DCV (L), however, the population did not shift in upon the addition of FTC (M). The ratio of the SP cells to total viable cells is indicated as percentage on each scatter plot. Figure 3 ABCG2 expression in SP and NSP cells from CWR-R1 and DCV efflux following in vitro propagation of SP and NSP cells from CWR-R1. (A) ABCG2 expression determined by qRT-PCR in the sorted and unsorted CWR-R1 cells isolated with gating strategy shown in Figure 2I . Error bars are the ?Ct standard error. CWR-R1 cells stained with DCV in the presence (B) or absence of FTC (C) and subjected to DCV dual emission wavelength analysis (DCV red fluorescence at 650 nm LP vs. DCV blue fluorescence at 450/40 nm BP). The CWR-R1 cell line was sorted into SP and NSP cells and cultured in vitro. Cultured SP cells (D and E) and NSP cells (F and G) were re-analyzed for the presence of a SP (DCV efflux) in the presence (E and G) and absence (D and F) of FTC. The ratio of the SP cells to total viable cells is indicated as percentage on each scatter plot. Figure 4 DCV SP analysis on cells derived from enzymatically digested prostate tissue. DCV-based SPs were observed in enzymatically digested: poorly differentiated tumor from a TRAMP mouse (A); benign human prostate tissue (patient 492) (C); and malignant human prostate tissue (patient 492) (E). The gates in panels (B, D and F) demonstrate the loss of the SP due to inhibition of DCV efflux population by pre-incubation of cells with FTC. The ratio of SP cells to total viable cells is indicated on each scatter plot as a percentage. (G) ABCG2 expression determined by qRT-PCR in the sorted SP and NSP cells isolated from enzymatically digested benign (C) and malignant (E) prostate tissue. Error bars are the ?Ct standard error. Figure 5 ABCG2 expression analysis in isolated SP cells from human prostate tissue. Enzymatically digested benign human prostate tissue was stained with DCV in the presence (B) or absence of FTC (A). The SP gate in panel (A) represents the sorted populations used for immunofluorescence analyses. The ratio of SP cells to total viable cells is indicated as percentage on the scatter plot. (B) Immunofluorescence of sorted cells using an antibody against human ABCG2 (BXP-21) and counterstained with DAPI. The arrow represents membrane staining for ABCG2. Figure 6 Phenotypic evaluation of the SP and NSP cells from human prostate tissue. The SP from enzymatically digested human prostate tissue (benign) is represented in (A) and in the presence of FTC (B). The ratio of the SP cells to total viable cells is indicated as percentage on each scatter plot. A dot plot representing Forward Scatter Area (FSC-A/FALS-A) vs. Side Scatter Area (SSC-A/LALS-A) measurements for the SP (C) and NSP (D) populations from panel (A) to estimate cell size. Micrographs of SP cells (C inset) and NSP cells (D inset) stained with hemotoxylin. Table 1 The percentage of SP cells relative to total viable cells in tissue specimens from human benign prostate and prostate cancer Benign Tumor 1.5 2.4 1.2 4.9 1.6 6.5 1.6 6.1 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.5 2.5 3.6 0.6 0.3 3.4 0.7 1.0 NA 0.4 NA 0.2 NA 2.3 NA 1.7 NA 4.4 NA NA, not available.  Results Side population identification based on DCV efflux Identification of the SP from mouse bone marrow cells based upon efflux of DCV was established as a positive control employing the DCV labeling protocol of Telford et al. 11 with minor modifications. The SP fluorescence characteristics were identical on the BD LSR II analytical instrument and BD FACSAria cell sorter. The distinct SP was defined in a multi-parametric analysis of the Red (650 LP) vs. Blue (450/40 BP) emission of DCV, in response to excitation by a violet diode laser (408 nm). Non-viable cells were gated from the analysis based upon uptake of the fluorescent membrane impermeable dye, 7-maino-actinomycin D (7-AAD). The SP in freshly isolated mouse bone marrow cells formed a tail on the viable cell population that was comprised of the cells with the lowest DCV emission, reflecting efflux of the dye in the ABCG2 expressing SP cells. The SP constituted 4.7% of the total viable cells, as compared to the bulk of the viable non-SP cell population that retained the DCV vital dye ( Fig. 1A ). The dependence of the SP phenotype on expression of ABCG2, and not other ABC-family members, was demonstrated by elimination of the SP by pre-incubation of the bone marrow cells with the specific inhibitor of ABCG2-mediated efflux, fumitremorgin C (FTC) ( Fig. 1B ). A SP identified based upon efflux of DCV was identified in two cell lines that had been demonstrated previously to contain a SP based upon Hoechst 33342 efflux. To establish the optimal dye concentration for DCV labeling of cultured human cell lines, MCF-7, a breast cancer cell line that expresses an endogenous ABCG2, and HEK 293, a human embryonic kidney cell line that lacks all ABC-family members that was transfected with human ABCG2 (R482G) cloned into pcDNA (HEK 293 (R482G)), were used as ABCG2-mediated SP containing control cell lines. 11 , 22 A distinct DCV-efflux mediated SP was observed in flow cytometric analyses of MCF-7 and HEK 293 (R482G) cells ( Fig. 1C and E ), and the SP was eliminated when the cells were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 1D and F ). HEK 293 cells transfected with an empty pcDNA vector were used as a negative control for DCV efflux, and a SP was not observed ( Fig. 1G ). DCV efflux profile in prostate cancer cell lines To determine the presence, or absence, of SP cells in benign human prostate cell lines and human prostate cancer cell lines, the DCV-labeling protocol optimized in the two control cell lines was utilized to evaluate several human prostate cell lines, including: RWPE-1 (non-tumorigenic); BPH-1 (non-tumorigenic); LAPC-4 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive); CWR-R1 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive but not androgen dependant); DU-145 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive); and PC-3 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive) ( Fig. 2 ). A distinct SP was observed in the RWPE-1 (0.04% viable cells) ( Fig. 2A ), DU-145 (0.73%) ( Fig. 2E ), and CWR-R1 (0.4%) ( Fig. 2I ) cell lines. The DCV efflux-mediated SP was lost in all cell lines when cultures were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 2B, F and K ). The prostate cancer cell lines BPH-1 and LAPC-4 lacked a clear SP ( Fig. 2C and G ) and were unresponsive to FTC ( Fig. 2D and H ). A population of cells demonstrating the characteristics of a SP was present in the PC-3 cell line ( Fig. 2L ), however, the putative SP population was not eliminated by pre-incubation with FTC ( Fig. 2M ), indicating that the phenotype of SP of PC-3 cells was not determined by ABCG2 mediated efflux of DCV. ABCG2 gene expression and maintenance of the SP phenotype in CWR-R1 SP and NSP cells SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line were characterized for the expression of ABCG2, and for the potential of sorted SP cells to maintain a SP phenotype during population expansion in culture. SP and NSP cells isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 2I and K ) were analyzed for expression of ABCG2 mRNA using quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). ABCG2 mRNA expression was detected in the unsorted, SP and NSP cells. Relative expression level (RQ) was calculated from RNA isolated from sorted or unsorted CWR-R1cells. Results represent the average RQ relative to the CWR-R1 NSP of two separate sorting experiments, with qRT-PCR reactions performed in triplicate ( Fig. 3A ). The level of ABCG2 mRNA was increased 55-fold in the SP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line compared to the unsorted parental population, and 124-fold compared to the NSP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line. An equal number of viable SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ) were placed in culture to determine if the SP cells were capable of maintaining the putative stem cell phenotype, and if they would proliferate in culture and give rise to NSP cells. The SP cell fraction contained 85–90% viable cells after sorting, and the NSP cell fraction contained 75–85% viable cells after sorting, based upon analysis of trypan blue exclusion. There was no difference in the growth characteristics, or time to confluence, between cultures of SP or NSP cells (data not shown). After 2 passages, approximately 10 days in culture, the SP and NSP cells were re-analyzed by flow-microfluorimetry for the presence of SPs capable of constitutive DCV efflux ( Fig. 3D and F ). A distinct SP profile that contained 1.2% of the viable cells was observed in cultures grown from the SP cells ( Fig. 3D ), representing a 3-fold increase in the SP compared to that in the original CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ). However, the majority of the cells do not efflux DCV, thus the SP phenotype is not maintained in cell culture. The cultured NSP did not contain a distinct SP, and the 0.02% of the total viable cells that were within the SP gate ( Fig. 3F ), remained within the gate in populations pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 3G ), confirming the absence of cells capable of ABCG2-mediated efflux of DCV. SP analysis of human prostate tissue The validated DCV labeling protocol and SP analysis by flow microfluorimetry was utilized subsequently to search for ABCG2-mediated SPs in single cell suspensions generated by enzymatic disaggregation of prostate tumors from TRAMP mice, and from fresh human prostate surgical specimens harvested from patients undergoing radical prostatectomy. The characteristic SP profile was difficult to resolve in freshly digested tissue due to the large amount of debris, as well as proteases, lipids and DNA from damaged cells that caused clumping of cells. To facilitate single cell preparations for analysis and sorting, the enzymatic digests were processed through a HISTOPAQUE-1077 density gradient to sediment erythrocytes, granulocytes and debris, and concentrate the intact single cells from the tissue digests. Prostate tumors from TRAMP mice contained a SP that comprised 1.0% of the total viable cells ( Fig. 4A ). Similarly, SPs were observed in cell populations recovered from human prostate tissue digests of un-involved (benign) areas of human prostates and digests of human prostate cancers. Figure 4C and E present typical flow cytograms of digested human prostate tissue: the gated SPs decreased when the enzymatic disaggregates were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 4D and F ). The SP comprised an average of 1.6 ± 0.30 percent of the viable cells in 15 specimens of benign human prostate and 2.8 ± 0.85 percent in 9 prostate cancer specimens ( Table 1 ). The average yield of viable SP cells from enzymatically disaggregated human prostate tissue specimens was approximately 2,550 cells/gram for benign tissue and 9,200 cells/gram of prostate cancer tissue. Evaluation of ABCG2 expression and phenotype of the SP and NSP cells Expression of ABCG2 in the FACS isolated SP, and NSP, cells from human benign prostate tissue ( Fig. 4C ) and prostate cancer tissue ( Fig. 4E ) was evaluated by qRT-PCR analysis. ABCG2 mRNA was detected in both SP and NSP cells isolated from both benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue. The relative expression level of ABCG2 mRNA was 66-fold and 32-fold greater in the benign and tumor SPs compared to the benign NSP, ( Fig. 4G ), for patient 492. ABCG2 expression was examined at the protein level by immunofluorescence analysis of the SP cells isolated from benign prostate tissue ( Fig. 5A ). ABCG2 protein ( Fig. 5C ) was localized to the membrane of SP cells isolated by FACS as visualized using an antibody against human ABCG2 (BXP-21), confirming that ABCG2 protein expression was concordant with DCV efflux in flow cytometric analyses. The size of cells in the SP and NSP were estimated by size analysis of forward angle light scatter (FALS) based upon calibration of the FACS instrument using beads that ranged in size from 4.3 ?m to 10.8 ?m. SP cells were determined to have a diameter of approximately 12.48 ?m ( Fig. 6C ), and NSP cells to have a diameter of approximately 15.13 ?m ( Fig. 6D ), based on the trendline from a plot of mean forward angle light scatter (FALS) intensity vs. bead size. In addition to the small size, SP cells demonstrated large nuclei and low cytoplasmic complexity and granularity, that contributed to a low level of large angle light scatter, also called side scatter or 90° scatter (LALS) [ Fig. 6C (inset) and D (inset)].  Results Side population identification based on DCV efflux Identification of the SP from mouse bone marrow cells based upon efflux of DCV was established as a positive control employing the DCV labeling protocol of Telford et al. 11 with minor modifications. The SP fluorescence characteristics were identical on the BD LSR II analytical instrument and BD FACSAria cell sorter. The distinct SP was defined in a multi-parametric analysis of the Red (650 LP) vs. Blue (450/40 BP) emission of DCV, in response to excitation by a violet diode laser (408 nm). Non-viable cells were gated from the analysis based upon uptake of the fluorescent membrane impermeable dye, 7-maino-actinomycin D (7-AAD). The SP in freshly isolated mouse bone marrow cells formed a tail on the viable cell population that was comprised of the cells with the lowest DCV emission, reflecting efflux of the dye in the ABCG2 expressing SP cells. The SP constituted 4.7% of the total viable cells, as compared to the bulk of the viable non-SP cell population that retained the DCV vital dye ( Fig. 1A ). The dependence of the SP phenotype on expression of ABCG2, and not other ABC-family members, was demonstrated by elimination of the SP by pre-incubation of the bone marrow cells with the specific inhibitor of ABCG2-mediated efflux, fumitremorgin C (FTC) ( Fig. 1B ). A SP identified based upon efflux of DCV was identified in two cell lines that had been demonstrated previously to contain a SP based upon Hoechst 33342 efflux. To establish the optimal dye concentration for DCV labeling of cultured human cell lines, MCF-7, a breast cancer cell line that expresses an endogenous ABCG2, and HEK 293, a human embryonic kidney cell line that lacks all ABC-family members that was transfected with human ABCG2 (R482G) cloned into pcDNA (HEK 293 (R482G)), were used as ABCG2-mediated SP containing control cell lines. 11 , 22 A distinct DCV-efflux mediated SP was observed in flow cytometric analyses of MCF-7 and HEK 293 (R482G) cells ( Fig. 1C and E ), and the SP was eliminated when the cells were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 1D and F ). HEK 293 cells transfected with an empty pcDNA vector were used as a negative control for DCV efflux, and a SP was not observed ( Fig. 1G ). DCV efflux profile in prostate cancer cell lines To determine the presence, or absence, of SP cells in benign human prostate cell lines and human prostate cancer cell lines, the DCV-labeling protocol optimized in the two control cell lines was utilized to evaluate several human prostate cell lines, including: RWPE-1 (non-tumorigenic); BPH-1 (non-tumorigenic); LAPC-4 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive); CWR-R1 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive but not androgen dependant); DU-145 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive); and PC-3 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive) ( Fig. 2 ). A distinct SP was observed in the RWPE-1 (0.04% viable cells) ( Fig. 2A ), DU-145 (0.73%) ( Fig. 2E ), and CWR-R1 (0.4%) ( Fig. 2I ) cell lines. The DCV efflux-mediated SP was lost in all cell lines when cultures were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 2B, F and K ). The prostate cancer cell lines BPH-1 and LAPC-4 lacked a clear SP ( Fig. 2C and G ) and were unresponsive to FTC ( Fig. 2D and H ). A population of cells demonstrating the characteristics of a SP was present in the PC-3 cell line ( Fig. 2L ), however, the putative SP population was not eliminated by pre-incubation with FTC ( Fig. 2M ), indicating that the phenotype of SP of PC-3 cells was not determined by ABCG2 mediated efflux of DCV. ABCG2 gene expression and maintenance of the SP phenotype in CWR-R1 SP and NSP cells SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line were characterized for the expression of ABCG2, and for the potential of sorted SP cells to maintain a SP phenotype during population expansion in culture. SP and NSP cells isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 2I and K ) were analyzed for expression of ABCG2 mRNA using quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). ABCG2 mRNA expression was detected in the unsorted, SP and NSP cells. Relative expression level (RQ) was calculated from RNA isolated from sorted or unsorted CWR-R1cells. Results represent the average RQ relative to the CWR-R1 NSP of two separate sorting experiments, with qRT-PCR reactions performed in triplicate ( Fig. 3A ). The level of ABCG2 mRNA was increased 55-fold in the SP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line compared to the unsorted parental population, and 124-fold compared to the NSP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line. An equal number of viable SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ) were placed in culture to determine if the SP cells were capable of maintaining the putative stem cell phenotype, and if they would proliferate in culture and give rise to NSP cells. The SP cell fraction contained 85–90% viable cells after sorting, and the NSP cell fraction contained 75–85% viable cells after sorting, based upon analysis of trypan blue exclusion. There was no difference in the growth characteristics, or time to confluence, between cultures of SP or NSP cells (data not shown). After 2 passages, approximately 10 days in culture, the SP and NSP cells were re-analyzed by flow-microfluorimetry for the presence of SPs capable of constitutive DCV efflux ( Fig. 3D and F ). A distinct SP profile that contained 1.2% of the viable cells was observed in cultures grown from the SP cells ( Fig. 3D ), representing a 3-fold increase in the SP compared to that in the original CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ). However, the majority of the cells do not efflux DCV, thus the SP phenotype is not maintained in cell culture. The cultured NSP did not contain a distinct SP, and the 0.02% of the total viable cells that were within the SP gate ( Fig. 3F ), remained within the gate in populations pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 3G ), confirming the absence of cells capable of ABCG2-mediated efflux of DCV. SP analysis of human prostate tissue The validated DCV labeling protocol and SP analysis by flow microfluorimetry was utilized subsequently to search for ABCG2-mediated SPs in single cell suspensions generated by enzymatic disaggregation of prostate tumors from TRAMP mice, and from fresh human prostate surgical specimens harvested from patients undergoing radical prostatectomy. The characteristic SP profile was difficult to resolve in freshly digested tissue due to the large amount of debris, as well as proteases, lipids and DNA from damaged cells that caused clumping of cells. To facilitate single cell preparations for analysis and sorting, the enzymatic digests were processed through a HISTOPAQUE-1077 density gradient to sediment erythrocytes, granulocytes and debris, and concentrate the intact single cells from the tissue digests. Prostate tumors from TRAMP mice contained a SP that comprised 1.0% of the total viable cells ( Fig. 4A ). Similarly, SPs were observed in cell populations recovered from human prostate tissue digests of un-involved (benign) areas of human prostates and digests of human prostate cancers. Figure 4C and E present typical flow cytograms of digested human prostate tissue: the gated SPs decreased when the enzymatic disaggregates were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 4D and F ). The SP comprised an average of 1.6 ± 0.30 percent of the viable cells in 15 specimens of benign human prostate and 2.8 ± 0.85 percent in 9 prostate cancer specimens ( Table 1 ). The average yield of viable SP cells from enzymatically disaggregated human prostate tissue specimens was approximately 2,550 cells/gram for benign tissue and 9,200 cells/gram of prostate cancer tissue. Evaluation of ABCG2 expression and phenotype of the SP and NSP cells Expression of ABCG2 in the FACS isolated SP, and NSP, cells from human benign prostate tissue ( Fig. 4C ) and prostate cancer tissue ( Fig. 4E ) was evaluated by qRT-PCR analysis. ABCG2 mRNA was detected in both SP and NSP cells isolated from both benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue. The relative expression level of ABCG2 mRNA was 66-fold and 32-fold greater in the benign and tumor SPs compared to the benign NSP, ( Fig. 4G ), for patient 492. ABCG2 expression was examined at the protein level by immunofluorescence analysis of the SP cells isolated from benign prostate tissue ( Fig. 5A ). ABCG2 protein ( Fig. 5C ) was localized to the membrane of SP cells isolated by FACS as visualized using an antibody against human ABCG2 (BXP-21), confirming that ABCG2 protein expression was concordant with DCV efflux in flow cytometric analyses. The size of cells in the SP and NSP were estimated by size analysis of forward angle light scatter (FALS) based upon calibration of the FACS instrument using beads that ranged in size from 4.3 ?m to 10.8 ?m. SP cells were determined to have a diameter of approximately 12.48 ?m ( Fig. 6C ), and NSP cells to have a diameter of approximately 15.13 ?m ( Fig. 6D ), based on the trendline from a plot of mean forward angle light scatter (FALS) intensity vs. bead size. In addition to the small size, SP cells demonstrated large nuclei and low cytoplasmic complexity and granularity, that contributed to a low level of large angle light scatter, also called side scatter or 90° scatter (LALS) [ Fig. 6C (inset) and D (inset)].  Side population identification based on DCV efflux Identification of the SP from mouse bone marrow cells based upon efflux of DCV was established as a positive control employing the DCV labeling protocol of Telford et al. 11 with minor modifications. The SP fluorescence characteristics were identical on the BD LSR II analytical instrument and BD FACSAria cell sorter. The distinct SP was defined in a multi-parametric analysis of the Red (650 LP) vs. Blue (450/40 BP) emission of DCV, in response to excitation by a violet diode laser (408 nm). Non-viable cells were gated from the analysis based upon uptake of the fluorescent membrane impermeable dye, 7-maino-actinomycin D (7-AAD). The SP in freshly isolated mouse bone marrow cells formed a tail on the viable cell population that was comprised of the cells with the lowest DCV emission, reflecting efflux of the dye in the ABCG2 expressing SP cells. The SP constituted 4.7% of the total viable cells, as compared to the bulk of the viable non-SP cell population that retained the DCV vital dye ( Fig. 1A ). The dependence of the SP phenotype on expression of ABCG2, and not other ABC-family members, was demonstrated by elimination of the SP by pre-incubation of the bone marrow cells with the specific inhibitor of ABCG2-mediated efflux, fumitremorgin C (FTC) ( Fig. 1B ). A SP identified based upon efflux of DCV was identified in two cell lines that had been demonstrated previously to contain a SP based upon Hoechst 33342 efflux. To establish the optimal dye concentration for DCV labeling of cultured human cell lines, MCF-7, a breast cancer cell line that expresses an endogenous ABCG2, and HEK 293, a human embryonic kidney cell line that lacks all ABC-family members that was transfected with human ABCG2 (R482G) cloned into pcDNA (HEK 293 (R482G)), were used as ABCG2-mediated SP containing control cell lines. 11 , 22 A distinct DCV-efflux mediated SP was observed in flow cytometric analyses of MCF-7 and HEK 293 (R482G) cells ( Fig. 1C and E ), and the SP was eliminated when the cells were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 1D and F ). HEK 293 cells transfected with an empty pcDNA vector were used as a negative control for DCV efflux, and a SP was not observed ( Fig. 1G ).  Side population identification based on DCV efflux Identification of the SP from mouse bone marrow cells based upon efflux of DCV was established as a positive control employing the DCV labeling protocol of Telford et al. 11 with minor modifications. The SP fluorescence characteristics were identical on the BD LSR II analytical instrument and BD FACSAria cell sorter. The distinct SP was defined in a multi-parametric analysis of the Red (650 LP) vs. Blue (450/40 BP) emission of DCV, in response to excitation by a violet diode laser (408 nm). Non-viable cells were gated from the analysis based upon uptake of the fluorescent membrane impermeable dye, 7-maino-actinomycin D (7-AAD). The SP in freshly isolated mouse bone marrow cells formed a tail on the viable cell population that was comprised of the cells with the lowest DCV emission, reflecting efflux of the dye in the ABCG2 expressing SP cells. The SP constituted 4.7% of the total viable cells, as compared to the bulk of the viable non-SP cell population that retained the DCV vital dye ( Fig. 1A ). The dependence of the SP phenotype on expression of ABCG2, and not other ABC-family members, was demonstrated by elimination of the SP by pre-incubation of the bone marrow cells with the specific inhibitor of ABCG2-mediated efflux, fumitremorgin C (FTC) ( Fig. 1B ). A SP identified based upon efflux of DCV was identified in two cell lines that had been demonstrated previously to contain a SP based upon Hoechst 33342 efflux. To establish the optimal dye concentration for DCV labeling of cultured human cell lines, MCF-7, a breast cancer cell line that expresses an endogenous ABCG2, and HEK 293, a human embryonic kidney cell line that lacks all ABC-family members that was transfected with human ABCG2 (R482G) cloned into pcDNA (HEK 293 (R482G)), were used as ABCG2-mediated SP containing control cell lines. 11 , 22 A distinct DCV-efflux mediated SP was observed in flow cytometric analyses of MCF-7 and HEK 293 (R482G) cells ( Fig. 1C and E ), and the SP was eliminated when the cells were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 1D and F ). HEK 293 cells transfected with an empty pcDNA vector were used as a negative control for DCV efflux, and a SP was not observed ( Fig. 1G ).  DCV efflux profile in prostate cancer cell lines To determine the presence, or absence, of SP cells in benign human prostate cell lines and human prostate cancer cell lines, the DCV-labeling protocol optimized in the two control cell lines was utilized to evaluate several human prostate cell lines, including: RWPE-1 (non-tumorigenic); BPH-1 (non-tumorigenic); LAPC-4 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive); CWR-R1 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive but not androgen dependant); DU-145 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive); and PC-3 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive) ( Fig. 2 ). A distinct SP was observed in the RWPE-1 (0.04% viable cells) ( Fig. 2A ), DU-145 (0.73%) ( Fig. 2E ), and CWR-R1 (0.4%) ( Fig. 2I ) cell lines. The DCV efflux-mediated SP was lost in all cell lines when cultures were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 2B, F and K ). The prostate cancer cell lines BPH-1 and LAPC-4 lacked a clear SP ( Fig. 2C and G ) and were unresponsive to FTC ( Fig. 2D and H ). A population of cells demonstrating the characteristics of a SP was present in the PC-3 cell line ( Fig. 2L ), however, the putative SP population was not eliminated by pre-incubation with FTC ( Fig. 2M ), indicating that the phenotype of SP of PC-3 cells was not determined by ABCG2 mediated efflux of DCV.  DCV efflux profile in prostate cancer cell lines To determine the presence, or absence, of SP cells in benign human prostate cell lines and human prostate cancer cell lines, the DCV-labeling protocol optimized in the two control cell lines was utilized to evaluate several human prostate cell lines, including: RWPE-1 (non-tumorigenic); BPH-1 (non-tumorigenic); LAPC-4 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive); CWR-R1 (tumorigenic, androgen responsive but not androgen dependant); DU-145 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive); and PC-3 (tumorigenic, androgen unresponsive) ( Fig. 2 ). A distinct SP was observed in the RWPE-1 (0.04% viable cells) ( Fig. 2A ), DU-145 (0.73%) ( Fig. 2E ), and CWR-R1 (0.4%) ( Fig. 2I ) cell lines. The DCV efflux-mediated SP was lost in all cell lines when cultures were pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 2B, F and K ). The prostate cancer cell lines BPH-1 and LAPC-4 lacked a clear SP ( Fig. 2C and G ) and were unresponsive to FTC ( Fig. 2D and H ). A population of cells demonstrating the characteristics of a SP was present in the PC-3 cell line ( Fig. 2L ), however, the putative SP population was not eliminated by pre-incubation with FTC ( Fig. 2M ), indicating that the phenotype of SP of PC-3 cells was not determined by ABCG2 mediated efflux of DCV.  ABCG2 gene expression and maintenance of the SP phenotype in CWR-R1 SP and NSP cells SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line were characterized for the expression of ABCG2, and for the potential of sorted SP cells to maintain a SP phenotype during population expansion in culture. SP and NSP cells isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 2I and K ) were analyzed for expression of ABCG2 mRNA using quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). ABCG2 mRNA expression was detected in the unsorted, SP and NSP cells. Relative expression level (RQ) was calculated from RNA isolated from sorted or unsorted CWR-R1cells. Results represent the average RQ relative to the CWR-R1 NSP of two separate sorting experiments, with qRT-PCR reactions performed in triplicate ( Fig. 3A ). The level of ABCG2 mRNA was increased 55-fold in the SP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line compared to the unsorted parental population, and 124-fold compared to the NSP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line. An equal number of viable SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ) were placed in culture to determine if the SP cells were capable of maintaining the putative stem cell phenotype, and if they would proliferate in culture and give rise to NSP cells. The SP cell fraction contained 85–90% viable cells after sorting, and the NSP cell fraction contained 75–85% viable cells after sorting, based upon analysis of trypan blue exclusion. There was no difference in the growth characteristics, or time to confluence, between cultures of SP or NSP cells (data not shown). After 2 passages, approximately 10 days in culture, the SP and NSP cells were re-analyzed by flow-microfluorimetry for the presence of SPs capable of constitutive DCV efflux ( Fig. 3D and F ). A distinct SP profile that contained 1.2% of the viable cells was observed in cultures grown from the SP cells ( Fig. 3D ), representing a 3-fold increase in the SP compared to that in the original CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ). However, the majority of the cells do not efflux DCV, thus the SP phenotype is not maintained in cell culture. The cultured NSP did not contain a distinct SP, and the 0.02% of the total viable cells that were within the SP gate ( Fig. 3F ), remained within the gate in populations pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 3G ), confirming the absence of cells capable of ABCG2-mediated efflux of DCV.  ABCG2 gene expression and maintenance of the SP phenotype in CWR-R1 SP and NSP cells SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line were characterized for the expression of ABCG2, and for the potential of sorted SP cells to maintain a SP phenotype during population expansion in culture. SP and NSP cells isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 2I and K ) were analyzed for expression of ABCG2 mRNA using quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). ABCG2 mRNA expression was detected in the unsorted, SP and NSP cells. Relative expression level (RQ) was calculated from RNA isolated from sorted or unsorted CWR-R1cells. Results represent the average RQ relative to the CWR-R1 NSP of two separate sorting experiments, with qRT-PCR reactions performed in triplicate ( Fig. 3A ). The level of ABCG2 mRNA was increased 55-fold in the SP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line compared to the unsorted parental population, and 124-fold compared to the NSP isolated from the CWR-R1 cell line. An equal number of viable SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ) were placed in culture to determine if the SP cells were capable of maintaining the putative stem cell phenotype, and if they would proliferate in culture and give rise to NSP cells. The SP cell fraction contained 85–90% viable cells after sorting, and the NSP cell fraction contained 75–85% viable cells after sorting, based upon analysis of trypan blue exclusion. There was no difference in the growth characteristics, or time to confluence, between cultures of SP or NSP cells (data not shown). After 2 passages, approximately 10 days in culture, the SP and NSP cells were re-analyzed by flow-microfluorimetry for the presence of SPs capable of constitutive DCV efflux ( Fig. 3D and F ). A distinct SP profile that contained 1.2% of the viable cells was observed in cultures grown from the SP cells ( Fig. 3D ), representing a 3-fold increase in the SP compared to that in the original CWR-R1 cell line ( Fig. 3B ). However, the majority of the cells do not efflux DCV, thus the SP phenotype is not maintained in cell culture. The cultured NSP did not contain a distinct SP, and the 0.02% of the total viable cells that were within the SP gate ( Fig. 3F ), remained within the gate in populations pre-incubated with FTC ( Fig. 3G ), confirming the absence of cells capable of ABCG2-mediated efflux of DCV.  Discussion The ability to isolate populations of viable, putative stem cells relies on stem cell specific expression of unique cell surface antigens capable of the efflux of vital dyes, such as Hoechst 33342 or DCV. The efflux of Hoechst and DCV dyes by SP cells is mediated by the ATP binding cassette transporters ABCB1 (MDR1) and ABCG2 (BCRP). 3 , 29 , 30 Cells with the capacity to efflux these vital dyes constitute the SP, and can be discriminated clearly in flow cytometric analyses from the bulk of the cells that lack these membrane pumps and demonstrate bright nuclear staining due to intercalation of the vital dyes in the DNA. 31 , 32 Experimentally, excitation of Hoechst dye requires an ultraviolet laser light source; UV lasers are large, expensive and require high laser power outputs that can result in UV-irradiation mediated damage to the DNA of cells. 30 In contrast, DCV is excited at 408 nm, using a low power violet diode laser that both allows analysis and sorting on instruments with the significantly less expensive laser source, and minimizes the potential for UV-induced DNA damage. The utility of DCV for identification of a SP in mouse and human bone marrow, and several cell lines, comparable to that observed with Hoechst was demonstrated previously. 11 , 12 However, this is the first application of this technology to cells harvested from human solid tissues/tumors. In this study, DCV was used as an analytical reagent for resolving a SP in benign and malignant prostate cell lines, and in cells derived from enzymatically digested benign and malignant prostate tissue. We confirmed that DCV is actively effluxed via ABCG2 by a subpopulation of mouse bone marrow cells that demonstrate the SP phenotype by the sensitivity of the efflux to inhibition by FTC. 11 Analysis of the DCV profile in the HEK 293 (R482G) cell line pre-incubated with FTC confirmed that DCV efflux was mediated by the membrane transporter ABCG2. Thus, DCV was used to identify the SP in prostate cancer cell lines and enzymatically digested human prostate clinical specimens. DCV provided a rapid and reproducible identification of a SP in several prostate cell lines. A clearly distinguishable SP was present in DU-145, an androgen deprivation recurrent metastatic cell line; CWR-R1, an androgen deprivation recurrent prostate cancer cell line; and in RWPE-1, an androgen responsive, non-tumorigenic cell line derived from the peripheral zone of a benign prostate specimen and immortalized with HPV18. 33 In contrast, the PC-3 cell line appeared to contain a SP, however, the putative SP was not sensitive to FTC-mediated ablation. The lack of sensitivity to FTC suggested the SP phenotype was related to the presence of other ATP-family transporters, such as ABCB1 (MDR-1) or Mrp1 (ABCC1). In contrast to a previous report that DU-145 did not contain a SP defined by efflux of Hoechst, 22 we observed a distinct SP characterized by efflux of DCV. These conflicting results may be due to the different substrates, or possibly to differences in maintenance or passage of the cell line. There was no SP observed in LAPC-4 and BPH-1 cells, confirming that not all cell lines contain a SP phenotype. SP cells isolated from several tumorigenic cell lines demonstrated an enhanced capacity to initiate tumor formation when xenografted into immunocompromised mice compared to the NSP cells, or the heterogeneous parental cell population. 22 , 32 , 34 – 37 Differential capacities of SP versus NSP cells to initiate tumor formation were hypothesized to suggest the presence of “cancer stem cells” in the SP population. Thus, isolation of a viable DCV-based SP and NSP from prostate cancer cell lines provided the resources to test the “cancer stem cell” hypothesis. In order to determine the stability of the SP and NSP populations isolated by FACS from the CWR-R1 cell line, a secondary SP analysis was performed after the FACS sorted cells were cultured for one week. The SP and NSP cells displayed similar morphological appearance, and growth rates after the week in culture. Reanalysis of the isolated SP and NSP populations for the presence of a SP based on DCV efflux, demonstrated that the population cultured from the sorted SP contained a higher percentage of SP cells than the parental population, whereas, the cultured NSP contained a very small number of SP cells ( Fig. 3D and F ). Interestingly, in the cultured NSP cells, the very small SP was maintained in the presence of the ABCG2 inhibitor FTC, suggesting the DCV efflux was due to the presence of alternative ABC-family members. ABCG2 mRNA expression was detected in both the SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line, although the level in the NSP was dramatically lower than in the SP cells. A similar pattern was reported for SP and NSP cells isolated from the LAPC9 xenograft, 22 murine bone marrow, skeletal muscle, cultured ES cells, and rhesus monkey bone marrow. 2 Therefore, expression of ABCG2 mRNA may not be limited to the SP phenotype, or other cell types that express ABC pumps, such as endothelial cells, recovered in the heterogeneous NSP are responsible for the presence of the mRNA. A SP-based enrichment/purification of putative stem cells has been utilized in multiple tissues, or cell lines, when externally expressed molecular markers for putative stem cells are unknown, or nonspecific. 31 In addition, a FACS-based enrichment/purification technology provides isolation of putative stem cells for analysis of cellular and biological functions without the cells having undergone adaptation to culture, with the potential for loss of expression of markers of stemness. 38 This study demonstrates the feasibility of isolating SP cells from fresh digests of benign human prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue for identification of specific stem cell properties and markers, based on DCV-efflux. The SP recovered from human prostate tissues ranged from between 0.2 to 4.4% of total viable cells in benign prostate tissue, and between 0.3 to 6.5% of total viable cells in prostate cancer tissue specimens. The presence of ABCG2 mRNA and protein in SP cells was confirmed with qRT-PCR ( Fig. 4G ) and immunofluoresence staining of SP cells isolated by FACS from both benign and malignant prostate tissue, without culturing the cells ( Fig. 5C ). Our observation that the increased number of SP cells in prostate cancer tissue compared to benign prostate tissue suggests an expansion in tumors of an ABCG2 expressing cancer stem cell population. Alternatively, the increased number of ABCG2 positive cells could represent the presence of an elevated number of endothelial cells in the tumor compared to benign tissue, or the presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. Both endothelial cells and lymphocytes are capable of effluxing Hoescht. 25 , 39 However, the SP cells from both benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue demonstrated lower FALS ( Fig. 6 ) than expected for the larger endothelial cells, and low LALS than characteristic of lymphocytes with very high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratios. Furthermore, the SP cells from prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue specimens were smaller, and had less cytoplasmic complexity, than cells of the NSP population ( Fig. 6D ). This result is consistent with reports that SP cells are smaller than NSP cells from cornea tissue 40 and that small cell size is a stem cell characteristic. 29 , 41 Unfortunately, the physical characteristics of FALS and LALS are not sufficiently discriminating to allow enrichment/purification of a putative stem cell population, and the lack of consensus cell-surface markers that unambiguously label all stem and cancer stem cells, leave the dye-efflux based separation protocol as the preferable approach to collecting enriched populations of live putative stem cells. 31 Consequently, the DCV dye efflux-based FACS separation provides a useful tool for isolation of small populations of viable putative stem cells from solid tissues or tumors that can be used to identify more definitive stem cell markers.  Discussion The ability to isolate populations of viable, putative stem cells relies on stem cell specific expression of unique cell surface antigens capable of the efflux of vital dyes, such as Hoechst 33342 or DCV. The efflux of Hoechst and DCV dyes by SP cells is mediated by the ATP binding cassette transporters ABCB1 (MDR1) and ABCG2 (BCRP). 3 , 29 , 30 Cells with the capacity to efflux these vital dyes constitute the SP, and can be discriminated clearly in flow cytometric analyses from the bulk of the cells that lack these membrane pumps and demonstrate bright nuclear staining due to intercalation of the vital dyes in the DNA. 31 , 32 Experimentally, excitation of Hoechst dye requires an ultraviolet laser light source; UV lasers are large, expensive and require high laser power outputs that can result in UV-irradiation mediated damage to the DNA of cells. 30 In contrast, DCV is excited at 408 nm, using a low power violet diode laser that both allows analysis and sorting on instruments with the significantly less expensive laser source, and minimizes the potential for UV-induced DNA damage. The utility of DCV for identification of a SP in mouse and human bone marrow, and several cell lines, comparable to that observed with Hoechst was demonstrated previously. 11 , 12 However, this is the first application of this technology to cells harvested from human solid tissues/tumors. In this study, DCV was used as an analytical reagent for resolving a SP in benign and malignant prostate cell lines, and in cells derived from enzymatically digested benign and malignant prostate tissue. We confirmed that DCV is actively effluxed via ABCG2 by a subpopulation of mouse bone marrow cells that demonstrate the SP phenotype by the sensitivity of the efflux to inhibition by FTC. 11 Analysis of the DCV profile in the HEK 293 (R482G) cell line pre-incubated with FTC confirmed that DCV efflux was mediated by the membrane transporter ABCG2. Thus, DCV was used to identify the SP in prostate cancer cell lines and enzymatically digested human prostate clinical specimens. DCV provided a rapid and reproducible identification of a SP in several prostate cell lines. A clearly distinguishable SP was present in DU-145, an androgen deprivation recurrent metastatic cell line; CWR-R1, an androgen deprivation recurrent prostate cancer cell line; and in RWPE-1, an androgen responsive, non-tumorigenic cell line derived from the peripheral zone of a benign prostate specimen and immortalized with HPV18. 33 In contrast, the PC-3 cell line appeared to contain a SP, however, the putative SP was not sensitive to FTC-mediated ablation. The lack of sensitivity to FTC suggested the SP phenotype was related to the presence of other ATP-family transporters, such as ABCB1 (MDR-1) or Mrp1 (ABCC1). In contrast to a previous report that DU-145 did not contain a SP defined by efflux of Hoechst, 22 we observed a distinct SP characterized by efflux of DCV. These conflicting results may be due to the different substrates, or possibly to differences in maintenance or passage of the cell line. There was no SP observed in LAPC-4 and BPH-1 cells, confirming that not all cell lines contain a SP phenotype. SP cells isolated from several tumorigenic cell lines demonstrated an enhanced capacity to initiate tumor formation when xenografted into immunocompromised mice compared to the NSP cells, or the heterogeneous parental cell population. 22 , 32 , 34 – 37 Differential capacities of SP versus NSP cells to initiate tumor formation were hypothesized to suggest the presence of “cancer stem cells” in the SP population. Thus, isolation of a viable DCV-based SP and NSP from prostate cancer cell lines provided the resources to test the “cancer stem cell” hypothesis. In order to determine the stability of the SP and NSP populations isolated by FACS from the CWR-R1 cell line, a secondary SP analysis was performed after the FACS sorted cells were cultured for one week. The SP and NSP cells displayed similar morphological appearance, and growth rates after the week in culture. Reanalysis of the isolated SP and NSP populations for the presence of a SP based on DCV efflux, demonstrated that the population cultured from the sorted SP contained a higher percentage of SP cells than the parental population, whereas, the cultured NSP contained a very small number of SP cells ( Fig. 3D and F ). Interestingly, in the cultured NSP cells, the very small SP was maintained in the presence of the ABCG2 inhibitor FTC, suggesting the DCV efflux was due to the presence of alternative ABC-family members. ABCG2 mRNA expression was detected in both the SP and NSP cells sorted from the CWR-R1 cell line, although the level in the NSP was dramatically lower than in the SP cells. A similar pattern was reported for SP and NSP cells isolated from the LAPC9 xenograft, 22 murine bone marrow, skeletal muscle, cultured ES cells, and rhesus monkey bone marrow. 2 Therefore, expression of ABCG2 mRNA may not be limited to the SP phenotype, or other cell types that express ABC pumps, such as endothelial cells, recovered in the heterogeneous NSP are responsible for the presence of the mRNA. A SP-based enrichment/purification of putative stem cells has been utilized in multiple tissues, or cell lines, when externally expressed molecular markers for putative stem cells are unknown, or nonspecific. 31 In addition, a FACS-based enrichment/purification technology provides isolation of putative stem cells for analysis of cellular and biological functions without the cells having undergone adaptation to culture, with the potential for loss of expression of markers of stemness. 38 This study demonstrates the feasibility of isolating SP cells from fresh digests of benign human prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue for identification of specific stem cell properties and markers, based on DCV-efflux. The SP recovered from human prostate tissues ranged from between 0.2 to 4.4% of total viable cells in benign prostate tissue, and between 0.3 to 6.5% of total viable cells in prostate cancer tissue specimens. The presence of ABCG2 mRNA and protein in SP cells was confirmed with qRT-PCR ( Fig. 4G ) and immunofluoresence staining of SP cells isolated by FACS from both benign and malignant prostate tissue, without culturing the cells ( Fig. 5C ). Our observation that the increased number of SP cells in prostate cancer tissue compared to benign prostate tissue suggests an expansion in tumors of an ABCG2 expressing cancer stem cell population. Alternatively, the increased number of ABCG2 positive cells could represent the presence of an elevated number of endothelial cells in the tumor compared to benign tissue, or the presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. Both endothelial cells and lymphocytes are capable of effluxing Hoescht. 25 , 39 However, the SP cells from both benign prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue demonstrated lower FALS ( Fig. 6 ) than expected for the larger endothelial cells, and low LALS than characteristic of lymphocytes with very high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratios. Furthermore, the SP cells from prostate tissue and prostate cancer tissue specimens were smaller, and had less cytoplasmic complexity, than cells of the NSP population ( Fig. 6D ). This result is consistent with reports that SP cells are smaller than NSP cells from cornea tissue 40 and that small cell size is a stem cell characteristic. 29 , 41 Unfortunately, the physical characteristics of FALS and LALS are not sufficiently discriminating to allow enrichment/purification of a putative stem cell population, and the lack of consensus cell-surface markers that unambiguously label all stem and cancer stem cells, leave the dye-efflux based separation protocol as the preferable approach to collecting enriched populations of live putative stem cells. 31 Consequently, the DCV dye efflux-based FACS separation provides a useful tool for isolation of small populations of viable putative stem cells from solid tissues or tumors that can be used to identify more definitive stem cell markers. 