A Pilot Study of the Use of Pain Questionnaires in Vertebroplasty Research SUMMARY Administration of comprehensive outcomes measures in elderly patients presenting for vertebroplasty is considered difficult. We administered a battery of 11 outcomes questionnaires with a total of 82 questions, both in person before vertebroplasty and by telephone after vertebroplasty in 20 consecutive patients (mean age, 74.5 years; 80% women). Initial and follow-up interviews required an average of 17.4 ± 0.36 minutes (range, 14–21 minutes) and 27.2 ± 0.73 minutes (range, 16–33 minutes), respectively.  Introduction Percutaneous vertebroplasty in many centers has become standard of care for patients suffering from painful, osteoporotic vertebral fractures. Even in the setting of widespread adoption of the vertebroplasty technique, few studies employing validated, functional outcomes scales have been published. 1 Further, the employment of a wide battery of outcomes assessments on a single vertebroplasty cohort has not previously been reported. As vertebroplasty research evolves over time, including implementation of randomized, blinded trials, we believe that it would be useful to assess the feasibility of employing multiple outcomes measures in patient cohort typical for vertebroplasty. These patients are over the age of 60 and are lacking in strength and vigor. Our group is in the late stages of carrying out an NIH-funded, prospective, randomized, blinded trial of percutaneous vertebroplasty. The subject and the interviewer are blinded to which procedure the subject received, control or cement. In anticipation of this trial, we conducted a pilot study to assess the feasibility of implementing multiple outcomes measures, some quite lengthy, in the vertebroplasty population. Our primary focus in this pilot study was to assess the duration of time required to administer multiple measures both in person and by telephone, to determine not only whether such measurement outcomes would be feasible in this patient population but also to allow us to optimize planning of coordinator time and effort. The current paper describes the results of this pilot trial.  Materials and Methods Institutional review board approval was obtained prior to initiating this pilot study. Fifty-two consecutive patients presenting for consideration of vertebroplasty between the dates of June 2 and September 10, 2003, were screened for painful, vertebral fractures. The inclusion/exclusion criteria for this pilot study were brief. If the patient was offered a vertebroplasty and decided to proceed with the vertebroplasty procedure, the patient was eligible. Twenty-two patients were not offered or deferred the vertebroplasty procedure. Six additional patients were deemed ineligible for the trial, leaving 24 patients eligible for enrollment. Twenty patients (83%) of these 24 eligible patients enrolled in the pilot trial. After signing an IRB approved informed consent, twenty participants in the pilot study were interviewed and a timing study was completed. The participants were patients who were to receive a vertebroplasty (13 due to osteoporosis, 1 due to trauma, and 6 with tumor involvement). These patients had been seen by the vertebroplasty practitioner and had been scheduled for a percutaneous vertebroplasty procedure. Of the 20 participants in the trial, 16 (80%) were female and 100% were Caucasian. The ages of the patients ranged from 60 – 89 years of age with the median age being 74.5 years. The pre-procedure outcomes questionnaires were administered in person by the study coordinator. The administration of questionnaires is a part of the training to become a study coordinator. The study coordinator recorded the answers on a paper copy of the questionnaires. The start time of the questionnaires was recorded at the beginning of the interview and the finish time was recorded when all the questions had been answered. One month following the vertebroplasty procedures patients again underwent administration of the questionnaires, this time over the telephone. The same questionnaires were used with the addition of one questionnaire asking about any doctor or hospital visits regarding the back that may have occurred in the month following the vertebroplasty. The study coordinator recorded the answers on a paper copy of the questionnaires. The start time of the questionnaires was recorded at the beginning of the interview and the finish time was recorded when all the questions had been answered. Questionnaires used The multiple questionnaires involved in this research are pain and quality of life questionnaires. The measures and the number of items per measure are listed in Table 1 . The numeric rating scale (NRS) is an 11 point scale that rates the intensity of pain from 0 (no pain) to10 (the worst possible pain). 2 The Pain Medication questionnaire asked participants if they had taken any pain medication in the last 24 hours (yes or no). If the answer was yes, the type of medication was recorded along with the dose and the number of times per day the medication was ingested. The Roland scale which consists of 23 questions relating to back pain and disability was completed. 3 , 4 The Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) Activities of Daily Living (ADL) questionnaire consists of six questions relating to activities done in a typical day. 5 Another questionnaire, the Euro Quality of Life (QOL), contains five questions regarding mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression. 6 Questions were asked regarding pain frequency and pain bothersomeness. The main health survey questionnaire called the SF-36 (Short Form – 36 questions) is used to measure health status. 7 This form is invaluable in measuring the sometimes subtle changes in health that follow medical interventions. Many patients who suffer from compression fractures of the vertebrae have changes in their posture and the alignment of the spine. The Osteoporosis Assessment Questionnaire (OPAQ) asks questions about feelings about body image. 8 Questions were asked about the pain impact on activities also. At the one month follow up telephone call all of these questionnaires were used as well as one more questionnaire requesting information regarding any physician office visits or hospital visits (regarding their back) the patient may have had since the vertebroplasty procedure.  Questionnaires used The multiple questionnaires involved in this research are pain and quality of life questionnaires. The measures and the number of items per measure are listed in Table 1 . The numeric rating scale (NRS) is an 11 point scale that rates the intensity of pain from 0 (no pain) to10 (the worst possible pain). 2 The Pain Medication questionnaire asked participants if they had taken any pain medication in the last 24 hours (yes or no). If the answer was yes, the type of medication was recorded along with the dose and the number of times per day the medication was ingested. The Roland scale which consists of 23 questions relating to back pain and disability was completed. 3 , 4 The Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) Activities of Daily Living (ADL) questionnaire consists of six questions relating to activities done in a typical day. 5 Another questionnaire, the Euro Quality of Life (QOL), contains five questions regarding mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression. 6 Questions were asked regarding pain frequency and pain bothersomeness. The main health survey questionnaire called the SF-36 (Short Form – 36 questions) is used to measure health status. 7 This form is invaluable in measuring the sometimes subtle changes in health that follow medical interventions. Many patients who suffer from compression fractures of the vertebrae have changes in their posture and the alignment of the spine. The Osteoporosis Assessment Questionnaire (OPAQ) asks questions about feelings about body image. 8 Questions were asked about the pain impact on activities also. At the one month follow up telephone call all of these questionnaires were used as well as one more questionnaire requesting information regarding any physician office visits or hospital visits (regarding their back) the patient may have had since the vertebroplasty procedure.  Results Among 20 patients initially enrolled, all patients were able to answer all questions at the baseline, pre-procedure, in person interview. See figure1 of the length of time needed for each participant. The length of time to complete the in person (face-to-face), pre-procedure questionnaires was a mean of 17.4 ± 2.4 (range: 14–21) minutes. At one month four patients (20%) were lost to follow-up (1 death from lymphoma, 2 not answering the telephone, and 1 withdrawing). All 16 patients who underwent the followup interview completed all questions. The length of time required to complete the telephone-administered, post-procedure questionnaires was a mean of 23.5 ± 5.5 (range: 16–33) minutes. The difference in time was noted and included in the budget information for the NIH trial. The difference in duration was statistically significant ( P <0.001).  Results Among 20 patients initially enrolled, all patients were able to answer all questions at the baseline, pre-procedure, in person interview. See figure1 of the length of time needed for each participant. The length of time to complete the in person (face-to-face), pre-procedure questionnaires was a mean of 17.4 ± 2.4 (range: 14–21) minutes. At one month four patients (20%) were lost to follow-up (1 death from lymphoma, 2 not answering the telephone, and 1 withdrawing). All 16 patients who underwent the followup interview completed all questions. The length of time required to complete the telephone-administered, post-procedure questionnaires was a mean of 23.5 ± 5.5 (range: 16–33) minutes. The difference in time was noted and included in the budget information for the NIH trial. The difference in duration was statistically significant ( P <0.001).  Discussion In this study we demonstrated that, even in elderly patients suffering from painful vertebral compression fractures, multiple outcomes measures can be administered in a relatively short duration of time. These multiple outcomes measures included 82 total questions among 11 outcomes measures. In-person interviews were completed in approximately 17 minutes, which we believe is quite feasible in setting of randomized trials. Telephone-administered interviews comprised a significantly longer duration, but still were completed in less than 30 minutes on average. These data suggest that a wide battery of outcomes measures can readily be administered in the vertebroplasty population. Validated, functional outcomes measures have previously been reported in the vertebroplasty population. 1 , 9 – 11 Global health measures have not been reported in the vertebroplasty population, but have been published in Kyphoplasty cohorts. Our data presented here suggests that wide arrays of outcomes measures can be applied to the vertebroplasty population, which may facilitate the completion of prospective trials. This study suffers several limitations. The patient population was somewhat heterogeneous regarding fracture etiology. However, the mean age of the cohort was similar to that of many previous vertebroplasty studies. The study also suffered from a 20% lost-to-follow-up rate, which is higher than would typically be acceptable in a large, prospective trial. The outcomes presented, including a high rate of successful questionnaire completion both in person and by telephone, offer encouragement that a wide array of outcomes measures can be administered to the vertebroplasty population. Future trials of vertebroplasty, when possible, should include appropriate outcomes measures.  Discussion In this study we demonstrated that, even in elderly patients suffering from painful vertebral compression fractures, multiple outcomes measures can be administered in a relatively short duration of time. These multiple outcomes measures included 82 total questions among 11 outcomes measures. In-person interviews were completed in approximately 17 minutes, which we believe is quite feasible in setting of randomized trials. Telephone-administered interviews comprised a significantly longer duration, but still were completed in less than 30 minutes on average. These data suggest that a wide battery of outcomes measures can readily be administered in the vertebroplasty population. Validated, functional outcomes measures have previously been reported in the vertebroplasty population. 1 , 9 – 11 Global health measures have not been reported in the vertebroplasty population, but have been published in Kyphoplasty cohorts. Our data presented here suggests that wide arrays of outcomes measures can be applied to the vertebroplasty population, which may facilitate the completion of prospective trials. This study suffers several limitations. The patient population was somewhat heterogeneous regarding fracture etiology. However, the mean age of the cohort was similar to that of many previous vertebroplasty studies. The study also suffered from a 20% lost-to-follow-up rate, which is higher than would typically be acceptable in a large, prospective trial. The outcomes presented, including a high rate of successful questionnaire completion both in person and by telephone, offer encouragement that a wide array of outcomes measures can be administered to the vertebroplasty population. Future trials of vertebroplasty, when possible, should include appropriate outcomes measures. 