Therapeutic Hypothermia: Applications in pediatric cardiac arrest There is a rich history for the use of therapeutic hypothermia after cardiac arrest in neonatology and pediatrics. Laboratory reports date back to 1824 in experimental perinatal asphyxia. Similarly, clinical reports in pediatric cold water drowning victims represented key initiating work in the field. The application of therapeutic hypothermia in pediatric drowning victims represented some of the seminal clinical use of this modality in modern neurointensive care. Uncontrolled application (too deep and too long) and unique facets of asphyxial cardiac arrest in children (a very difficult insult to affect any benefit) likely combined to result in abandonment of therapeutic hypothermia in the mid to late 1980s. Important studies in perinatal medicine have built upon the landmark clinical trials in adults, and are once again bringing therapeutic hypothermia into standard care for pediatrics. Although more work is needed, particularly in the use of mild therapeutic hypothermia in children, there is a strong possibility that this important therapy will ultimately have broad applications after cardiac arrest and CNS insults in the pediatric arena.  New data on therapeutic hypothermia in children after cardiac arrest: Clinical studies Is it appropriate to extrapolate the results from the successful clinical studies in adults and newborns to children with cardiac arrest? The answer is unclear. Arguments in support of the use of therapeutic hypothermia include the fact that the mortality rate of cardiac arrest in children is high, ranging from 45-92%, neurological morbidity occurs in half of survivors, and there are no new proven therapeutic options ( Nadkarni et al., 2006 ; Young et al., 2004 ). In addition, there was no increase in adverse events between cooled and non-cooled patients in these adult and neonatal trials. Extrapolating from the adult RCTs, the 2005 American Heart Association's Pediatric Advanced Life Support guidelines recommended the consideration of hypothermia for 12-24 h in comatose children after cardiac arrest, acknowledging that the optimal duration of cooling and rewarming is unknown, and cautioning about hypothermia's associated side effects ( American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, 2006 ). Arguments against the adoption of therapeutic hypothermia in children include the fact that the primary etiology of cardiac arrest in children is asphyxia, which has a unique pathophysiology from that of arrhythmia-induced cardiac arrest ( Young and Seidel, 1999 ; Vaagenes et al., 1997 ). In addition, most patients in the neonatal RCT cohorts did not suffer from cardiac arrest, had perinatal-related causes of hypoxia-ischemia, and are in a different stage of brain development than children after cardiac arrest—as previously discussed. Similarly, delays in initiating resuscitation in out-of-hospital pediatric asphyxial arrest can be significant—even relative to ventricular fibrillation cardiac arrest in adults. As we approach the 2010 guidelines, we still do not have prospective data in the pediatric population, but planning is underway for a multi-center RCT (personal communication, Frank Moler, MD), which was overwhelmingly (81% of responders) supported by a cohort of pediatric critical care physicians in a survey conducted in 2005 ( Haque et al., 2006 ). 47% of those that responded were already using mild therapeutic hypothermia with variable parameters for pediatric patients after cardiac arrest at least “sometimes”, and 95% of respondents were willing to randomize their patients to hypothermia and normothermia groups for a definitive study. Retrospective data from a single multidisciplinary PICU showed that half of the 40 children who were cooled without a protocol after cardiac arrest arrived in the PICU at their target temperature (34.1 ± 0.8, mean ± SD), were maintained at the target temperature for 31.8 ± 19.2 h, and re-warmed over 7.5 ± 5.9 h ( Fink et al., 2007 ). Children in the hypothermia group had more electrolyte replacements in the first four days after cardiac arrest compared to children who were not cooled (standard group, n=141), but the incidence of bleeding, and arrhythmias were similar. There was a trend toward more infections in the first 4 days in the hypothermia group (p = 0.06). Cooling to a temperature below the target range (“overcooling,” <32 °C) occurred in 15.8%. There was no difference in mortality between groups (55.0% hypothermia group, 55.3% standard group), however, the cooled cohort had more severe insults, as reflected by a number of parameters. A preliminary prospective study testing a protocol in 5 pediatric patients using surface cooling to initiate hypothermia after cardiac arrest showed that the target temperature of (32-34°C was achieved quickly and maintained for 24 h, with an overcooling incidence of > 20% ( Topjian et al., 2007 ). Hyperthermia was uncommon and three methods of temperature measurement using rectal, esophageal, and urinary catheter probes, were deemed equivalent. Table 1 summarizes the findings of these studies. In a separate study at the same institution, electroencephalograms taken during the first week after cardiac arrest in children were graded in severity and were found to be predictive of outcome, highlighting the need for advanced neurological monitoring in this cohort, many of whom are comatose or require neuromuscular blockade to prevent shivering ( Nishisaki et al., 2007 ). While we await an RCT to determine the efficacy of hypothermia for neuroprotection in children after cardiac arrest, other questions remain regarding the optimal duration of hypothermia therapy and re-warming, methods of initiation and maintenance of cooling, and contemporary monitoring modalities.  Conclusions There is a rich history for the use of therapeutic hypothermia after cardiac arrest in infants and children. Indeed, early laboratory reports date back to 1824 in experimental perinatal asphyxia and clinical reports in cold water drowning victims represented key initiating work in the field. Hypothermia in pediatric drowning victims represented some of the seminal clinical application of therapeutic hypothermia in modern neurointensive care. Uncontrolled application (too deep and too long) and unique facets of asphyxial cardiac arrest in children (a very difficult insult to affect any benefit) likely combined to result in abandonment of therapeutic hypothermia. Important studies in perinatal medicine have built upon the landmark clinical trials in adults, and are once again bringing therapeutic hypothermia into standard care for pediatrics. Although more work is needed, particularly in the use of mild therapeutic hypothermia in children, there is a strong possibility that this important therapy will ultimately have broad applications after cardiac arrest and CNS insults in the pediatric arena.  Table Table 1 Summary of the clinical evaluation of hypothermia in neonates and children with global hypoxia-ischemia.<xref rid="TFN1" ref-type="table-fn">#</xref> Author(s) Type of study Age (n) Target temperature (°C) Duration of hypothermia (h) Major findings Significance Gluckman et al., 2005 * RCT Newborn (234) 32-34 72 ? mortality if moderate but not severe encephalopathy RR 0.42 [0.22 – 0.80 for moderate encephalopathy Shankaran et al., 2005 RCT Newborn (208) 32-34 72 ? mortality, severe disability composite 44% vs. 62%, RR = 0.72 [0.54 – 0.95 Fink et al., 2007 Retrospective, observational 1 wk-21 yr (181) 34.1 ± 0.8, mean ± SD (un-protocolized use of hypothermia) 31.8 ± 19.2, mean ± SD ? electrolyte replacement P < .05 ? infections in HT group No difference in bleeding, arrhythmias P = .06 P > .05 Topjian et al., 2007 Prospective, non-randomized Children, unspecified (5) 32-34 24 T < 32 occurred in 21% of 30 min. measures; T > 34 occurred 7% # The etiology of hypoxia-ischemia in the neonatal studies was heterogeneous (i.e., placental lesions, cardiac arrest, fetal deceleration, hemorrhage) while in children the etiology was solely cardiac arrest. * Head cooling only; other listed studies involved whole body cooling. RCT, Randomized, controlled trial; RR, relative risk; p, p-value; T, temperature; SD, standard deviation 