Manipulation of Gene Expression by Oxygen: A Primer From Bedside to Bench For nearly 100 years, pediatricians have regularly employed oxygen to treat neonatal and childhood diseases. Over this time, it has become clear that oxygen is toxic and that overzealous use can lead to significant morbidity. As we have learned more about the appropriate clinical indications for oxygen therapy, studies at the bench have begun to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which cells respond to hyperoxia. In this review, we discuss transcription factors whose activity is regulated by oxygen, including Nrf2, AP-1, p53, NF-?B, STAT and CEBP. Special attention is paid to the mechanisms by which hyperoxia affects these transcription factors in the lung. Finally, we identify downstream targets of these transcription factors, with a focus on heme oxygenase-1. A better understanding of how oxygen affects various signaling pathways could lead to interventions aimed at preventing hyperoxic injury.  CONCLUSION Hyperoxia regulates multiple transcription factors in the lung. These in turn regulate a variety of downstream targets including ARE regulated genes such as HO-1, antioxidant enzymes which are important in the detoxification of electrophiles, as well as genes involved in cell cycle regulation and the inflammatory response. The overall effect of hyperoxia in the lung depends on the maturational stage of the organism. The net effect of hyperoxic lung gene regulation may be both enhanced cytoprotection and worsened lung function. In the neonate where postnatal lung development is crucial to proper alveolar formation, hyperoxic gene regulation may have long-lasting effect on lung structure and function. A further understanding of how hyperoxia affects specific signaling pathways and subsequent gene expression could lead to interventions aimed at preventing hyperoxic injury.  Figures and Table Figure 1 How a stimulus is perceived and how cells respond to return to the steady state. Cellular receptors or sensors detect stimuli such as hyperoxia. This leads to the translation of this signal via signal transduction pathways, which result in transcription factor activation. This then generates a response such as gene regulation and subsequent protein synthesis and a return to the steady state. Figure 2 Nrf-2 mediated gene expression. The transcription factor Nrf-2 is sequestered in the cytoplasm bound to Keap1. Upon hyperoxic exposure, it dissociates from Keap1 and can migrate to the nucleus where it forms a complex with Jun or Maf proteins and results in gene activation. Figure 3 NF-?B mediated gene expression. With hyperoxia, there is phosphorylation (p) of the inhibitory protein I?B? on tyrosine 42. This results in the ubiquination (u) and subsequent degradation of I?B?. This allows for dissociation and nuclear translocation of the active NF-?B complex (p65 and p50 are represented here), binding to consensus sequences on various genes and transcriptional activation or repression of gene expression. Figure 4 Diagram of the HO-1 gene. Numbers indicate base pairs. There are two distal enhancers (DE). These contain a multiple antioxidant response element/stress response element (MARE/StRE), which has consensus sequence for a cadmium response element (CdRE) as well as an AP-1 binding site. The gene also contains a proximal enhancer (PE) and a promoter (P). Table 1 Summary of transcription factors regulated by hyperoxia Transcription Factor Regulated Genes Protective Effect against Hyperoxia References Nrf2 ARE-mediated phase 2 detoxifying and antioxidant enzymes (i.e. HO-1) yes ( 26 - 30 ) AP-1 IL-8 yes ( 34 - 40 ) NF-?B IGFBP2 ICAM-1 IL-6 ENaC p21 yes/no ( 57 , 62 - 68 , 72 , 77 , 80 - 88 , 95 , 104 , 107 , 108 , 111 , 113 - 117 , 119 - 127 ) STAT IL-6 yes ( 90 , 91 ) CEBP Proteins CCSP yes ( 38 , 93 , 94 ) 