Significant Impairment in Immune Recovery Following Cancer Treatment Background Although immunosuppression from cancer adjuvant therapy has been documented, how these suppressed immune responses recover to baseline values after completion of cancer adjuvant therapy has not been studied systematically. Objectives To examine the probability of immune recovery following cancer adjuvant therapy and the potential impact of cancer adjuvant therapy type and cancer stage on immune recovery in newly diagnosed breast cancer patients. Method In a repeated-measures design, immune responses were measured 4 times in 80 early stage breast cancer patients: prior to, and at 2, 6, and 12 months from the beginning of cancer adjuvant therapy. Natural killer cell activity (NKCA), lymphokine-activated killer cell activity, lymphocyte proliferation, CD subsets (CD4, CD8, and CD56), and cytokines (IFN-?, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-1?) were selected for their relevance to breast cancer. Immune recovery was defined by the level of immune response reaching to and above baseline levels. Data were analyzed using a multivariate generalized linear mixed model approach. Results Delayed immune recovery to pretreatment baseline levels continued to the 12-month time point in all parameters. The percentages of immune recovery ranged from 6% to 76% of the patients, varying among immune parameters. Overall, immune recovery was poorer for IFN-?, IL-2, IL-4, lymphocyte proliferation and NKCA than for CD subsets and IL-6. The type of cancer adjuvant therapy, not cancer stage, showed selective influence on immune recovery. Chemotherapy or chemo- and radiotherapy combination significantly delayed IL-2 recovery, whereas radiotherapy significantly delayed IL-4 recovery. Discussion Immune recovery following breast cancer adjuvant therapy is delayed significantly for an extended time period in numerous immune parameters. The type of cancer adjuvant therapy has selective influence on immune recovery. Future investigations are warranted to elucidate the time course of immune recovery, clinical significance of poor immune recovery, and factors influencing immune recovery in order to develop potential interventions.  Method In a repeated-measures design, immune responses were measured 4 times in 80 early stage breast cancer patients: prior to, and at 2, 6, and 12 months from the beginning of cancer adjuvant therapy. Natural killer cell activity (NKCA), lymphokine-activated killer cell activity, lymphocyte proliferation, CD subsets (CD4, CD8, and CD56), and cytokines (IFN-?, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-1?) were selected for their relevance to breast cancer. Immune recovery was defined by the level of immune response reaching to and above baseline levels. Data were analyzed using a multivariate generalized linear mixed model approach.  Results Delayed immune recovery to pretreatment baseline levels continued to the 12-month time point in all parameters. The percentages of immune recovery ranged from 6% to 76% of the patients, varying among immune parameters. Overall, immune recovery was poorer for IFN-?, IL-2, IL-4, lymphocyte proliferation and NKCA than for CD subsets and IL-6. The type of cancer adjuvant therapy, not cancer stage, showed selective influence on immune recovery. Chemotherapy or chemo- and radiotherapy combination significantly delayed IL-2 recovery, whereas radiotherapy significantly delayed IL-4 recovery.  Discussion Immune recovery following breast cancer adjuvant therapy is delayed significantly for an extended time period in numerous immune parameters. The type of cancer adjuvant therapy has selective influence on immune recovery. Future investigations are warranted to elucidate the time course of immune recovery, clinical significance of poor immune recovery, and factors influencing immune recovery in order to develop potential interventions.  Methods Design The design of the parent study was a randomized clinical trial with a pre- and post-intervention (8 weeks) design with four repeated measures in women with newly diagnosed breast cancer. Data were collected once before the intervention (baseline), and at 2, 6, and 12 moths from the start of the intervention. Because intervention was coincided with the start of cancer adjuvant therapy, the data in this study represent the baseline data before the start of cancer adjuvant therapy, and post-adjuvant therapy data at 2, 6, and 12 months from the start of cancer adjuvant therapy. Participants A total of 1,127 women with breast cancer were screened at the interdisciplinary and other breast clinics within a university health system in the Southeastern region of the United States. Two hundred and thirteen patients were eligible for the study, and 100 patients enrolled in the study. Most women were not eligible for the study because they were not newly diagnosed, were already in the middle of cancer adjuvant therapy, or lived in different cities preventing from participation in the intervention if they were randomized into the intervention group. Among the eligible women, the two most common reasons for declining the invitation to participate were “not having enough time to participate in the study” and “not interested in participating in the study.” The parent study sample size of 90 women (45 women in each group) was based on having a minimum of 80% power to detect differences in NK cell activity (a major immune parameter) between treatment groups, and is not applicable to the aims of these secondary analyses. Since sample size was determined by the parent study for this secondary analysis, a post-hoc power analysis was performed in order to identify the minimum effect size that could be identified given the available sample. PASS 2008 ( Hintze, 2008 ) was used to perform the calculations, based on the F distribution, which is the test statistic employed for the generalized linear mixed model analyses utilized. Keying on the Time main effect, a .287 effect size would provide 80% power, given a 5% Type I error rate. Inclusion criteria were: (a) women 30 years or older with stage I-III BC and receiving chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy; (b) absence of a defined psychosis; (c) no uncontrolled cardiopulmonary or other serious medical conditions that would prohibit moderate intensity exercise; (d) not participating in other structured support or exercise program; (e) ability to comprehend and follow instructions, speak and respond in English; and (f) obtaining medical clearance from a primary medical oncologist to participate in the study. Exclusion criteria were: (a) pregnancy; (b) distance preventing from weekly participation in intervention; (c) diffuse bony metastasis with high risk of pathologic fractures; and (d) lack of access to a telephone. After obtaining written informed consent, patients were stratified first by cancer stage (stage I-IIB vs. III) and randomized into either intervention or wait-list control group using a computer-generated randomization table. The 8-week integrated intervention was implemented at the start of adjuvant therapy, and patients were encouraged to continue their learned activities at home at the completion of the intervention. The control group received usual standard cancer care. Eighty women completed the study: 10 women from each group withdrew from the study for reasons, such as chemotherapy side effects (4), time commitment (2), and other family and personal issues (14). The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board. Data Collection Procedure Participants were recruited by posting flyers in the clinic waiting areas, word of mouth, and invitations from clinic nurses, physicians, and research team members. The purpose and procedure of the study, what was expected from them, a need for random assignment, when and how data were to be collected, and potential risks and benefits of the study were explained fully, and questions were answered and clarified prior to obtaining the consent. Consent was obtained at the clinic if the participant preferred to do so. Otherwise, participants took the consent form home and mailed the consent later to the study coordinator. The study was designed in a way that most blood samples could be collected at the time of participant’s routine blood work: Additional amount of blood was drawn for the study at the clinical laboratory. If this was not possible, the study coordinator who was a registered nurse traveled to the place preferred by the patient (e.g., home or office) and collected the blood samples by using routine venipuncture technique. Immune Measurements Blood samples for immune measurements were collected prior to the start of adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or both) as baseline, and at 2, 6, and 12 months after the start of adjuvant therapy. Baseline samples were collected at least 2-3 weeks after initial surgery to control for any surgery-related impact on immune responses. All blood samples (20 ml) were collected between 0800 and 1200 into heparin-containing vacutainers. All assays were performed following well-established immune assay protocols. Cell separation Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were separated using the Ficoll-Hypaque (1.077 sg; Sigma) density-gradient method. MNCs were washed twice with sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+, pH 7.4; Gibco), centrifuged at 450 g for 10 min, and were resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 (supplemented with HEPES 25 mM, L-glutamine 2 mM, 50 U Penicillin and 50 ?g Streptomycin/ml) at the concentration of 2 × 106 cells/ml. This method has typically yielded more than 98% cell viability ( Kang, Coe, & McCarthy, 1996 ; Kang, Coe, McCarthy, & Ershler, 1997 ). Natural killer cell and lymphokine-activated killer cell activity The standard chromium-51 (Cr-51) release cytotoxicity assay was used using K562 target cells ( Kang et al., 1997 ). Target cells were labeled with 125 ?Ci Cr-51 for 1 hr at 37° C, were washed and centrifuged twice, and were resuspended at 4 × 104 cells/ml. The MNCs from patients were incubated in triplicate with labeled K562 target cells and 60% heat-inactivated pooled human serum in four effector-to-target cell (E:T) ratios--100:1, 50:1, 25:1, and 12.5:1. Spontaneous and maximal lysis was determined by incubating target cells with medium alone and 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate solution. Following a 4-hr incubation in 5% CO2 at 37° C, cytotoxicity was determined from supernatant using a gamma counter. Cytotoxicity was calculated as follows: NK cell activity (%) = [(sample release - spontaneous release)/(maximum - spontaneous release)] × 100. The assay sensitivity was ? 0.1%, with 2-6% intra-assay coefficient variation in previous work. For LAK cell activity, a protocol modified from studies by Brenner et al. ( Brenner, Gryllis, Gornitsky, Cupples, & Wainberg, 1991 ) and Nagao et al. ( Nagao, Yabe, Xu, & Okumura, 1995 ) was used: MNCs (1 × 106 cells/ml) were incubated in complete RPMI medium containing 10% fetal calf serum and 100 U/ml recombinant IL-2 for 3 days in a humidified air of 5% CO2 at 37° C. Next day, LAK cells were washed twice in complete RPMI medium, cells were counted, and the same Cr-51 NK cell assay protocol was used ( Brenner et al., 1991 ). The assay sensitivity and variation remains the same. Lymphocyte proliferation The MNCs (1 × 105) were cultured in triplicate with 60% heat-inactivated pooled human serum and phytohemagglutinin at 5 and 10 ?g/ml. Following 54 hr-incubation in humidified air with 5% CO2 at 37°C, cells were pulsed with 1 ?Ci of tritiated thymidine, incubated for additional 18 hr, harvested onto glass-fiber filters (MASH harvester, Otto Hiller, Madison, WI) and were counted by a liquid scintillation counter (Packard Tricarb 300 CD, Downers Grove, IL). The results indicate the net counts per minute controlling for unstimulated cell counts. Cytokine production Whole blood cell culture assay was used, which is thought to be a better method to reflect the in vivo condition than using the isolated MNC method. Blood was diluted 1:10 with the complete RPMI medium and was incubated for 4 days at 37°C with 5% CO2 with phytohemagglutinin 10 ?g/ml and lipopolysaccharide 2.5 ?g/ml. Culture supernatant was collected and stored in aliquots at -80° C until assayed. Cytokine levels were determined by a standard two-step sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA) using commercial kits. The assay sensitivity for cytokines has been reported to be 0.04 - 5 pg/ml with intra- and interassay % coefficients of variation being 4 - 9.6% for all cytokines (Biosource, San Francisco, CA; R & D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Cell subsets Direct immunofluorescence method was used. Cells suspended in PBS supplemented with 0.1% sodium azide were stained using fluorescein (FITC)- and phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against CD4, CD8, CD56, and CD3+ (pan T cells) surface markers. Cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, washed with PBS, and analyzed using a flow cytometer (FACScan, Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) at the FACS Shared Core Facility on campus. Statistical Analysis The purpose of this study was to evaluate immune recovery, relative to pretreatment levels, after breast cancer adjuvant therapy. Of particular interest was (a) immune recovery over time and (b) how different cancer adjuvant therapy types and cancer stage might affect recovery, after controlling for selected covariates which might influence recovery. The response variable, Immune Recovery to baseline or above, was binary in nature and was evaluated at 2, 6, and 12 months after baseline. Immune Recovery was coded as 1 if immune response was equal or greater than the baseline value, and as 0 if immune response was less than the baseline value. The analysis method, therefore, included (a) within-subjects (repeated measures), (b) between-subjects effects, (c) covariates, and (d) dichotomous response variables. A Generalized Linear Mixed Models (GLMM) approach, as implemented in SAS PROC GLIMMIX ( SAS Institute Inc., 2005 ), was used to analyze the data. This approach accommodates the binomial distribution of the response variables through use of a logit link function, models dependencies produced by the repeated measures, and incorporates time-varying covariates and factors ( Little, Schnabel, & Baumert, 2000 ; McCullagh & Nelder, 1997 ; McCulloch & Searle, 2001 ). Multivariate models were examined for NK, LAK, and lymphocyte proliferation immune parameters to accommodate the multiple target-to-effector ratios or stimulations used for those parameters. Each model was composed of first-order type of cancer adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or both), cancer stage (Stage 2 or less, greater than 2), hormone replacement (no, yes), menopause (pre-, peri, postmenopause), and time (2, 6, and 12 months) effects, as well as all significant second-order effects involving the time factor. Models were of the form ? = X? + Z? , where X? is the fixed model component, composed of a matrix of predictor values ( X ) and vector of estimated regression weights ( ? ). The Z? term is a random term, representing the overdispersion effect. For example, the predictor ( X ) effects contained in the model for CD4% included Time, Age, Cancer Adjuvant Cancer Therapy, Cancer Stage, Hormone Replacement, Menopause, and the Time by Cancer Adjuvant Cancer Therapy interaction. A random multiplicative over-dispersion parameter was incorporated into each model. The GLIMMIX default estimation method (residual pseudo-likelihood with a subject-specific expansion) was employed. Residuals were examined for conformity to assumptions, and model fit statistics were examined to determine best fit covariance structure. Predictor collinearity was examined, and all Variance Inflation values were below 1.3, indicating no problems in terms of collinearity. Probability of immune recovery was estimated using ? ^ Recovery k = ( 1 + e ? ? ^ k ) ? 1 where ? ? ^ k ? is the model-estimated (that is, least-squares) estimate for the logit response for level k of the effect of interest (that is, cancer treatment or time), after controlling for all other variables in the model ( SAS Institute Inc., 2005 ). Statistically significant interactions were followed up with simple main effects analyses. Missing values were relatively limited to 5 – 13 across all time points and all immune parameters and were not included within analyses. Significance level was set at 0.05, with adjustment for multiple comparisons using the SIMULATE adjustment option implemented within PROC GLIMMIX ( SAS Institute Inc., 2005 ).  Design The design of the parent study was a randomized clinical trial with a pre- and post-intervention (8 weeks) design with four repeated measures in women with newly diagnosed breast cancer. Data were collected once before the intervention (baseline), and at 2, 6, and 12 moths from the start of the intervention. Because intervention was coincided with the start of cancer adjuvant therapy, the data in this study represent the baseline data before the start of cancer adjuvant therapy, and post-adjuvant therapy data at 2, 6, and 12 months from the start of cancer adjuvant therapy.  Participants A total of 1,127 women with breast cancer were screened at the interdisciplinary and other breast clinics within a university health system in the Southeastern region of the United States. Two hundred and thirteen patients were eligible for the study, and 100 patients enrolled in the study. Most women were not eligible for the study because they were not newly diagnosed, were already in the middle of cancer adjuvant therapy, or lived in different cities preventing from participation in the intervention if they were randomized into the intervention group. Among the eligible women, the two most common reasons for declining the invitation to participate were “not having enough time to participate in the study” and “not interested in participating in the study.” The parent study sample size of 90 women (45 women in each group) was based on having a minimum of 80% power to detect differences in NK cell activity (a major immune parameter) between treatment groups, and is not applicable to the aims of these secondary analyses. Since sample size was determined by the parent study for this secondary analysis, a post-hoc power analysis was performed in order to identify the minimum effect size that could be identified given the available sample. PASS 2008 ( Hintze, 2008 ) was used to perform the calculations, based on the F distribution, which is the test statistic employed for the generalized linear mixed model analyses utilized. Keying on the Time main effect, a .287 effect size would provide 80% power, given a 5% Type I error rate. Inclusion criteria were: (a) women 30 years or older with stage I-III BC and receiving chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy; (b) absence of a defined psychosis; (c) no uncontrolled cardiopulmonary or other serious medical conditions that would prohibit moderate intensity exercise; (d) not participating in other structured support or exercise program; (e) ability to comprehend and follow instructions, speak and respond in English; and (f) obtaining medical clearance from a primary medical oncologist to participate in the study. Exclusion criteria were: (a) pregnancy; (b) distance preventing from weekly participation in intervention; (c) diffuse bony metastasis with high risk of pathologic fractures; and (d) lack of access to a telephone. After obtaining written informed consent, patients were stratified first by cancer stage (stage I-IIB vs. III) and randomized into either intervention or wait-list control group using a computer-generated randomization table. The 8-week integrated intervention was implemented at the start of adjuvant therapy, and patients were encouraged to continue their learned activities at home at the completion of the intervention. The control group received usual standard cancer care. Eighty women completed the study: 10 women from each group withdrew from the study for reasons, such as chemotherapy side effects (4), time commitment (2), and other family and personal issues (14). The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board.  Data Collection Procedure Participants were recruited by posting flyers in the clinic waiting areas, word of mouth, and invitations from clinic nurses, physicians, and research team members. The purpose and procedure of the study, what was expected from them, a need for random assignment, when and how data were to be collected, and potential risks and benefits of the study were explained fully, and questions were answered and clarified prior to obtaining the consent. Consent was obtained at the clinic if the participant preferred to do so. Otherwise, participants took the consent form home and mailed the consent later to the study coordinator. The study was designed in a way that most blood samples could be collected at the time of participant’s routine blood work: Additional amount of blood was drawn for the study at the clinical laboratory. If this was not possible, the study coordinator who was a registered nurse traveled to the place preferred by the patient (e.g., home or office) and collected the blood samples by using routine venipuncture technique.  Immune Measurements Blood samples for immune measurements were collected prior to the start of adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or both) as baseline, and at 2, 6, and 12 months after the start of adjuvant therapy. Baseline samples were collected at least 2-3 weeks after initial surgery to control for any surgery-related impact on immune responses. All blood samples (20 ml) were collected between 0800 and 1200 into heparin-containing vacutainers. All assays were performed following well-established immune assay protocols. Cell separation Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were separated using the Ficoll-Hypaque (1.077 sg; Sigma) density-gradient method. MNCs were washed twice with sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+, pH 7.4; Gibco), centrifuged at 450 g for 10 min, and were resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 (supplemented with HEPES 25 mM, L-glutamine 2 mM, 50 U Penicillin and 50 ?g Streptomycin/ml) at the concentration of 2 × 106 cells/ml. This method has typically yielded more than 98% cell viability ( Kang, Coe, & McCarthy, 1996 ; Kang, Coe, McCarthy, & Ershler, 1997 ). Natural killer cell and lymphokine-activated killer cell activity The standard chromium-51 (Cr-51) release cytotoxicity assay was used using K562 target cells ( Kang et al., 1997 ). Target cells were labeled with 125 ?Ci Cr-51 for 1 hr at 37° C, were washed and centrifuged twice, and were resuspended at 4 × 104 cells/ml. The MNCs from patients were incubated in triplicate with labeled K562 target cells and 60% heat-inactivated pooled human serum in four effector-to-target cell (E:T) ratios--100:1, 50:1, 25:1, and 12.5:1. Spontaneous and maximal lysis was determined by incubating target cells with medium alone and 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate solution. Following a 4-hr incubation in 5% CO2 at 37° C, cytotoxicity was determined from supernatant using a gamma counter. Cytotoxicity was calculated as follows: NK cell activity (%) = [(sample release - spontaneous release)/(maximum - spontaneous release)] × 100. The assay sensitivity was ? 0.1%, with 2-6% intra-assay coefficient variation in previous work. For LAK cell activity, a protocol modified from studies by Brenner et al. ( Brenner, Gryllis, Gornitsky, Cupples, & Wainberg, 1991 ) and Nagao et al. ( Nagao, Yabe, Xu, & Okumura, 1995 ) was used: MNCs (1 × 106 cells/ml) were incubated in complete RPMI medium containing 10% fetal calf serum and 100 U/ml recombinant IL-2 for 3 days in a humidified air of 5% CO2 at 37° C. Next day, LAK cells were washed twice in complete RPMI medium, cells were counted, and the same Cr-51 NK cell assay protocol was used ( Brenner et al., 1991 ). The assay sensitivity and variation remains the same. Lymphocyte proliferation The MNCs (1 × 105) were cultured in triplicate with 60% heat-inactivated pooled human serum and phytohemagglutinin at 5 and 10 ?g/ml. Following 54 hr-incubation in humidified air with 5% CO2 at 37°C, cells were pulsed with 1 ?Ci of tritiated thymidine, incubated for additional 18 hr, harvested onto glass-fiber filters (MASH harvester, Otto Hiller, Madison, WI) and were counted by a liquid scintillation counter (Packard Tricarb 300 CD, Downers Grove, IL). The results indicate the net counts per minute controlling for unstimulated cell counts. Cytokine production Whole blood cell culture assay was used, which is thought to be a better method to reflect the in vivo condition than using the isolated MNC method. Blood was diluted 1:10 with the complete RPMI medium and was incubated for 4 days at 37°C with 5% CO2 with phytohemagglutinin 10 ?g/ml and lipopolysaccharide 2.5 ?g/ml. Culture supernatant was collected and stored in aliquots at -80° C until assayed. Cytokine levels were determined by a standard two-step sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA) using commercial kits. The assay sensitivity for cytokines has been reported to be 0.04 - 5 pg/ml with intra- and interassay % coefficients of variation being 4 - 9.6% for all cytokines (Biosource, San Francisco, CA; R & D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). Cell subsets Direct immunofluorescence method was used. Cells suspended in PBS supplemented with 0.1% sodium azide were stained using fluorescein (FITC)- and phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against CD4, CD8, CD56, and CD3+ (pan T cells) surface markers. Cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, washed with PBS, and analyzed using a flow cytometer (FACScan, Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) at the FACS Shared Core Facility on campus.  Cell separation Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were separated using the Ficoll-Hypaque (1.077 sg; Sigma) density-gradient method. MNCs were washed twice with sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+, pH 7.4; Gibco), centrifuged at 450 g for 10 min, and were resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 (supplemented with HEPES 25 mM, L-glutamine 2 mM, 50 U Penicillin and 50 ?g Streptomycin/ml) at the concentration of 2 × 106 cells/ml. This method has typically yielded more than 98% cell viability ( Kang, Coe, & McCarthy, 1996 ; Kang, Coe, McCarthy, & Ershler, 1997 ).  Natural killer cell and lymphokine-activated killer cell activity The standard chromium-51 (Cr-51) release cytotoxicity assay was used using K562 target cells ( Kang et al., 1997 ). Target cells were labeled with 125 ?Ci Cr-51 for 1 hr at 37° C, were washed and centrifuged twice, and were resuspended at 4 × 104 cells/ml. The MNCs from patients were incubated in triplicate with labeled K562 target cells and 60% heat-inactivated pooled human serum in four effector-to-target cell (E:T) ratios--100:1, 50:1, 25:1, and 12.5:1. Spontaneous and maximal lysis was determined by incubating target cells with medium alone and 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate solution. Following a 4-hr incubation in 5% CO2 at 37° C, cytotoxicity was determined from supernatant using a gamma counter. Cytotoxicity was calculated as follows: NK cell activity (%) = [(sample release - spontaneous release)/(maximum - spontaneous release)] × 100. The assay sensitivity was ? 0.1%, with 2-6% intra-assay coefficient variation in previous work. For LAK cell activity, a protocol modified from studies by Brenner et al. ( Brenner, Gryllis, Gornitsky, Cupples, & Wainberg, 1991 ) and Nagao et al. ( Nagao, Yabe, Xu, & Okumura, 1995 ) was used: MNCs (1 × 106 cells/ml) were incubated in complete RPMI medium containing 10% fetal calf serum and 100 U/ml recombinant IL-2 for 3 days in a humidified air of 5% CO2 at 37° C. Next day, LAK cells were washed twice in complete RPMI medium, cells were counted, and the same Cr-51 NK cell assay protocol was used ( Brenner et al., 1991 ). The assay sensitivity and variation remains the same.  Lymphocyte proliferation The MNCs (1 × 105) were cultured in triplicate with 60% heat-inactivated pooled human serum and phytohemagglutinin at 5 and 10 ?g/ml. Following 54 hr-incubation in humidified air with 5% CO2 at 37°C, cells were pulsed with 1 ?Ci of tritiated thymidine, incubated for additional 18 hr, harvested onto glass-fiber filters (MASH harvester, Otto Hiller, Madison, WI) and were counted by a liquid scintillation counter (Packard Tricarb 300 CD, Downers Grove, IL). The results indicate the net counts per minute controlling for unstimulated cell counts.  Cytokine production Whole blood cell culture assay was used, which is thought to be a better method to reflect the in vivo condition than using the isolated MNC method. Blood was diluted 1:10 with the complete RPMI medium and was incubated for 4 days at 37°C with 5% CO2 with phytohemagglutinin 10 ?g/ml and lipopolysaccharide 2.5 ?g/ml. Culture supernatant was collected and stored in aliquots at -80° C until assayed. Cytokine levels were determined by a standard two-step sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA) using commercial kits. The assay sensitivity for cytokines has been reported to be 0.04 - 5 pg/ml with intra- and interassay % coefficients of variation being 4 - 9.6% for all cytokines (Biosource, San Francisco, CA; R & D Systems, Minneapolis, MN).  Cell subsets Direct immunofluorescence method was used. Cells suspended in PBS supplemented with 0.1% sodium azide were stained using fluorescein (FITC)- and phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against CD4, CD8, CD56, and CD3+ (pan T cells) surface markers. Cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, washed with PBS, and analyzed using a flow cytometer (FACScan, Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) at the FACS Shared Core Facility on campus.  Statistical Analysis The purpose of this study was to evaluate immune recovery, relative to pretreatment levels, after breast cancer adjuvant therapy. Of particular interest was (a) immune recovery over time and (b) how different cancer adjuvant therapy types and cancer stage might affect recovery, after controlling for selected covariates which might influence recovery. The response variable, Immune Recovery to baseline or above, was binary in nature and was evaluated at 2, 6, and 12 months after baseline. Immune Recovery was coded as 1 if immune response was equal or greater than the baseline value, and as 0 if immune response was less than the baseline value. The analysis method, therefore, included (a) within-subjects (repeated measures), (b) between-subjects effects, (c) covariates, and (d) dichotomous response variables. A Generalized Linear Mixed Models (GLMM) approach, as implemented in SAS PROC GLIMMIX ( SAS Institute Inc., 2005 ), was used to analyze the data. This approach accommodates the binomial distribution of the response variables through use of a logit link function, models dependencies produced by the repeated measures, and incorporates time-varying covariates and factors ( Little, Schnabel, & Baumert, 2000 ; McCullagh & Nelder, 1997 ; McCulloch & Searle, 2001 ). Multivariate models were examined for NK, LAK, and lymphocyte proliferation immune parameters to accommodate the multiple target-to-effector ratios or stimulations used for those parameters. Each model was composed of first-order type of cancer adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or both), cancer stage (Stage 2 or less, greater than 2), hormone replacement (no, yes), menopause (pre-, peri, postmenopause), and time (2, 6, and 12 months) effects, as well as all significant second-order effects involving the time factor. Models were of the form ? = X? + Z? , where X? is the fixed model component, composed of a matrix of predictor values ( X ) and vector of estimated regression weights ( ? ). The Z? term is a random term, representing the overdispersion effect. For example, the predictor ( X ) effects contained in the model for CD4% included Time, Age, Cancer Adjuvant Cancer Therapy, Cancer Stage, Hormone Replacement, Menopause, and the Time by Cancer Adjuvant Cancer Therapy interaction. A random multiplicative over-dispersion parameter was incorporated into each model. The GLIMMIX default estimation method (residual pseudo-likelihood with a subject-specific expansion) was employed. Residuals were examined for conformity to assumptions, and model fit statistics were examined to determine best fit covariance structure. Predictor collinearity was examined, and all Variance Inflation values were below 1.3, indicating no problems in terms of collinearity. Probability of immune recovery was estimated using ? ^ Recovery k = ( 1 + e ? ? ^ k ) ? 1 where ? ? ^ k ? is the model-estimated (that is, least-squares) estimate for the logit response for level k of the effect of interest (that is, cancer treatment or time), after controlling for all other variables in the model ( SAS Institute Inc., 2005 ). Statistically significant interactions were followed up with simple main effects analyses. Missing values were relatively limited to 5 – 13 across all time points and all immune parameters and were not included within analyses. Significance level was set at 0.05, with adjustment for multiple comparisons using the SIMULATE adjustment option implemented within PROC GLIMMIX ( SAS Institute Inc., 2005 ).  Results Participant Characteristics Demographic characteristics and medical information of the participants are presented in Tables 1 and 2 . Participants had a mean age of 49.5 years and tended to be Caucasian (75%), postmenopausal (57.5%) and working full-time or part-time (81.3%). Participants were overweight on average (mean body mass index = 28.8), had stage I-III BC, and most frequently received both chemo- and radiotherapy. Typical regimens of chemotherapy included about 40% of the patients receiving Adriamycin 60mg/m2 + Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses and about 53% of the patients receiving either Adriamycin 60mg/m2, Taxol 145mg/m2, and Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 sequentially every 2-3 weeks for 3 doses each, or Adriamycin 50mg/m2 + Cytoxan 500 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses followed by Taxotere 75mg/m2 every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses. Type of chemotherapy regimen influence on immune recovery was examined, but there was not a sufficient sample to statistically analyze three different chemotherapy regimens. On the other hand, typical radiotherapy included a total dose of 45-65 Gy over 6 weeks with 15-20 Gy boost dose toward the end. Immune Recovery over Time The first hypothesis was that the probability of immune recovery to or above baseline levels would increase over time after cancer adjuvant therapy. First, the percentages of the participants with immune recovery to baseline or above ranged from 17% to 62% at 2 months, 11% to 76% at 6 months, and 6% to 76% at 12 months, varying among immune parameters (Tables 3 and 4 ). Accordingly, for CD4%, IFN-?, IL-2, IL-6, LAK cell activity, and lymphocyte proliferation responses, the probability of immune recovery was significantly different across three different time points, p ? .05 ( Table 5 ). The IL-2 and lymphocyte proliferation responses, for example, showed further decrement in the probability of immune recovery at 12 months than earlier time points, whereas IL-6 showed a higher probability of recovery at 12 months. Immune recovery of CD4%, IFN-?, and LAK cell activity differed across three time points in subgroups of women based on the type of cancer adjuvant therapy received. For example, CD4% immune recovery was significantly lower at 12 months in women who received chemotherapy, whereas immune recovery of LAK cell activity was significantly higher at 12 months in women who received both chemotherapy and radiotherapy ( Table 5 ). Therefore, this hypothesis was supported only partially. Immune Recovery by the Type of Cancer Adjuvant Therapy The second hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ among the three types of cancer adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy and radiotherapy). The type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant effects on the probability of IL-2 and IL-4 immune recovery across all three time points ( Table 6 ). The recovery of IL-2 responses was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy than women who received radiotherapy only. In contrast, the recovery of IL-4 responses was significantly poorer in women who received radiotherapy than women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For the recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant impact on immune recovery at only the 12-month time point: The recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy than women who received radiotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For other immune parameters tested in this study, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy did not show significant impact on immune recovery at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was supported partially. Immune Recovery by Cancer Stage The third hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ between two cancer stages (stage 1-2 vs. stage > 2). The probability of immune recovery to baseline or above was not significantly different by cancer stage for any immune parameters ( Table 7 ). In all immune parameters tested in this study, the probability of immune recovery was similar between women with breast cancer stage ? 2 and women with breast cancer stage >2 at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was not supported.  Results Participant Characteristics Demographic characteristics and medical information of the participants are presented in Tables 1 and 2 . Participants had a mean age of 49.5 years and tended to be Caucasian (75%), postmenopausal (57.5%) and working full-time or part-time (81.3%). Participants were overweight on average (mean body mass index = 28.8), had stage I-III BC, and most frequently received both chemo- and radiotherapy. Typical regimens of chemotherapy included about 40% of the patients receiving Adriamycin 60mg/m2 + Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses and about 53% of the patients receiving either Adriamycin 60mg/m2, Taxol 145mg/m2, and Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 sequentially every 2-3 weeks for 3 doses each, or Adriamycin 50mg/m2 + Cytoxan 500 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses followed by Taxotere 75mg/m2 every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses. Type of chemotherapy regimen influence on immune recovery was examined, but there was not a sufficient sample to statistically analyze three different chemotherapy regimens. On the other hand, typical radiotherapy included a total dose of 45-65 Gy over 6 weeks with 15-20 Gy boost dose toward the end. Immune Recovery over Time The first hypothesis was that the probability of immune recovery to or above baseline levels would increase over time after cancer adjuvant therapy. First, the percentages of the participants with immune recovery to baseline or above ranged from 17% to 62% at 2 months, 11% to 76% at 6 months, and 6% to 76% at 12 months, varying among immune parameters (Tables 3 and 4 ). Accordingly, for CD4%, IFN-?, IL-2, IL-6, LAK cell activity, and lymphocyte proliferation responses, the probability of immune recovery was significantly different across three different time points, p ? .05 ( Table 5 ). The IL-2 and lymphocyte proliferation responses, for example, showed further decrement in the probability of immune recovery at 12 months than earlier time points, whereas IL-6 showed a higher probability of recovery at 12 months. Immune recovery of CD4%, IFN-?, and LAK cell activity differed across three time points in subgroups of women based on the type of cancer adjuvant therapy received. For example, CD4% immune recovery was significantly lower at 12 months in women who received chemotherapy, whereas immune recovery of LAK cell activity was significantly higher at 12 months in women who received both chemotherapy and radiotherapy ( Table 5 ). Therefore, this hypothesis was supported only partially. Immune Recovery by the Type of Cancer Adjuvant Therapy The second hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ among the three types of cancer adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy and radiotherapy). The type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant effects on the probability of IL-2 and IL-4 immune recovery across all three time points ( Table 6 ). The recovery of IL-2 responses was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy than women who received radiotherapy only. In contrast, the recovery of IL-4 responses was significantly poorer in women who received radiotherapy than women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For the recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant impact on immune recovery at only the 12-month time point: The recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy than women who received radiotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For other immune parameters tested in this study, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy did not show significant impact on immune recovery at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was supported partially. Immune Recovery by Cancer Stage The third hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ between two cancer stages (stage 1-2 vs. stage > 2). The probability of immune recovery to baseline or above was not significantly different by cancer stage for any immune parameters ( Table 7 ). In all immune parameters tested in this study, the probability of immune recovery was similar between women with breast cancer stage ? 2 and women with breast cancer stage >2 at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was not supported.  Participant Characteristics Demographic characteristics and medical information of the participants are presented in Tables 1 and 2 . Participants had a mean age of 49.5 years and tended to be Caucasian (75%), postmenopausal (57.5%) and working full-time or part-time (81.3%). Participants were overweight on average (mean body mass index = 28.8), had stage I-III BC, and most frequently received both chemo- and radiotherapy. Typical regimens of chemotherapy included about 40% of the patients receiving Adriamycin 60mg/m2 + Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses and about 53% of the patients receiving either Adriamycin 60mg/m2, Taxol 145mg/m2, and Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 sequentially every 2-3 weeks for 3 doses each, or Adriamycin 50mg/m2 + Cytoxan 500 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses followed by Taxotere 75mg/m2 every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses. Type of chemotherapy regimen influence on immune recovery was examined, but there was not a sufficient sample to statistically analyze three different chemotherapy regimens. On the other hand, typical radiotherapy included a total dose of 45-65 Gy over 6 weeks with 15-20 Gy boost dose toward the end.  Participant Characteristics Demographic characteristics and medical information of the participants are presented in Tables 1 and 2 . Participants had a mean age of 49.5 years and tended to be Caucasian (75%), postmenopausal (57.5%) and working full-time or part-time (81.3%). Participants were overweight on average (mean body mass index = 28.8), had stage I-III BC, and most frequently received both chemo- and radiotherapy. Typical regimens of chemotherapy included about 40% of the patients receiving Adriamycin 60mg/m2 + Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses and about 53% of the patients receiving either Adriamycin 60mg/m2, Taxol 145mg/m2, and Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 sequentially every 2-3 weeks for 3 doses each, or Adriamycin 50mg/m2 + Cytoxan 500 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses followed by Taxotere 75mg/m2 every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses. Type of chemotherapy regimen influence on immune recovery was examined, but there was not a sufficient sample to statistically analyze three different chemotherapy regimens. On the other hand, typical radiotherapy included a total dose of 45-65 Gy over 6 weeks with 15-20 Gy boost dose toward the end.  Immune Recovery over Time The first hypothesis was that the probability of immune recovery to or above baseline levels would increase over time after cancer adjuvant therapy. First, the percentages of the participants with immune recovery to baseline or above ranged from 17% to 62% at 2 months, 11% to 76% at 6 months, and 6% to 76% at 12 months, varying among immune parameters (Tables 3 and 4 ). Accordingly, for CD4%, IFN-?, IL-2, IL-6, LAK cell activity, and lymphocyte proliferation responses, the probability of immune recovery was significantly different across three different time points, p ? .05 ( Table 5 ). The IL-2 and lymphocyte proliferation responses, for example, showed further decrement in the probability of immune recovery at 12 months than earlier time points, whereas IL-6 showed a higher probability of recovery at 12 months. Immune recovery of CD4%, IFN-?, and LAK cell activity differed across three time points in subgroups of women based on the type of cancer adjuvant therapy received. For example, CD4% immune recovery was significantly lower at 12 months in women who received chemotherapy, whereas immune recovery of LAK cell activity was significantly higher at 12 months in women who received both chemotherapy and radiotherapy ( Table 5 ). Therefore, this hypothesis was supported only partially.  Immune Recovery over Time The first hypothesis was that the probability of immune recovery to or above baseline levels would increase over time after cancer adjuvant therapy. First, the percentages of the participants with immune recovery to baseline or above ranged from 17% to 62% at 2 months, 11% to 76% at 6 months, and 6% to 76% at 12 months, varying among immune parameters (Tables 3 and 4 ). Accordingly, for CD4%, IFN-?, IL-2, IL-6, LAK cell activity, and lymphocyte proliferation responses, the probability of immune recovery was significantly different across three different time points, p ? .05 ( Table 5 ). The IL-2 and lymphocyte proliferation responses, for example, showed further decrement in the probability of immune recovery at 12 months than earlier time points, whereas IL-6 showed a higher probability of recovery at 12 months. Immune recovery of CD4%, IFN-?, and LAK cell activity differed across three time points in subgroups of women based on the type of cancer adjuvant therapy received. For example, CD4% immune recovery was significantly lower at 12 months in women who received chemotherapy, whereas immune recovery of LAK cell activity was significantly higher at 12 months in women who received both chemotherapy and radiotherapy ( Table 5 ). Therefore, this hypothesis was supported only partially.  Immune Recovery by the Type of Cancer Adjuvant Therapy The second hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ among the three types of cancer adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy and radiotherapy). The type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant effects on the probability of IL-2 and IL-4 immune recovery across all three time points ( Table 6 ). The recovery of IL-2 responses was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy than women who received radiotherapy only. In contrast, the recovery of IL-4 responses was significantly poorer in women who received radiotherapy than women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For the recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant impact on immune recovery at only the 12-month time point: The recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy than women who received radiotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For other immune parameters tested in this study, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy did not show significant impact on immune recovery at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was supported partially.  Immune Recovery by the Type of Cancer Adjuvant Therapy The second hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ among the three types of cancer adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy and radiotherapy). The type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant effects on the probability of IL-2 and IL-4 immune recovery across all three time points ( Table 6 ). The recovery of IL-2 responses was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy than women who received radiotherapy only. In contrast, the recovery of IL-4 responses was significantly poorer in women who received radiotherapy than women who received chemotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For the recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy had significant impact on immune recovery at only the 12-month time point: The recovery of CD4% and LAK cell activity was significantly poorer in women who received chemotherapy than women who received radiotherapy or both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For other immune parameters tested in this study, the type of cancer adjuvant therapy did not show significant impact on immune recovery at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was supported partially.  Immune Recovery by Cancer Stage The third hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ between two cancer stages (stage 1-2 vs. stage > 2). The probability of immune recovery to baseline or above was not significantly different by cancer stage for any immune parameters ( Table 7 ). In all immune parameters tested in this study, the probability of immune recovery was similar between women with breast cancer stage ? 2 and women with breast cancer stage >2 at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was not supported.  Immune Recovery by Cancer Stage The third hypothesis was that immune recovery over time would differ between two cancer stages (stage 1-2 vs. stage > 2). The probability of immune recovery to baseline or above was not significantly different by cancer stage for any immune parameters ( Table 7 ). In all immune parameters tested in this study, the probability of immune recovery was similar between women with breast cancer stage ? 2 and women with breast cancer stage >2 at any time point. Therefore, this hypothesis was not supported.  Discussion The findings of this study indicate that immune recovery to pretreatment levels within the first year of cancer adjuvant therapy is impaired significantly in large proportions of BC patients. Furthermore, there is considerable variability in the extent of immune recovery among different immune parameters and patients. Not surprisingly, the type of adjuvant therapy showed significant effects on immune recovery, but those effects also varied based on immune parameters. Cancer stage, on the other hand, did not show any significant effects on immune recovery in this study, perhaps because we did not have the patients with advanced metastatic disease. The percentages of the patients with immune recovery to baseline or above ranged from 6% to 76% across all three time points in this study. Significant delays in immune recovery and large variability persisted at 12 months, which was at least 6-10 months after the completion of any adjuvant therapy. It is interesting to note that enumerative parameters of CD subsets (with the exception of CD4% in chemotherapy patients) and a proinflammatory cytokine, IL-6, seem to recover faster than other parameters that are better known to be a tumor-defense mechanism (NK cell activity) and cytokines that enhance tumor-defense mechanism (IFN-? and IL-2). The differential speed of recovery among different CD subsets we found is consistent with previous findings: CD8+ and CD16+/CD56+ cells recovered faster than CD4+ cells ( Belka et al., 1999 ; Santin et al., 2000 ); and CD4+ cell recovery remained below baseline at 4 months after a low dose radiotherapy ( Belka et al., 1999 ). In advanced BC patients, high-dose chemotherapy led to an inversion of CD4/CD8 ratio and significant reductions in lymphocyte proliferation that persisted for 6-12 months ( Avigan et al., 2000 ). Prolonged reductions in lymphocyte proliferation were also reported in early stage BC patients ( Wiltschke et al., 1995 ). Furthermore, immune recovery did not always improve with time. For example, the probability of recovering IL-2 responses to baseline or above was only about 19% at 12 months ( Table 5 ), lower than that of earlier time points. A similar decreasing trend was noted in lymphocyte proliferation responses. These findings suggest that cancer adjuvant therapy may have a delayed impact on recovery of certain immune responses far beyond the immediate period after completion of therapy. The type of cancer adjuvant therapy had a differential influence on immune recovery in selective immune measures. Chemotherapy had significant selective immunosuppressive impact on the recovery of IL-2 responses at all times and CD4% at 12 months. In contrast, radiotherapy had significant selective immunosuppressive impact on the recovery of IL-4 responses. Immunosuppression from both chemo- or radiotherapy has been reported by others, including a depletion of CD4+, CD8+ and CD56+ subsets, impaired NK cell activity and lymphocyte proliferation in various cancer patients ( Santin et al., 2000 ; Steele, 2002 ; Verastegui, Morales, Barrera-Franco, Poitevin, & Hadden, 2003 ). The NK cell activity has been found to decrease significantly during and following chemotherapy in BC patients, although NK cell numbers were less affected and tended to return to baseline before subsequent cycles of chemotherapy ( Beitsch, Lotzova, Hortobagyi, & Pollock, 1994 ; Sewell et al., 1993 ; Solomayer et al., 2003 ). Direct comparison of three different types of cancer adjuvant therapy on immune responses has rarely been conducted. Santin et al. ( Santin et al., 2000 ) reported no significant differences in immune suppression between radiotherapy alone and radiotherapy combined with cisplatinum in cervical cancer patients, but the sample size was extremely small ( n = 8). While time between completion of adjuvant therapy and blood draw for immune function measurement differed among adjuvant therapy types in this study, those differences are an unlikely explanation for differential responses because the patterns of IL-2 and IL-4 responses to adjuvant therapy types remained similar across time points. It appears that chemotherapy or combination of chemo- and radiotherapy suppresses Th1-type cytokine response, whereas radiotherapy suppresses Th2-type cytokine response. Cancer stage had no significant effects on immune recovery in this study. Findings from prior studies have been mixed in that some found incrementally lower NK cell activity with advances in BC stage particularly among those with metastatic BC ( Konjevic & Spuzic, 1993 ), whereas others did not find stage-dependent reductions in immune responses ( Campbell et al., 2005 ). One likely reason for not observing the effect of cancer stage in this study is that advanced stage metastatic BC patients were not included in the study. Clinical significance of differential and impaired immune recovery is unclear at present and warrants further long-term in-depth investigations. The impact of impaired immune recovery in early stage BC patients may be more subtle than clinical outcomes documented in advanced metastatic BC patients. In advanced BC patients, early immune recovery of lymphocyte count or lymphocyte proliferation responses predicted better survival and lower recurrence of disease ( Nieto et al., 2004 ; Porrata et al., 2001 ); and lower levels of IL-2 but higher levels of IL-6 were associated with significantly negative survival outcomes ( Bachelot et al., 2003 ; Bozcuk et al., 2004 ). Even in early BC patients, lower lymphocyte proliferation was correlated with greater tumor burden (tumor size and axillary lymph node involvement) and those who had not recovered their lymphocyte proliferation response to baseline values in 12 months from surgery developed a far greater rate of metastatic disease (61%) within subsequent 2 years than those who had recovered lymphocyte proliferation above the baseline (2%) ( Verastegui et al., 2003 ; Wiltschke et al., 1995 ). Similarly, decreased intracellular IFN-? and IL-2 expression in T cells was correlated with increased number of tumor cells in bone marrow ( Campbell et al., 2005 ), and lower baseline IL-2 levels were associated with a greater tumor relapse rate, 33.3% vs. 4.7% in early stage BC patients ( Arduino et al., 1996 ). Although clinical outcomes from delayed immune recovery in early stage BC patients might be mostly nonlife-threatening outcomes, such as infections, they can compromise patients’ quality of life. Such infections were documented in 11-17% of early BC patients (median follow-up of 69 months; ( Henderson et al., 2003 ) and 47% of metastatic BC patients (median follow-up of 40 weeks) ( Slamon et al., 2001 ). Thus, research needs to be extended to determine clinical significance of delayed and poor immune recovery in early stage BC cancer patients employing large sample sizes and longer follow-up periods to gain sufficient statistical power. In addition, investigators need to simultaneously assess potential psychosocial, behavioral, disease-related and biological factors that might contribute to variability in immune recovery. These findings may provide a basis for future interventions to facilitate a timely recovery of immune responses and perhaps improve clinical outcomes in early stage BC patients.  Discussion The findings of this study indicate that immune recovery to pretreatment levels within the first year of cancer adjuvant therapy is impaired significantly in large proportions of BC patients. Furthermore, there is considerable variability in the extent of immune recovery among different immune parameters and patients. Not surprisingly, the type of adjuvant therapy showed significant effects on immune recovery, but those effects also varied based on immune parameters. Cancer stage, on the other hand, did not show any significant effects on immune recovery in this study, perhaps because we did not have the patients with advanced metastatic disease. The percentages of the patients with immune recovery to baseline or above ranged from 6% to 76% across all three time points in this study. Significant delays in immune recovery and large variability persisted at 12 months, which was at least 6-10 months after the completion of any adjuvant therapy. It is interesting to note that enumerative parameters of CD subsets (with the exception of CD4% in chemotherapy patients) and a proinflammatory cytokine, IL-6, seem to recover faster than other parameters that are better known to be a tumor-defense mechanism (NK cell activity) and cytokines that enhance tumor-defense mechanism (IFN-? and IL-2). The differential speed of recovery among different CD subsets we found is consistent with previous findings: CD8+ and CD16+/CD56+ cells recovered faster than CD4+ cells ( Belka et al., 1999 ; Santin et al., 2000 ); and CD4+ cell recovery remained below baseline at 4 months after a low dose radiotherapy ( Belka et al., 1999 ). In advanced BC patients, high-dose chemotherapy led to an inversion of CD4/CD8 ratio and significant reductions in lymphocyte proliferation that persisted for 6-12 months ( Avigan et al., 2000 ). Prolonged reductions in lymphocyte proliferation were also reported in early stage BC patients ( Wiltschke et al., 1995 ). Furthermore, immune recovery did not always improve with time. For example, the probability of recovering IL-2 responses to baseline or above was only about 19% at 12 months ( Table 5 ), lower than that of earlier time points. A similar decreasing trend was noted in lymphocyte proliferation responses. These findings suggest that cancer adjuvant therapy may have a delayed impact on recovery of certain immune responses far beyond the immediate period after completion of therapy. The type of cancer adjuvant therapy had a differential influence on immune recovery in selective immune measures. Chemotherapy had significant selective immunosuppressive impact on the recovery of IL-2 responses at all times and CD4% at 12 months. In contrast, radiotherapy had significant selective immunosuppressive impact on the recovery of IL-4 responses. Immunosuppression from both chemo- or radiotherapy has been reported by others, including a depletion of CD4+, CD8+ and CD56+ subsets, impaired NK cell activity and lymphocyte proliferation in various cancer patients ( Santin et al., 2000 ; Steele, 2002 ; Verastegui, Morales, Barrera-Franco, Poitevin, & Hadden, 2003 ). The NK cell activity has been found to decrease significantly during and following chemotherapy in BC patients, although NK cell numbers were less affected and tended to return to baseline before subsequent cycles of chemotherapy ( Beitsch, Lotzova, Hortobagyi, & Pollock, 1994 ; Sewell et al., 1993 ; Solomayer et al., 2003 ). Direct comparison of three different types of cancer adjuvant therapy on immune responses has rarely been conducted. Santin et al. ( Santin et al., 2000 ) reported no significant differences in immune suppression between radiotherapy alone and radiotherapy combined with cisplatinum in cervical cancer patients, but the sample size was extremely small ( n = 8). While time between completion of adjuvant therapy and blood draw for immune function measurement differed among adjuvant therapy types in this study, those differences are an unlikely explanation for differential responses because the patterns of IL-2 and IL-4 responses to adjuvant therapy types remained similar across time points. It appears that chemotherapy or combination of chemo- and radiotherapy suppresses Th1-type cytokine response, whereas radiotherapy suppresses Th2-type cytokine response. Cancer stage had no significant effects on immune recovery in this study. Findings from prior studies have been mixed in that some found incrementally lower NK cell activity with advances in BC stage particularly among those with metastatic BC ( Konjevic & Spuzic, 1993 ), whereas others did not find stage-dependent reductions in immune responses ( Campbell et al., 2005 ). One likely reason for not observing the effect of cancer stage in this study is that advanced stage metastatic BC patients were not included in the study. Clinical significance of differential and impaired immune recovery is unclear at present and warrants further long-term in-depth investigations. The impact of impaired immune recovery in early stage BC patients may be more subtle than clinical outcomes documented in advanced metastatic BC patients. In advanced BC patients, early immune recovery of lymphocyte count or lymphocyte proliferation responses predicted better survival and lower recurrence of disease ( Nieto et al., 2004 ; Porrata et al., 2001 ); and lower levels of IL-2 but higher levels of IL-6 were associated with significantly negative survival outcomes ( Bachelot et al., 2003 ; Bozcuk et al., 2004 ). Even in early BC patients, lower lymphocyte proliferation was correlated with greater tumor burden (tumor size and axillary lymph node involvement) and those who had not recovered their lymphocyte proliferation response to baseline values in 12 months from surgery developed a far greater rate of metastatic disease (61%) within subsequent 2 years than those who had recovered lymphocyte proliferation above the baseline (2%) ( Verastegui et al., 2003 ; Wiltschke et al., 1995 ). Similarly, decreased intracellular IFN-? and IL-2 expression in T cells was correlated with increased number of tumor cells in bone marrow ( Campbell et al., 2005 ), and lower baseline IL-2 levels were associated with a greater tumor relapse rate, 33.3% vs. 4.7% in early stage BC patients ( Arduino et al., 1996 ). Although clinical outcomes from delayed immune recovery in early stage BC patients might be mostly nonlife-threatening outcomes, such as infections, they can compromise patients’ quality of life. Such infections were documented in 11-17% of early BC patients (median follow-up of 69 months; ( Henderson et al., 2003 ) and 47% of metastatic BC patients (median follow-up of 40 weeks) ( Slamon et al., 2001 ). Thus, research needs to be extended to determine clinical significance of delayed and poor immune recovery in early stage BC cancer patients employing large sample sizes and longer follow-up periods to gain sufficient statistical power. In addition, investigators need to simultaneously assess potential psychosocial, behavioral, disease-related and biological factors that might contribute to variability in immune recovery. These findings may provide a basis for future interventions to facilitate a timely recovery of immune responses and perhaps improve clinical outcomes in early stage BC patients.  Tables Table 1 Demographic characteristics of participants (N = 80) Variable M (SD) n (%) Age (years) 49.5 (8.7) ?Range 32-70 Education (years) ?Less than high school 1 (1.3) ?Graduated from High School 13 (16.3) ?Trade School/some college 28 (35.0) ?Bachelor’s degree 17 (21.3) ?Some Graduate school/Graduate degree 15 (18.8) ?Other 6 (7.5) Employment Status ?Not employed 15 (18.8) ?Part-time 12 (15.0) ?Full-time (40 hr/week) 53 (66.3) Body Mass Index 28.8 (6.3) ?19-24.9 28 (35.0) ?25 – 29.9 17 (21.3) ?30 – 46.6 31 (38.8) ?Missing 4 (5.0) Ethnicity ?African American 18 (22.5) ?Native American 2 (2.5) ?Caucasian 60 (75.0) Religion ?Protestant 62 (77.5) ?Catholic 12 (15.0) ?Jewish or Muslim 2 (2.4) ?None or Missing 4 (5.0) Marital Status ?Single 5 (6.3) ?Married or living as married 58 (72.5) ?Separated, Divorced, or Widowed 16 (20.0) ?Missing 1 (1.3) Menopausal Status ?Premenopause 22 (27.5) ?Postmenopause 46 (57.5) ?Perimenopause 12 (15.0) Table 2 Medical information of participants (N = 80) Variable N n (%) Stage (TNM classification) 80 ?0 * 1 (1.3) ?I 21 (26.3) ?II 45 (56.3) ?III 11 (13.8) ?Unknown 2 (2.5) Estrogen & Progesterone Receptor 80 ?Positive-positive 59 (73.8) ?Negative-negative 17 (21.3) ?Mixed 1 (1.3) ?Unknown 3 (3.8) Adjuvant Therapy 80 ?Chemotherapy 20 (25.0) ?Radiotherapy 26 (32.5) ?Chemo + radiotherapy 33 (41.3) ?No adjuvant therapy 1 (1.3) ?Hormonal therapy 60 (75.0) Chemotherapy Regimen 53 ?AC 21 (39.6) ?ACT/ATC 28 (52.8) ?Other (e.g., CMF) 4 (7.6) Recurrence 80 ?Yes 3 (3.8) ?No 74 (92.5) ?Unknown 3 (3.8) Notes . One woman was originally staged as stage 1, but it was later changed to stage 0. AC = Adriamycin 60mg/m2 + Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses; ATC = Adriamycin 60mg/m2, Taxol 145mg/m2, and Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 sequentially every 2-3 weeks for 3 doses each; ACT = Adriamycin 50mg/m2 + Cytoxan 500 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses followed by Taxotere 75mg/m2 every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses Table 3 Descriptive percentages of participants with immune recovery to or above baseline immune responses at 2, 6, and 12 months by cancer treatment group Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Chemo-+Radiotherapy Immune parameter 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) CD4% 41 41 18 57 52 70 38 50 53 CD56% 41 76 76 57 71 75 62 57 70 CD8% 41 65 71 57 67 65 59 70 67 IFN-? 33 28 24 17 48 27 58 50 25 IL-1? 53 59 62 27 27 29 33 30 44 IL-2 18 11 6 39 32 18 39 21 12 IL-4 56 56 35 17 13 23 27 33 35 IL-6 61 67 71 39 61 73 45 70 59 NK 12.5:1 35 22 18 30 48 32 41 42 39 NK 25:1 28 22 17 17 30 41 47 42 41 NK 50:1 28 28 17 22 48 41 41 27 35 NK 100:1 28 28 28 35 43 45 41 24 16 LAK 12.5:1 33 33 22 39 39 45 41 55 56 LAK 25:1 22 28 11 36 43 55 34 48 53 LAK 50:1 33 39 22 39 43 41 30 44 44 LAK 100:1 33 33 28 52 52 36 33 44 56 LP5 33 25 7 43 40 25 48 38 36 LP10 33 33 29 57 30 25 33 25 43 Notes . NK = natural killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LAK = lymphokine-activated killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LP5 and LP10 = lymphocyte proliferation stimulated with Phytohemagglutinin 5-10 ?g/ml. Sample size may vary slightly due to missing data. Table 4 Descriptive percentages of participants with immune recovery to or above baseline immune level at 2, 6, and 12 months by cancer stage Stage 1-2 Stage > 2 Immune parameter 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) CD4% 52 48 49 29 50 50 CD56% 59 70 76 48 59 68 CD8% 59 65 67 43 73 68 IFN-? 33 40 22 50 52 33 IL-1? 36 31 39 36 46 52 IL-2 31 20 10 42 25 17 IL-4 33 36 33 28 25 27 IL-6 51 66 67 40 67 65 NK 12.5:1 36 40 30 36 38 35 NK 25:1 29 34 35 40 33 35 NK 50:1 29 38 35 36 25 26 NK 100:1 35 38 35 36 17 13 LAK 12.5:1 38 48 45 41 36 43 LAK 25:1 32 44 47 32 36 35 LAK 50:1 35 44 41 32 39 30 LAK 100:1 41 42 41 36 48 48 LP5 41 35 21 47 37 37 LP10 41 30 30 42 26 42 Notes . NK denotes natural killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LAK denotes lymphokine-activated killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LP5 and LP10 denote lymphocyte proliferation stimulated with Phytohemagglutinin 5-10 ?g/ml. Sample size may vary slightly due to missing data. Table 5 Model-estimated treatment group probability of immune recovery over time by the type of cancer adjuvant therapy Variable Treatment Time Point p 2 mo Probability 6 mo Probability 12 mo Probability CD4 Chemo 0.45 0.46A 0.18B .04 Radiation 0.65 0.60 0.78 .28 Chemo+Radio 0.46 0.58 0.62 .36 CD56 Combined 0.60A 0.71A 0.76B .13 CD8 Combined 0.60 0.71 0.71 .18 IFN-? Chemo 0.33 0.26 0.23 .83 Radiation 0.21A 0.53B 0.31 .05 Chemo+Radio 0.51A 0.43 0.21B .04 IL-1? Combined 0.34 0.36 0.42 .43 IL-2 Combined 0.48A 0.34B 0.19C <.001 IL-4 Combined 0.22 0.22 0.22 .99 IL-6 Combined 0.45A 0.63B 0.67B .04 NK (MV) Com bined 0.34 0.35 0.33 .92 LAK (MV) Chemo 0.33 0.37 0.24 .26 Radiation 0.49 0.45 0.45 .91 Chemo+Radio 0.33A 0.50 0.58B <.02 LP (MV) Combined 0.44A 0.32B 0.29B .03 Notes . Pairs of probability with different letters (e.g., A and B, A and C, B and C) are significantly different at p < .05. Combined: Collapsed over types of cancer adjuvant therapy as interaction with time was not statistically significant. NK: natural killer cell activity. LAK: lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. LP: lymphocyte proliferation. MV: Multivariate model tested. ‘Chemo+Radio’ indicates both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Table 6 Model-estimated time point probability of immune recovery by the type of cancer adjuvant therapy Time point (month) Chemotherapy Probability Radiotherapy Probability Chemo+ Radiotherapy Probability p CD4 2 0.45 0.65 0.46 .39 6 0.45 0.60 0.58 .59 12 0.18A 0.77B 0.62B .002 CD56 Combined 0.66 0.70 0.73 .77 CD8 Combined 0.63 0.68 0.59 .66 IFN-r 2 0.33 0.21 0.51 .17 6 0.25 0.53 0.43 .27 12 0.23 0.31 0.21 .82 IL-1? Combined 0.56 0.25 0.33 .10 IL-2 Combined 0.11A 0.73B 0.29A .004 IL-4 Combined 0.41A 0.09B 0.26A .002 IL-6 Combined 0.67 0.53 0.56 .56 NK (MV) Combined 0.27 0.37 0.38 .65 LAK (MV) 2 0.33 0.37 0.24 .54 6 0.49 0.45 0.45 .66 12 0.33A 0.50 0.58B .05 LP (MV) Combined 0.29 0.37 0.38 .82 Notes . Pairs of treatment group with different letters (e.g., A and B, A and C, B and C) are significantly different at p < .05. Combined: Collapsed over types of cancer adjuvant therapy, as interaction with time was not statistically significant. NK: natural killer cell activity. LAK: lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. LP: lymphocyte proliferation. MV: Multivariate model tested. Table 7 Model-estimated probability of immune recovery by cancer stage Variable Timepoint (month) Stage 1 - 2 Stage > 2 p Probability Probability CD4 Combined 0.54 0.52 .86 CD56 Combined 0.74 0.64 .31 CD8 Combined 0.70 0.66 .69 IFN-r Combined 0.28 0.37 .31 IL-1? Combined 0.36 0.39 .82 IL-2 Combined 0.20 0.50 .07 IL-4 Combined 0.29 0.17 .11 IL-6 Combined 0.65 0.52 .20 NK (MV) Combined 0.36 0.32 0.63 LAK (MV) Combined 0.43 0.39 .74 LP(MV) Combined 0.31 0.39 .52 Notes . Combined: Collapsed over types of cancer adjuvant therapy, as interaction with time was not statistically significant. NK: natural killer cell activity. LAK: lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. LP: lymphocyte proliferation. MV: Multivariate model tested.  Tables Table 1 Demographic characteristics of participants (N = 80) Variable M (SD) n (%) Age (years) 49.5 (8.7) ?Range 32-70 Education (years) ?Less than high school 1 (1.3) ?Graduated from High School 13 (16.3) ?Trade School/some college 28 (35.0) ?Bachelor’s degree 17 (21.3) ?Some Graduate school/Graduate degree 15 (18.8) ?Other 6 (7.5) Employment Status ?Not employed 15 (18.8) ?Part-time 12 (15.0) ?Full-time (40 hr/week) 53 (66.3) Body Mass Index 28.8 (6.3) ?19-24.9 28 (35.0) ?25 – 29.9 17 (21.3) ?30 – 46.6 31 (38.8) ?Missing 4 (5.0) Ethnicity ?African American 18 (22.5) ?Native American 2 (2.5) ?Caucasian 60 (75.0) Religion ?Protestant 62 (77.5) ?Catholic 12 (15.0) ?Jewish or Muslim 2 (2.4) ?None or Missing 4 (5.0) Marital Status ?Single 5 (6.3) ?Married or living as married 58 (72.5) ?Separated, Divorced, or Widowed 16 (20.0) ?Missing 1 (1.3) Menopausal Status ?Premenopause 22 (27.5) ?Postmenopause 46 (57.5) ?Perimenopause 12 (15.0) Table 2 Medical information of participants (N = 80) Variable N n (%) Stage (TNM classification) 80 ?0 * 1 (1.3) ?I 21 (26.3) ?II 45 (56.3) ?III 11 (13.8) ?Unknown 2 (2.5) Estrogen & Progesterone Receptor 80 ?Positive-positive 59 (73.8) ?Negative-negative 17 (21.3) ?Mixed 1 (1.3) ?Unknown 3 (3.8) Adjuvant Therapy 80 ?Chemotherapy 20 (25.0) ?Radiotherapy 26 (32.5) ?Chemo + radiotherapy 33 (41.3) ?No adjuvant therapy 1 (1.3) ?Hormonal therapy 60 (75.0) Chemotherapy Regimen 53 ?AC 21 (39.6) ?ACT/ATC 28 (52.8) ?Other (e.g., CMF) 4 (7.6) Recurrence 80 ?Yes 3 (3.8) ?No 74 (92.5) ?Unknown 3 (3.8) Notes . One woman was originally staged as stage 1, but it was later changed to stage 0. AC = Adriamycin 60mg/m2 + Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses; ATC = Adriamycin 60mg/m2, Taxol 145mg/m2, and Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 sequentially every 2-3 weeks for 3 doses each; ACT = Adriamycin 50mg/m2 + Cytoxan 500 mg/m2 together every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses followed by Taxotere 75mg/m2 every 2-3 weeks for 4 doses Table 3 Descriptive percentages of participants with immune recovery to or above baseline immune responses at 2, 6, and 12 months by cancer treatment group Chemotherapy Radiotherapy Chemo-+Radiotherapy Immune parameter 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) CD4% 41 41 18 57 52 70 38 50 53 CD56% 41 76 76 57 71 75 62 57 70 CD8% 41 65 71 57 67 65 59 70 67 IFN-? 33 28 24 17 48 27 58 50 25 IL-1? 53 59 62 27 27 29 33 30 44 IL-2 18 11 6 39 32 18 39 21 12 IL-4 56 56 35 17 13 23 27 33 35 IL-6 61 67 71 39 61 73 45 70 59 NK 12.5:1 35 22 18 30 48 32 41 42 39 NK 25:1 28 22 17 17 30 41 47 42 41 NK 50:1 28 28 17 22 48 41 41 27 35 NK 100:1 28 28 28 35 43 45 41 24 16 LAK 12.5:1 33 33 22 39 39 45 41 55 56 LAK 25:1 22 28 11 36 43 55 34 48 53 LAK 50:1 33 39 22 39 43 41 30 44 44 LAK 100:1 33 33 28 52 52 36 33 44 56 LP5 33 25 7 43 40 25 48 38 36 LP10 33 33 29 57 30 25 33 25 43 Notes . NK = natural killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LAK = lymphokine-activated killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LP5 and LP10 = lymphocyte proliferation stimulated with Phytohemagglutinin 5-10 ?g/ml. Sample size may vary slightly due to missing data. Table 4 Descriptive percentages of participants with immune recovery to or above baseline immune level at 2, 6, and 12 months by cancer stage Stage 1-2 Stage > 2 Immune parameter 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) 2 mo (%) 6 mo (%) 12 mo (%) CD4% 52 48 49 29 50 50 CD56% 59 70 76 48 59 68 CD8% 59 65 67 43 73 68 IFN-? 33 40 22 50 52 33 IL-1? 36 31 39 36 46 52 IL-2 31 20 10 42 25 17 IL-4 33 36 33 28 25 27 IL-6 51 66 67 40 67 65 NK 12.5:1 36 40 30 36 38 35 NK 25:1 29 34 35 40 33 35 NK 50:1 29 38 35 36 25 26 NK 100:1 35 38 35 36 17 13 LAK 12.5:1 38 48 45 41 36 43 LAK 25:1 32 44 47 32 36 35 LAK 50:1 35 44 41 32 39 30 LAK 100:1 41 42 41 36 48 48 LP5 41 35 21 47 37 37 LP10 41 30 30 42 26 42 Notes . NK denotes natural killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LAK denotes lymphokine-activated killer cell activity 12.5:1 – 100:1; LP5 and LP10 denote lymphocyte proliferation stimulated with Phytohemagglutinin 5-10 ?g/ml. Sample size may vary slightly due to missing data. Table 5 Model-estimated treatment group probability of immune recovery over time by the type of cancer adjuvant therapy Variable Treatment Time Point p 2 mo Probability 6 mo Probability 12 mo Probability CD4 Chemo 0.45 0.46A 0.18B .04 Radiation 0.65 0.60 0.78 .28 Chemo+Radio 0.46 0.58 0.62 .36 CD56 Combined 0.60A 0.71A 0.76B .13 CD8 Combined 0.60 0.71 0.71 .18 IFN-? Chemo 0.33 0.26 0.23 .83 Radiation 0.21A 0.53B 0.31 .05 Chemo+Radio 0.51A 0.43 0.21B .04 IL-1? Combined 0.34 0.36 0.42 .43 IL-2 Combined 0.48A 0.34B 0.19C <.001 IL-4 Combined 0.22 0.22 0.22 .99 IL-6 Combined 0.45A 0.63B 0.67B .04 NK (MV) Com bined 0.34 0.35 0.33 .92 LAK (MV) Chemo 0.33 0.37 0.24 .26 Radiation 0.49 0.45 0.45 .91 Chemo+Radio 0.33A 0.50 0.58B <.02 LP (MV) Combined 0.44A 0.32B 0.29B .03 Notes . Pairs of probability with different letters (e.g., A and B, A and C, B and C) are significantly different at p < .05. Combined: Collapsed over types of cancer adjuvant therapy as interaction with time was not statistically significant. NK: natural killer cell activity. LAK: lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. LP: lymphocyte proliferation. MV: Multivariate model tested. ‘Chemo+Radio’ indicates both chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Table 6 Model-estimated time point probability of immune recovery by the type of cancer adjuvant therapy Time point (month) Chemotherapy Probability Radiotherapy Probability Chemo+ Radiotherapy Probability p CD4 2 0.45 0.65 0.46 .39 6 0.45 0.60 0.58 .59 12 0.18A 0.77B 0.62B .002 CD56 Combined 0.66 0.70 0.73 .77 CD8 Combined 0.63 0.68 0.59 .66 IFN-r 2 0.33 0.21 0.51 .17 6 0.25 0.53 0.43 .27 12 0.23 0.31 0.21 .82 IL-1? Combined 0.56 0.25 0.33 .10 IL-2 Combined 0.11A 0.73B 0.29A .004 IL-4 Combined 0.41A 0.09B 0.26A .002 IL-6 Combined 0.67 0.53 0.56 .56 NK (MV) Combined 0.27 0.37 0.38 .65 LAK (MV) 2 0.33 0.37 0.24 .54 6 0.49 0.45 0.45 .66 12 0.33A 0.50 0.58B .05 LP (MV) Combined 0.29 0.37 0.38 .82 Notes . Pairs of treatment group with different letters (e.g., A and B, A and C, B and C) are significantly different at p < .05. Combined: Collapsed over types of cancer adjuvant therapy, as interaction with time was not statistically significant. NK: natural killer cell activity. LAK: lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. LP: lymphocyte proliferation. MV: Multivariate model tested. Table 7 Model-estimated probability of immune recovery by cancer stage Variable Timepoint (month) Stage 1 - 2 Stage > 2 p Probability Probability CD4 Combined 0.54 0.52 .86 CD56 Combined 0.74 0.64 .31 CD8 Combined 0.70 0.66 .69 IFN-r Combined 0.28 0.37 .31 IL-1? Combined 0.36 0.39 .82 IL-2 Combined 0.20 0.50 .07 IL-4 Combined 0.29 0.17 .11 IL-6 Combined 0.65 0.52 .20 NK (MV) Combined 0.36 0.32 0.63 LAK (MV) Combined 0.43 0.39 .74 LP(MV) Combined 0.31 0.39 .52 Notes . Combined: Collapsed over types of cancer adjuvant therapy, as interaction with time was not statistically significant. NK: natural killer cell activity. LAK: lymphokine-activated killer cell activity. LP: lymphocyte proliferation. MV: Multivariate model tested. 