Deficiency of the intestinal enzyme acyl CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase-2 protects mice from metabolic disorders induced by high-fat feeding Animals are remarkably efficient in absorbing dietary fat and assimilating this energy-dense nutrient into the white adipose tissue (WAT) for storage. Although this metabolic efficiency may confer an advantage in times of calorie deprivation, it contributes to obesity and associated metabolic disorders when dietary fat is abundant 1 , 2 . Here we show that the intestinal lipid synthesis enzyme acyl CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase-2 (MGAT2) has a crucial role in the assimilation of dietary fat and the accretion of body fat in mice. Mice lacking MGAT2 have a normal phenotype on a low-fat diet. However, on a high-fat diet, MGAT2-deficient mice are protected against developing obesity, glucose intolerance, hypercholesterolemia and fatty livers. Caloric intake is normal in MGAT2-deficient mice, and dietary fat is absorbed fully. However, entry of dietary fat into the circulation occurs at a reduced rate. This altered kinetics of fat absorption apparently results in more partitioning of dietary fat toward energy dissipation rather than toward storage in the WAT. Thus, our studies identify MGAT2 as a key determinant of energy metabolism in response to dietary fat and suggest that the inhibition of this enzyme may prove to be a useful strategy for treating obesity and other metabolic diseases associated with excessive fat intake.  METHODS Generation of <italic>Mogat2</italic>-deficient mice We generated Mogat2 -targeted 129/SvJae embryonic stem cells and, subsequently, mice carrying this mutation with a targeting vector designed to replace exon 1 of Mogat2 , including the translation-initiating methionine, with a neomycin-resistance cassette. We confirmed Mogat2 disruption by Southern blotting of genomic DNA that had been digested with Bst XI with a probe hybridizing upstream of sequences included in the targeting vector and by PCR (described in Supplementary Fig. 2a ). We generated Mogat2 ?/? and wild-type littermates from breeding heterozygotes (that were first backcrossed for 10–12 generations with C57BL/6J mice from the Jackson Laboratory) and housed them in a pathogen-free facility. Diets were standard chow, containing 11.9% calories from fat (5053 PicoLab; Purina), or semipurified diets containing 10%, 45% or 60% calories from fat (Research Diets). The University of California–San Francisco Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all procedures involving mice. Body weight, composition and temperature To monitor long-term growth, we weaned mice at 3 weeks of age onto the standard chow diet, weighed them weekly between 16:00 and 18:00 and kept them on the low-fat chow or switched them to the 60% high-fat diet at 9 weeks of age. We analyzed body composition by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) with a PixiMus2 scanner (GE Healthcare Lunar) after a 4-h fast, and we measured body lengths from nose tip to tail base after anesthesia. For monitoring food intake and weight gain in home cages, we acclimatized adult mice to individual caging and to the high-fat diet for a week, weighed them and their food daily and pooled the data for the following 7 d. We measured core body temperature rectally with a digital thermometer (model 4600; Yellow Springs Instruments) between 14:00 and 16:00 after deprivation of food for 4 h (fast) and between 21:00 and 22:00 ( ad libitum ; fed). Biochemical assays We measured plasma triacylglycerol, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, insulin, GLP1 (active), and PYY (total) levels by enzymatic assay or enzyme-linked immunoassay kits (triacylglycerol, Trig/GB, Roche/Hitachi Diagnostics; cholesterol, Waco Chemicals; insulin, Crystal Chem; GLP1, Millipore; PYY, Diagnostic Systems Laboratories). For GLP1 and PYY, we collected plasma 2 h after feeding and immediately added a dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitor (Millipore). We sent samples to Craft Technologies to measure retinol, retinyl esters and ?-tocopherol. We measured MGAT activity and tissue triacylglycerol as previously described 8 , 20 . We visualized lipids by iodine vapor or by dipping the plate into a solution of 10% cupric sulfate and 8% phosphoric acid and heating to 180 °C. We quantified rriacylglycerol mass was quantified by a previously described method4, with triolein as a standard. Absorption of dietary fat We assessed fat absorption during chronic high-fat feeding and after an acute challenge with a bolus of oil. We measured triacylglycerol absorption during high-fat feeding first using the fat balance assay developed by the Mouse Phenotyping Center at the University of Cincinnati 13 . We collected feces from mice fed diets containing the nonabsorbable fat sucrose polybenehate and 60% calories from lard. We calculated fat absorption from the ratios of behenic acid to other fatty acids in diet and feces. We next determined the fat contents of the diet and feces by weight. We monitored food intake and fecal output in individually caged mice fed a high-fat (60%) diet over a six-day period. We dried, weighed and ground a portion of diet and collected feces, extracted each with 40 ml of chloroform:methanol (2:1), and weighed lipid residues after the solvents were evaporated. We determined the caloric content of feces with an adiabatic bomb calorimeter (1241 Oxygen Bomb Calorimeter; Parr Instrument Company). For acute studies, we measured plasma triacylglycerol concentrations before (time 0) we had challenged mice with a bolus of 200 ?l of olive oil through intragastric gavage and at 1 h, 2 h and 4 h after the challenge. To inhibit the clearance of plasma triacylglycerol, we administered 100 ?l of the surfactant tyloxapol (5% in PBS, Sigma) through a tail vein. After 15 min, we collected blood before (time 0) and at 1 h, 2 h and 4 h after we had challenged mice with 200 ?l of olive oil containing 2 ?Ci 14C-trioleoylglycerol for triacylglycerol measurement and scintillation counting. To visualize chylomicron-size lipoprotein particles, we pooled plasma fractions from 1-h samples, ultracentrifuged them and examined the particles floating on the surface layer (density < 1.006 g ml?1) by electron microscopy after negative staining with potassium phosphotungstate 20 . Distribution of dietary fat uptake We assessed the uptake of dietary fat along the length of the small intestine by modifying a previously described method 21 . We fasted the mice for 4h and gavaged them with 1 ?Ci of 14C-trioleoylglycerol in 100 ?l of olive oil. Two hours later, we excised the small intestine (between the base of the stomach and the cecal junction), flushed it with 0.5 mM sodium taurocholate in PBS and cut it into 2-cm segments. We digested each segment with 500 ?l of 1 N NaOH at 65 °C for 1 h, mixed it with 5 ml of Hionicfluor liquid scintillation cocktail (PerkinElmer) and measured counts per minute with a scintillation counter. Energy balance We measured oxygen consumption and physical activity by a monitoring system (Oxymax; Columbus Instruments) after mice were acclimated to the system and various diets under the regular 12-h light-dark cycle. We took measurements from each cage about every 15 min, and we performed experiments for 3 d per diet condition. We separated the data on the basis of light-dark cycle, pooled and averaged them. We normalized oxygen consumption data to lean body mass, as measured by DEXA scanning on the day before calorimetry studies. Statistical analyses We compared means of two groups by the t test for parametric data and the Mann-Whitney rank sum test for nonparametric data. When we compared more than two groups, we performed analysis of variance followed by post hoc tests. For most experiments, we performed two-way analysis of variance to determine whether the effects of genotype and diet were significant; if so, we performed Bonferroni post-tests for group comparisons.  Generation of <italic>Mogat2</italic>-deficient mice We generated Mogat2 -targeted 129/SvJae embryonic stem cells and, subsequently, mice carrying this mutation with a targeting vector designed to replace exon 1 of Mogat2 , including the translation-initiating methionine, with a neomycin-resistance cassette. We confirmed Mogat2 disruption by Southern blotting of genomic DNA that had been digested with Bst XI with a probe hybridizing upstream of sequences included in the targeting vector and by PCR (described in Supplementary Fig. 2a ). We generated Mogat2 ?/? and wild-type littermates from breeding heterozygotes (that were first backcrossed for 10–12 generations with C57BL/6J mice from the Jackson Laboratory) and housed them in a pathogen-free facility. Diets were standard chow, containing 11.9% calories from fat (5053 PicoLab; Purina), or semipurified diets containing 10%, 45% or 60% calories from fat (Research Diets). The University of California–San Francisco Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all procedures involving mice.  Body weight, composition and temperature To monitor long-term growth, we weaned mice at 3 weeks of age onto the standard chow diet, weighed them weekly between 16:00 and 18:00 and kept them on the low-fat chow or switched them to the 60% high-fat diet at 9 weeks of age. We analyzed body composition by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) with a PixiMus2 scanner (GE Healthcare Lunar) after a 4-h fast, and we measured body lengths from nose tip to tail base after anesthesia. For monitoring food intake and weight gain in home cages, we acclimatized adult mice to individual caging and to the high-fat diet for a week, weighed them and their food daily and pooled the data for the following 7 d. We measured core body temperature rectally with a digital thermometer (model 4600; Yellow Springs Instruments) between 14:00 and 16:00 after deprivation of food for 4 h (fast) and between 21:00 and 22:00 ( ad libitum ; fed).  Biochemical assays We measured plasma triacylglycerol, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, insulin, GLP1 (active), and PYY (total) levels by enzymatic assay or enzyme-linked immunoassay kits (triacylglycerol, Trig/GB, Roche/Hitachi Diagnostics; cholesterol, Waco Chemicals; insulin, Crystal Chem; GLP1, Millipore; PYY, Diagnostic Systems Laboratories). For GLP1 and PYY, we collected plasma 2 h after feeding and immediately added a dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitor (Millipore). We sent samples to Craft Technologies to measure retinol, retinyl esters and ?-tocopherol. We measured MGAT activity and tissue triacylglycerol as previously described 8 , 20 . We visualized lipids by iodine vapor or by dipping the plate into a solution of 10% cupric sulfate and 8% phosphoric acid and heating to 180 °C. We quantified rriacylglycerol mass was quantified by a previously described method4, with triolein as a standard.  Absorption of dietary fat We assessed fat absorption during chronic high-fat feeding and after an acute challenge with a bolus of oil. We measured triacylglycerol absorption during high-fat feeding first using the fat balance assay developed by the Mouse Phenotyping Center at the University of Cincinnati 13 . We collected feces from mice fed diets containing the nonabsorbable fat sucrose polybenehate and 60% calories from lard. We calculated fat absorption from the ratios of behenic acid to other fatty acids in diet and feces. We next determined the fat contents of the diet and feces by weight. We monitored food intake and fecal output in individually caged mice fed a high-fat (60%) diet over a six-day period. We dried, weighed and ground a portion of diet and collected feces, extracted each with 40 ml of chloroform:methanol (2:1), and weighed lipid residues after the solvents were evaporated. We determined the caloric content of feces with an adiabatic bomb calorimeter (1241 Oxygen Bomb Calorimeter; Parr Instrument Company). For acute studies, we measured plasma triacylglycerol concentrations before (time 0) we had challenged mice with a bolus of 200 ?l of olive oil through intragastric gavage and at 1 h, 2 h and 4 h after the challenge. To inhibit the clearance of plasma triacylglycerol, we administered 100 ?l of the surfactant tyloxapol (5% in PBS, Sigma) through a tail vein. After 15 min, we collected blood before (time 0) and at 1 h, 2 h and 4 h after we had challenged mice with 200 ?l of olive oil containing 2 ?Ci 14C-trioleoylglycerol for triacylglycerol measurement and scintillation counting. To visualize chylomicron-size lipoprotein particles, we pooled plasma fractions from 1-h samples, ultracentrifuged them and examined the particles floating on the surface layer (density < 1.006 g ml?1) by electron microscopy after negative staining with potassium phosphotungstate 20 .  Distribution of dietary fat uptake We assessed the uptake of dietary fat along the length of the small intestine by modifying a previously described method 21 . We fasted the mice for 4h and gavaged them with 1 ?Ci of 14C-trioleoylglycerol in 100 ?l of olive oil. Two hours later, we excised the small intestine (between the base of the stomach and the cecal junction), flushed it with 0.5 mM sodium taurocholate in PBS and cut it into 2-cm segments. We digested each segment with 500 ?l of 1 N NaOH at 65 °C for 1 h, mixed it with 5 ml of Hionicfluor liquid scintillation cocktail (PerkinElmer) and measured counts per minute with a scintillation counter.  Energy balance We measured oxygen consumption and physical activity by a monitoring system (Oxymax; Columbus Instruments) after mice were acclimated to the system and various diets under the regular 12-h light-dark cycle. We took measurements from each cage about every 15 min, and we performed experiments for 3 d per diet condition. We separated the data on the basis of light-dark cycle, pooled and averaged them. We normalized oxygen consumption data to lean body mass, as measured by DEXA scanning on the day before calorimetry studies.  Statistical analyses We compared means of two groups by the t test for parametric data and the Mann-Whitney rank sum test for nonparametric data. When we compared more than two groups, we performed analysis of variance followed by post hoc tests. For most experiments, we performed two-way analysis of variance to determine whether the effects of genotype and diet were significant; if so, we performed Bonferroni post-tests for group comparisons.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Data  Figures Figure 1 MGAT2-deficient mice are protected from obesity induced by high-fat feeding. ( a , b ) Growth curves of male mice on a regular diet (10% calories from fat; a ) or switched to a high-fat diet (60% calories from fat; underlined; b ) at 9 weeks of age. n = 8–16 mice per group. * P < 0.01 versus wild type. ( c ) Body composition of 5–6-month-old male mice, as determined by DEXA. n = 12–16 mice per group. ** P < 0.001 versus wild type fat mass. ( d ) Weight gain of 4–6-month-old female mice fed a regular diet and then switched to a high-fat diet (underlined) for 12 weeks. n = 8 mice per group. * P < 0.01 versus wild type. Values are means ± s.e.m. Figure 2 MGAT2-deficient mice are protected from metabolic disorders induced by high-fat feeding. ( a ) Protection from hyperinsulinemia and glucose intolerance. Fasting plasma insulin (top) and blood glucose concentrations (bottom) of 8–11-month-old male wild-type and Mogat2 ?/? mice fed chow ( n = 6 and 10, respectively), a high-fat diet for 2 months ( n = 9 per group), or a high-fat diet for 7–9 months (8-month HF, n = 13 and 12, respectively) after an intraperitoneal injection of glucose (1 mg per g body weight). ( b ) Protection from hypercholesterolemia. Plasma cholesterol concentrations of mice fasted for 4 h. Solid bars represent high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (same number of mice per group as in a ). ( c ) Protection from hepatic steatosis. Representative appearance (top) and osmium tetroxide–toluidine blue–stained sections (bottom) of livers from wild-type and Mogat2 ?/? mice fed a high-fat diet for 7–8 months. Scale bar, 100 ?m. Values are means ± s.e.m. * P < 0.01 versus wild type. Figure 3 MGAT2-deficient mice show increased energy expenditure and body temperature. ( a ) Food intake in wild-type and Mogat2 ?/? mice. Cumulative food intake (left) and weight gain (right) of adult male mice (6–7 months old) during a 1-week period after being acclimated to individual housing and a 60% high-fat diet for a week. wild-type, n = 15; Mogat2 ?/?, n = 11. ( b ) Oxygen consumption in wild-type and Mogat2 ?/? mice. Male mice (5–6 months old) were acclimated individually in metabolic cages, and experiments were performed for 3 d on 10% fat (chow) or 60% fat (high-fat) diet. Data were normalized by lean body mass and were averages of light or dark phases from 3-day measurements. n = 12 per group. ( c ) Levels of physical activity in wild-type and Mogat2 ?/? mice. Activity was assessed by breaks of light beams, and experiments were performed as described in b . ( d ) Body temperature in wild-type Mogat2 ?/? mice fed the indicated diet under fasted or fed condition. n = 12–25 mice per group. Values are means ± s.e.m. * P < 0.01 and ** P < 0.001 versus wild type. Figure 4 Fat absorption in MGAT2-deficient mice is quantitatively normal but delayed. ( a ) Intestinal fat absorption measured in adult mice fed a diet containing 60% of calories from fat. A nonabsorbable fat was used as a marker 13 . Wild-type, n = 12; Mogat2 ?/?, n = 14. ( b ) Output and energy content determined by an adiabatic bomb calorimeter of feces from mice fed a 60% fat diet. Wild-type n = 9; Mogat2 ?/?, n = 8. ( c ) Total amounts of retinol and retinyl esters (Vit. A) in the liver and the levels of ?-tocopherol (Vit. E) in the WAT in 10-month-old male wild-type and Mogat2 ?/? mice fed a 60 kcal% fat diet. n = 6 mice per group. ( d ) Lipids extracted from the intestinal mucosa of mice fed a high-fat diet for 2 d, resolved by thin-layer chromatography using a two-solvent system 22 and stained with iodine vapor. TG, triacylglycerol; DG, diacylglycerol; MG, monoacylglycerol; FA, fatty acid. ( e ) Plasma triacylglycerol and radioactivity levels in chow-fed female mice after injection of the lipase inhibitor tyloxapol and gavage with olive oil containing 14C-trioleoylglycerol. Wild-type, n = 7; Mogat2 ?/? n = 6. ( f ) Sections of jejunum from mice fed a high-fat diet. Arrows indicate lipid droplets stained with toluidine blue. Scale bar, 20 ?m. ( g ) Altered distribution of dietary triacylglycerol in the small intestine of Mogat2 ?/? mice after an oral challenge of oil. Radioactivity levels 2 h after gavage with oil containing 14C-trioleoylglycerol in intestinal segments of female mice acclimatized to a high-fat diet. n = 4 per genotype. ( h ) Postprandial GLP-1 and PYY concentrations in the plasma of chronically high-fat–fed mice. n = 10–20 mice per group. Values are means ± s.e.m. * P < 0.05 and ** P < 0.001 versus wild type. 