Factors Identified by Experts to Support Decision Making for Post Acute Referral Background Each year, more than 13 million post acute referral decisions are made for Medicare recipients, yet there are no national, empirically derived decision support tools to assist in making these important decisions. Objectives The aim of this study was to elicit expert knowledge about factors important to referral decision making and identify the characteristics of hospitalized patients who need a post acute referral. Methods This was a retrospective and prospective mixed-methods study of the referral decisions made by discharge planning experts for 355 hospitalized older adults. Variables included sociodemographics, living arrangement, insurance, diagnosis, comorbid conditions, adverse events, medications, home care use, hospitalization in last 30 days or 6 months, patients’ perception of need for and use of assistive devices or post acute services, length of stay, cognition, self-rated health, depression, functional status, and post acute referral decision. Results The final model identified six factors associated with the need for a post acute referral. A cutpoint was derived with a sensitivity and specificity of 87.6% and 63.2%, respectively. Experts were more likely to refer patients who had no or intermittent help available (odds ratio [OR] = 3.0), major walking restrictions (OR = 6.5), less than excellent self-rated health (3.1 and 4.0 times more likely with good and fair–poor health, respectively), remained in the hospital longer (OR = 1.2), and had higher depression scores (OR = 1.1) or number of comorbidities (OR = 1.2). Discussion This study begins to identify information useful to clinicians caring for hospitalized older adults who may benefit from post acute services. By assuring the systematic, valid, and reliable collection of these items, the multidisciplinary team is alerted to patients who may benefit from post acute services. Further work is needed to increase the specificity and generalizability of the model and to test its effects on patient and clinician outcomes.  Methods This was a retrospective and prospective mixed-methods study of the referral decisions made by discharge planning experts for 355 hospitalized older adults. Variables included sociodemographics, living arrangement, insurance, diagnosis, comorbid conditions, adverse events, medications, home care use, hospitalization in last 30 days or 6 months, patients’ perception of need for and use of assistive devices or post acute services, length of stay, cognition, self-rated health, depression, functional status, and post acute referral decision.  Results The final model identified six factors associated with the need for a post acute referral. A cutpoint was derived with a sensitivity and specificity of 87.6% and 63.2%, respectively. Experts were more likely to refer patients who had no or intermittent help available (odds ratio [OR] = 3.0), major walking restrictions (OR = 6.5), less than excellent self-rated health (3.1 and 4.0 times more likely with good and fair–poor health, respectively), remained in the hospital longer (OR = 1.2), and had higher depression scores (OR = 1.1) or number of comorbidities (OR = 1.2).  Discussion This study begins to identify information useful to clinicians caring for hospitalized older adults who may benefit from post acute services. By assuring the systematic, valid, and reliable collection of these items, the multidisciplinary team is alerted to patients who may benefit from post acute services. Further work is needed to increase the specificity and generalizability of the model and to test its effects on patient and clinician outcomes.  Methods Specific Aim This study addressed two specific aims: to elicit expert knowledge about factors important to referral decision making and to identify the characteristics of hospitalized patients who need a PAC referral. Design A mixed-method comparative and exploratory analysis of the characteristics of hospitalized older adults and the decisions of experts to refer them for PAC was conducted on a combined retrospective and prospective sample. The independent variables were derived through various methods of knowledge elicitation, including case study analysis, Delphi rounds, focus groups, and data mining. The details of these methodologies are described below. The dependent variable was the experts’ yes–no referral decision. Institutional review board approval was obtained for all study phases. Theoretical Framework The Self-care Deficit Theory of Orem (1985) guided the identification and organization of factors that affect the patient’s ability for self-care. Nursing care is appropriate when the person is not able to engage in self-care. Orem notes that basic conditioning factors are internal or external factors that affect the ability of an individual to engage in self-care or influence the amount of self-care required. These basic conditioning factors fall into 10 categories: age, gender, developmental state, health state, sociocultural orientation, healthcare system factors, family systems factors, patterns of living, environmental factors, and socioeconomic factors ( Orem, 1985 ). The Orem conditioning factors provided the framework to categorize information abstracted from patients’ records and to organize the ontology and the discussion during expert focus groups. Sample The sample contained 355 older adults admitted to one of six hospitals (urban, suburban, and rural). Data came from two sources: existing records and a convenience sample. The original plan was to analyze only existing records, but the experts requested additional cases to add variety to types of diagnoses represented. The data sets were combined because they contained measures of the same variables and the analysis achieved the same goal for both data sets. Their retrospective or prospective nature did not affect the study design. Existing Records The existing records were taken from among the control group patients enrolled during three completed randomized clinical trials (RCT) ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 , 1994 ). These records were used because they had a comprehensive database of variables that described the characteristics of older adults while hospitalized and 12 weeks after discharge. The same variables were collected across all three studies, and the control group was used so that the effects of the RCT intervention did not influence the 12-week outcomes. A power analysis, using a standard error of 0.045 associated with the area under the curve (AUC) statistic and assuming an anticipated concordance of 0.80, was performed to calculate the minimum number of cases, which was found to be 100 (50 referral + 50 nonreferral; Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). A list of subject identification numbers (N = 443) was generated from the control groups of the three previous studies. The sample for this study randomly drawn from this list. On the basis of pilot work, where most patients were referred by experts, a larger sample (than the power analysis indicated) was purposely drawn to assure enough nonreferral types. Therefore, 245 participants were chosen randomly using a table of random numbers. After reviewing these records, 37 were not used because of missing data ( n = 21), withdrawal or moved ( n = 6), not readable ( n = 3), cases too similar ( n = 2), or cases used to train the abstractors ( n = 5). The remaining 208 records were used in this study. Convenience Sample Data on the remaining 147 older adults were collected prospectively from a convenience sample enrolled from an academic medical center ( n = 50) and a rural community hospital ( n = 97), both sites used in the previous studies. All participants were 65 years and older, English speaking, and cognitively intact and expected to be discharged home. In addition, patients enrolled in Studies 2 and 3 met at least one criteria associated with risk for poor discharge outcomes ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 ). Participants in Study 1 were admitted for heart failure, angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, valve replacement, or coronary artery bypass surgery ( Naylor et al., 1994 ). Study 2 patients had those diagnoses and respiratory infection, major small and large bowel surgery, or lower extremity orthopedic surgery ( Naylor et al., 1999 ). All Study 3 patients were admitted for heart failure ( Naylor et al., 2004 ). Participants enrolled prospectively met the same inclusion criteria except for diagnoses and the criteria associated with poor outcomes. They were sought because the experts requested cases with more diversity in diagnosis and severity. These cases represented cancer, diabetes, infection, genitourinary conditions, and traumatic injury and were mixed with the others before presentation to the experts. All patients had the same database of information about their characteristics available for analysis (i.e., function, number of conditions, caregiver availability). Data Collection Case studies were developed from the patients’ medical records and interviews conducted during the index hospitalization. Data were collected on age, race, gender, income, education, living arrangement, insurance, medical diagnosis, comorbidities, adverse events, admission and discharge medications, length of stay (LOS), previous home care or hospitalization in the last 6 months, use of assistive devices or services, and patient’s perceived need for devices or services after discharge. Measures of self-rated health, cognition, functional status, and depression were obtained using standardized instruments. Discharge disposition was recorded to know whether the patient received a referral for PAC services and subsequent rehospitalization and emergency department use up to 12 weeks after discharge. All PAC services were verified by subsequent medical record review. Trained nursing graduate student research assistants (RAs) collected all data in-person during hospitalization and by telephone at 12 weeks. Instruments Self-rated health status is the patient’s perception of overall health measured using a single question: How would you rate your overall health at the present time? Is it excellent, good, fair, or poor ( Maddox & Douglass, 1973 )? The Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ) was used to measure the presence and degree of intellectual impairment. It is a valid and reliable measure of mental status in the elderly ( Roccaforte, Burke, Bayer, & Wengel, 1994 ). For construct validity, the SPMSQ showed good correlation with the Mini-Mental State Exam and a test–retest reliability k value of .45 was reported, with a sensitivity of .74 and specificity of .91 for detecting dementia ( Roccaforte et al., 1994 ). Functional status was measured using the Enforced Social Dependency Scale ( Moinpour, McCorkle, & Saunders, 1981 ). Enforced social dependency is defined as needing assistance to perform activities or roles that adults can usually do alone. The instrument describes the patient’s function regarding eating, dressing, walking, traveling, bathing, and toileting; home, work, and recreational activities; and communication. Scores range from 10 to 51, with higher scores indicating more dependency. McCorkle and Benoliel (1981) reported a .8 reliability coefficient for the total scale with cardiac patients, and test–retest reliability for the revised scale was .62. Depression was measured using the Centers for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale ( Radloff, 1977 ). Depression was not measured in Study 1 and partially measured in Study 3 patients. Participants rate the occurrence of 20 items during the last week; scores >16 indicate depressive symptoms. The scale has high internal consistency (.85) and adequate test–retest reliability (average of .53 for different samples, including the elderly; Callahan, Hui, Nienaber, Musick, & Tierney, 1994 ; Datto, Thompson, Knott, & Katz, 2006 ). Development of Case Studies The principal investigator (PI) used five records to train two RAs in abstracting information from the research and medical records of each patient. The abstractors read the entire case to become familiar with the content and context. During a second reading, information about the assessments and interventions documented in the progress notes, discharge plans, and summaries was collected and summarized into a case study as shown in Table 1 . The 10 Orem basic conditioning factors provided the organizing framework to standardize the format of the case studies. The PI reviewed all 355 cases for completeness and grammatical and medical accuracy before they were sent to the experts. The Experts Four nationally recognized scholars and four local clinicians were selected as experts. The four national scholars were chosen based on their published record of scholarly work in discharge planning and the care of the elderly. They held either a PhD or MD degree. The four clinical experts were recommended by their acute care managers for their discharge planning skill and had at least 5 years of experience in discharge decision making for older adults. They held at least an MS or MD degree. This multidisciplinary group contained two of each of the major disciplines involved in discharge planning: physicians, nurses, social workers, and physical therapists. They were paid $55/hour and each case took 15–30 minutes to review. Expert Judgments and Data Management The cases were posted online where the experts anonymously and independently evaluated each case, provided a “yes” or “no” referral decision, and identified which patient characteristics (factors) influenced their decision and, if a referral was suggested, to which PAC service. Their findings (recorded on the Web site) were entered automatically into a relational database for analysis. Cases were posted for the experts in batches of 50. When all eight experts entered their judgments, the round was considered complete. All cases for which there was no agreement for the yes–no referral decision and the site were posted for Delphi rounds. Three Delphi rounds enabled the experts to review the case again and judge again. The goal was to seek consensus. The experts could see each other’s decisions and reasons, but not their identity. In this subsequent review, the experts considered the various viewpoints of their colleagues and, if they changed their mind, indicated their new decision and the reasons for it. After three rounds, if total agreement was not reached, the majority decision (reflected by at least five experts) was accepted. This occurred for 91 of the cases (26%). There were 12 cases with a tie (four said “yes,” four said “no”) that were discussed in the final in-person session and resolved. The experts achieved statistically significant correlations among their decisions regardless of discipline ( r = .291–.517, p = .01). An ontology was developed in collaboration with the experts to standardize the reasons for referral. An ontology is a formal representation of a set of concepts within their domains and the relationships between those concepts. It is used to define the domain. By coding each of the factors systematically, the terms used were standardized by the experts to describe the reasons for referral or not and prepare the qualitative data for more robust analyses. For example, one expert might have referred because the patient has difficulty walking, another might have referred because of impaired mobility. These two terms were each coded with the same code within the ontology so they could be categorized and counted. The study investigators created the ontology using the domain headings from the Orem Self-care Deficit Theory and created subcategories under them that described the terms used by the experts. Techniques used are described further by Castro et al. (2006) . For example, the Orem category of Developmental State contained ontology code 1.0 functional status, with subcategories of 1.1 walking ability, 1.2 bathing ability, and so forth, as subcategories within that domain. Prior to coding the reasons for referral, the study team presented the ontology categories to the experts for approval. The experts and study investigators coded several cases together and the experts affirmed that the ontology domains and subcodes adequately captured their meaning. The PI was the primary coder, with member checks by the experts on every 50th case, and an interrater reliability of 92% was achieved with a coinvestigator on a random sample of 10% of the codes. When coders did not agree or were unclear, they were discussed with the experts. These data were analyzed using data mining techniques, recursive partitioning, and decision tree algorithms ( Witten & Frank, 2005 ). These exploratory analyses helped to identify the most common factors related to the decisions. The results were discussed in the focus groups described below. Focus Groups Over the course of the study, seven in-person sessions were held with the local experts, and national experts participated by e-mail, telephone, and one in-person session. During these sessions, the ontology was validated, cases were reviewed, and the factors identified by the data mining were discussed. The eight experts reviewed the rules generated by the data mining and systematically considered each factor in relation to the decision to refer or not. Factors identified by the experts as important were included in the logistic regression analyses ( Table 2 ). Statistical Analysis Descriptive statistics revealed the distribution of the variables. Two cases were not posted accidentally for the experts, so the data set contained 353 cases. Because depression was not assessed in Study 1 and was assessed partially in Study 3, 27.0% of the participants did not have depression scores. Missing depression scores were imputed using multiple imputation via the EM method ( Schafer, 1997 ). Imputed variables were generated based on the known participant demographic and functional information at baseline, including age, race, gender, marital status, self-rated health, number of comorbidities, and functional status variables. Categorical variables were collapsed as necessary to ensure sufficient numbers (>5%) in any one category. Due to the number of variables considered, terms were added using forward selection, adding those factors whose addition caused a significant change in the model fit. Variables that were selected in the final models were reviewed to ensure that there was no confounding. The final model contained all of the independent variables able to sustain statistical significance ( p < .05) or those whose removal affected the estimate for another significant variable by more than 10% ( Hosmer & Lemeshow, 2000 ). Receiver operating characteristic curves were used to determine the optimal cut-point for classification and prediction by the regression model ( Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). Finally, Monte Carlo cross-validation was run to obtain overall predictive value, using 500 replications and 20% of the data as the validation set ( Efron & Tibshirani, 1993 ).  Specific Aim This study addressed two specific aims: to elicit expert knowledge about factors important to referral decision making and to identify the characteristics of hospitalized patients who need a PAC referral.  Design A mixed-method comparative and exploratory analysis of the characteristics of hospitalized older adults and the decisions of experts to refer them for PAC was conducted on a combined retrospective and prospective sample. The independent variables were derived through various methods of knowledge elicitation, including case study analysis, Delphi rounds, focus groups, and data mining. The details of these methodologies are described below. The dependent variable was the experts’ yes–no referral decision. Institutional review board approval was obtained for all study phases.  Theoretical Framework The Self-care Deficit Theory of Orem (1985) guided the identification and organization of factors that affect the patient’s ability for self-care. Nursing care is appropriate when the person is not able to engage in self-care. Orem notes that basic conditioning factors are internal or external factors that affect the ability of an individual to engage in self-care or influence the amount of self-care required. These basic conditioning factors fall into 10 categories: age, gender, developmental state, health state, sociocultural orientation, healthcare system factors, family systems factors, patterns of living, environmental factors, and socioeconomic factors ( Orem, 1985 ). The Orem conditioning factors provided the framework to categorize information abstracted from patients’ records and to organize the ontology and the discussion during expert focus groups.  Sample The sample contained 355 older adults admitted to one of six hospitals (urban, suburban, and rural). Data came from two sources: existing records and a convenience sample. The original plan was to analyze only existing records, but the experts requested additional cases to add variety to types of diagnoses represented. The data sets were combined because they contained measures of the same variables and the analysis achieved the same goal for both data sets. Their retrospective or prospective nature did not affect the study design. Existing Records The existing records were taken from among the control group patients enrolled during three completed randomized clinical trials (RCT) ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 , 1994 ). These records were used because they had a comprehensive database of variables that described the characteristics of older adults while hospitalized and 12 weeks after discharge. The same variables were collected across all three studies, and the control group was used so that the effects of the RCT intervention did not influence the 12-week outcomes. A power analysis, using a standard error of 0.045 associated with the area under the curve (AUC) statistic and assuming an anticipated concordance of 0.80, was performed to calculate the minimum number of cases, which was found to be 100 (50 referral + 50 nonreferral; Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). A list of subject identification numbers (N = 443) was generated from the control groups of the three previous studies. The sample for this study randomly drawn from this list. On the basis of pilot work, where most patients were referred by experts, a larger sample (than the power analysis indicated) was purposely drawn to assure enough nonreferral types. Therefore, 245 participants were chosen randomly using a table of random numbers. After reviewing these records, 37 were not used because of missing data ( n = 21), withdrawal or moved ( n = 6), not readable ( n = 3), cases too similar ( n = 2), or cases used to train the abstractors ( n = 5). The remaining 208 records were used in this study. Convenience Sample Data on the remaining 147 older adults were collected prospectively from a convenience sample enrolled from an academic medical center ( n = 50) and a rural community hospital ( n = 97), both sites used in the previous studies. All participants were 65 years and older, English speaking, and cognitively intact and expected to be discharged home. In addition, patients enrolled in Studies 2 and 3 met at least one criteria associated with risk for poor discharge outcomes ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 ). Participants in Study 1 were admitted for heart failure, angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, valve replacement, or coronary artery bypass surgery ( Naylor et al., 1994 ). Study 2 patients had those diagnoses and respiratory infection, major small and large bowel surgery, or lower extremity orthopedic surgery ( Naylor et al., 1999 ). All Study 3 patients were admitted for heart failure ( Naylor et al., 2004 ). Participants enrolled prospectively met the same inclusion criteria except for diagnoses and the criteria associated with poor outcomes. They were sought because the experts requested cases with more diversity in diagnosis and severity. These cases represented cancer, diabetes, infection, genitourinary conditions, and traumatic injury and were mixed with the others before presentation to the experts. All patients had the same database of information about their characteristics available for analysis (i.e., function, number of conditions, caregiver availability).  Existing Records The existing records were taken from among the control group patients enrolled during three completed randomized clinical trials (RCT) ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 , 1994 ). These records were used because they had a comprehensive database of variables that described the characteristics of older adults while hospitalized and 12 weeks after discharge. The same variables were collected across all three studies, and the control group was used so that the effects of the RCT intervention did not influence the 12-week outcomes. A power analysis, using a standard error of 0.045 associated with the area under the curve (AUC) statistic and assuming an anticipated concordance of 0.80, was performed to calculate the minimum number of cases, which was found to be 100 (50 referral + 50 nonreferral; Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). A list of subject identification numbers (N = 443) was generated from the control groups of the three previous studies. The sample for this study randomly drawn from this list. On the basis of pilot work, where most patients were referred by experts, a larger sample (than the power analysis indicated) was purposely drawn to assure enough nonreferral types. Therefore, 245 participants were chosen randomly using a table of random numbers. After reviewing these records, 37 were not used because of missing data ( n = 21), withdrawal or moved ( n = 6), not readable ( n = 3), cases too similar ( n = 2), or cases used to train the abstractors ( n = 5). The remaining 208 records were used in this study.  Convenience Sample Data on the remaining 147 older adults were collected prospectively from a convenience sample enrolled from an academic medical center ( n = 50) and a rural community hospital ( n = 97), both sites used in the previous studies. All participants were 65 years and older, English speaking, and cognitively intact and expected to be discharged home. In addition, patients enrolled in Studies 2 and 3 met at least one criteria associated with risk for poor discharge outcomes ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 ). Participants in Study 1 were admitted for heart failure, angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, valve replacement, or coronary artery bypass surgery ( Naylor et al., 1994 ). Study 2 patients had those diagnoses and respiratory infection, major small and large bowel surgery, or lower extremity orthopedic surgery ( Naylor et al., 1999 ). All Study 3 patients were admitted for heart failure ( Naylor et al., 2004 ). Participants enrolled prospectively met the same inclusion criteria except for diagnoses and the criteria associated with poor outcomes. They were sought because the experts requested cases with more diversity in diagnosis and severity. These cases represented cancer, diabetes, infection, genitourinary conditions, and traumatic injury and were mixed with the others before presentation to the experts. All patients had the same database of information about their characteristics available for analysis (i.e., function, number of conditions, caregiver availability).  Data Collection Case studies were developed from the patients’ medical records and interviews conducted during the index hospitalization. Data were collected on age, race, gender, income, education, living arrangement, insurance, medical diagnosis, comorbidities, adverse events, admission and discharge medications, length of stay (LOS), previous home care or hospitalization in the last 6 months, use of assistive devices or services, and patient’s perceived need for devices or services after discharge. Measures of self-rated health, cognition, functional status, and depression were obtained using standardized instruments. Discharge disposition was recorded to know whether the patient received a referral for PAC services and subsequent rehospitalization and emergency department use up to 12 weeks after discharge. All PAC services were verified by subsequent medical record review. Trained nursing graduate student research assistants (RAs) collected all data in-person during hospitalization and by telephone at 12 weeks.  Instruments Self-rated health status is the patient’s perception of overall health measured using a single question: How would you rate your overall health at the present time? Is it excellent, good, fair, or poor ( Maddox & Douglass, 1973 )? The Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ) was used to measure the presence and degree of intellectual impairment. It is a valid and reliable measure of mental status in the elderly ( Roccaforte, Burke, Bayer, & Wengel, 1994 ). For construct validity, the SPMSQ showed good correlation with the Mini-Mental State Exam and a test–retest reliability k value of .45 was reported, with a sensitivity of .74 and specificity of .91 for detecting dementia ( Roccaforte et al., 1994 ). Functional status was measured using the Enforced Social Dependency Scale ( Moinpour, McCorkle, & Saunders, 1981 ). Enforced social dependency is defined as needing assistance to perform activities or roles that adults can usually do alone. The instrument describes the patient’s function regarding eating, dressing, walking, traveling, bathing, and toileting; home, work, and recreational activities; and communication. Scores range from 10 to 51, with higher scores indicating more dependency. McCorkle and Benoliel (1981) reported a .8 reliability coefficient for the total scale with cardiac patients, and test–retest reliability for the revised scale was .62. Depression was measured using the Centers for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale ( Radloff, 1977 ). Depression was not measured in Study 1 and partially measured in Study 3 patients. Participants rate the occurrence of 20 items during the last week; scores >16 indicate depressive symptoms. The scale has high internal consistency (.85) and adequate test–retest reliability (average of .53 for different samples, including the elderly; Callahan, Hui, Nienaber, Musick, & Tierney, 1994 ; Datto, Thompson, Knott, & Katz, 2006 ).  Development of Case Studies The principal investigator (PI) used five records to train two RAs in abstracting information from the research and medical records of each patient. The abstractors read the entire case to become familiar with the content and context. During a second reading, information about the assessments and interventions documented in the progress notes, discharge plans, and summaries was collected and summarized into a case study as shown in Table 1 . The 10 Orem basic conditioning factors provided the organizing framework to standardize the format of the case studies. The PI reviewed all 355 cases for completeness and grammatical and medical accuracy before they were sent to the experts.  The Experts Four nationally recognized scholars and four local clinicians were selected as experts. The four national scholars were chosen based on their published record of scholarly work in discharge planning and the care of the elderly. They held either a PhD or MD degree. The four clinical experts were recommended by their acute care managers for their discharge planning skill and had at least 5 years of experience in discharge decision making for older adults. They held at least an MS or MD degree. This multidisciplinary group contained two of each of the major disciplines involved in discharge planning: physicians, nurses, social workers, and physical therapists. They were paid $55/hour and each case took 15–30 minutes to review.  Expert Judgments and Data Management The cases were posted online where the experts anonymously and independently evaluated each case, provided a “yes” or “no” referral decision, and identified which patient characteristics (factors) influenced their decision and, if a referral was suggested, to which PAC service. Their findings (recorded on the Web site) were entered automatically into a relational database for analysis. Cases were posted for the experts in batches of 50. When all eight experts entered their judgments, the round was considered complete. All cases for which there was no agreement for the yes–no referral decision and the site were posted for Delphi rounds. Three Delphi rounds enabled the experts to review the case again and judge again. The goal was to seek consensus. The experts could see each other’s decisions and reasons, but not their identity. In this subsequent review, the experts considered the various viewpoints of their colleagues and, if they changed their mind, indicated their new decision and the reasons for it. After three rounds, if total agreement was not reached, the majority decision (reflected by at least five experts) was accepted. This occurred for 91 of the cases (26%). There were 12 cases with a tie (four said “yes,” four said “no”) that were discussed in the final in-person session and resolved. The experts achieved statistically significant correlations among their decisions regardless of discipline ( r = .291–.517, p = .01). An ontology was developed in collaboration with the experts to standardize the reasons for referral. An ontology is a formal representation of a set of concepts within their domains and the relationships between those concepts. It is used to define the domain. By coding each of the factors systematically, the terms used were standardized by the experts to describe the reasons for referral or not and prepare the qualitative data for more robust analyses. For example, one expert might have referred because the patient has difficulty walking, another might have referred because of impaired mobility. These two terms were each coded with the same code within the ontology so they could be categorized and counted. The study investigators created the ontology using the domain headings from the Orem Self-care Deficit Theory and created subcategories under them that described the terms used by the experts. Techniques used are described further by Castro et al. (2006) . For example, the Orem category of Developmental State contained ontology code 1.0 functional status, with subcategories of 1.1 walking ability, 1.2 bathing ability, and so forth, as subcategories within that domain. Prior to coding the reasons for referral, the study team presented the ontology categories to the experts for approval. The experts and study investigators coded several cases together and the experts affirmed that the ontology domains and subcodes adequately captured their meaning. The PI was the primary coder, with member checks by the experts on every 50th case, and an interrater reliability of 92% was achieved with a coinvestigator on a random sample of 10% of the codes. When coders did not agree or were unclear, they were discussed with the experts. These data were analyzed using data mining techniques, recursive partitioning, and decision tree algorithms ( Witten & Frank, 2005 ). These exploratory analyses helped to identify the most common factors related to the decisions. The results were discussed in the focus groups described below.  Focus Groups Over the course of the study, seven in-person sessions were held with the local experts, and national experts participated by e-mail, telephone, and one in-person session. During these sessions, the ontology was validated, cases were reviewed, and the factors identified by the data mining were discussed. The eight experts reviewed the rules generated by the data mining and systematically considered each factor in relation to the decision to refer or not. Factors identified by the experts as important were included in the logistic regression analyses ( Table 2 ).  Statistical Analysis Descriptive statistics revealed the distribution of the variables. Two cases were not posted accidentally for the experts, so the data set contained 353 cases. Because depression was not assessed in Study 1 and was assessed partially in Study 3, 27.0% of the participants did not have depression scores. Missing depression scores were imputed using multiple imputation via the EM method ( Schafer, 1997 ). Imputed variables were generated based on the known participant demographic and functional information at baseline, including age, race, gender, marital status, self-rated health, number of comorbidities, and functional status variables. Categorical variables were collapsed as necessary to ensure sufficient numbers (>5%) in any one category. Due to the number of variables considered, terms were added using forward selection, adding those factors whose addition caused a significant change in the model fit. Variables that were selected in the final models were reviewed to ensure that there was no confounding. The final model contained all of the independent variables able to sustain statistical significance ( p < .05) or those whose removal affected the estimate for another significant variable by more than 10% ( Hosmer & Lemeshow, 2000 ). Receiver operating characteristic curves were used to determine the optimal cut-point for classification and prediction by the regression model ( Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). Finally, Monte Carlo cross-validation was run to obtain overall predictive value, using 500 replications and 20% of the data as the validation set ( Efron & Tibshirani, 1993 ).  Results Sample characteristics are the following: 54% were female, 74% were White, 26% were Black, average age was 74 years (range = 65–90 years), 50% were married, 36% were widowed, 30% had less than a high school education, 43% had an annual income <$20,000, and 52% had at least one hospitalization in the previous 6 months. Experts’ Referral Decisions The experts recommended referral for 183 additional patients than were referred by hospital clinicians. Although the experts’ referral recommendations were predominantly for skilled home care services (88%), a few patients were referred also to outpatient (8%) and inpatient rehabilitation (4%). This distribution precluded examination separately by site; however, identification of who should be flagged for referral, regardless of site, remained clinically important. Therefore, the presence or absence of a discharge referral, regardless of site, remained the dependent variable. Logistic Regression Results for Expert Decision Of the 20 variables, 6 were found to be statistically significant ( p < .05; Table 3 ), and the patient’s age was an effect modifier; it changed the estimates for self-rated health by >10%. Experts were more likely to refer patients who had no or intermittent help (odds ratio [OR] = 3.0, p = .018, 95%confidence interval [CI] = 1.2–7.3), had major walking restrictions (OR = 6.5, p = .002, 95% CI = 2.0–20.9), had less than excellent self-rated health (good health: OR = 3.1, p = .017, 95% CI = 1.2–7.7; fair–poor health: OR = 4.0, p = .005, 95% CI = 1.5–10.5), had longer LOS (OR = 1.2 per day, p = .004, 95% CI = 1.0–1.3), had higher depression scores (OR = 1.1, p = .011, 95% CI = 1.0–1.1), or had more comorbidities (OR = 1.2, p = .010, 95% CI = 1.1–1.5). Similar results were obtained when participants with imputed depression scores were excluded from the model, except that age obtained statistical significance (OR = 1.1, p = .037, 95% CI = 1.0–1.2). Combination factors (interactions) identified by the experts were examined. However, they either did not occur in a large enough quantity to include in the models or were not statistically significant. The receiver operating characteristic curves were used to determine the optimal cut-point for classification. The optimal cut-point was 0.69. This corresponded to a sensitivity and specificity of 87.6% and 65.2%, respectively. The AUC was 86.3%. In general, an AUC greater than 80% indicates a good model for classifying participants with an outcome of interest against those without the outcome ( Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). The overall predictive value for the model was 83.2%, with a cross-validated predictive value of 80.1%.  Results Sample characteristics are the following: 54% were female, 74% were White, 26% were Black, average age was 74 years (range = 65–90 years), 50% were married, 36% were widowed, 30% had less than a high school education, 43% had an annual income <$20,000, and 52% had at least one hospitalization in the previous 6 months. Experts’ Referral Decisions The experts recommended referral for 183 additional patients than were referred by hospital clinicians. Although the experts’ referral recommendations were predominantly for skilled home care services (88%), a few patients were referred also to outpatient (8%) and inpatient rehabilitation (4%). This distribution precluded examination separately by site; however, identification of who should be flagged for referral, regardless of site, remained clinically important. Therefore, the presence or absence of a discharge referral, regardless of site, remained the dependent variable. Logistic Regression Results for Expert Decision Of the 20 variables, 6 were found to be statistically significant ( p < .05; Table 3 ), and the patient’s age was an effect modifier; it changed the estimates for self-rated health by >10%. Experts were more likely to refer patients who had no or intermittent help (odds ratio [OR] = 3.0, p = .018, 95%confidence interval [CI] = 1.2–7.3), had major walking restrictions (OR = 6.5, p = .002, 95% CI = 2.0–20.9), had less than excellent self-rated health (good health: OR = 3.1, p = .017, 95% CI = 1.2–7.7; fair–poor health: OR = 4.0, p = .005, 95% CI = 1.5–10.5), had longer LOS (OR = 1.2 per day, p = .004, 95% CI = 1.0–1.3), had higher depression scores (OR = 1.1, p = .011, 95% CI = 1.0–1.1), or had more comorbidities (OR = 1.2, p = .010, 95% CI = 1.1–1.5). Similar results were obtained when participants with imputed depression scores were excluded from the model, except that age obtained statistical significance (OR = 1.1, p = .037, 95% CI = 1.0–1.2). Combination factors (interactions) identified by the experts were examined. However, they either did not occur in a large enough quantity to include in the models or were not statistically significant. The receiver operating characteristic curves were used to determine the optimal cut-point for classification. The optimal cut-point was 0.69. This corresponded to a sensitivity and specificity of 87.6% and 65.2%, respectively. The AUC was 86.3%. In general, an AUC greater than 80% indicates a good model for classifying participants with an outcome of interest against those without the outcome ( Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). The overall predictive value for the model was 83.2%, with a cross-validated predictive value of 80.1%.  Experts’ Referral Decisions The experts recommended referral for 183 additional patients than were referred by hospital clinicians. Although the experts’ referral recommendations were predominantly for skilled home care services (88%), a few patients were referred also to outpatient (8%) and inpatient rehabilitation (4%). This distribution precluded examination separately by site; however, identification of who should be flagged for referral, regardless of site, remained clinically important. Therefore, the presence or absence of a discharge referral, regardless of site, remained the dependent variable.  Experts’ Referral Decisions The experts recommended referral for 183 additional patients than were referred by hospital clinicians. Although the experts’ referral recommendations were predominantly for skilled home care services (88%), a few patients were referred also to outpatient (8%) and inpatient rehabilitation (4%). This distribution precluded examination separately by site; however, identification of who should be flagged for referral, regardless of site, remained clinically important. Therefore, the presence or absence of a discharge referral, regardless of site, remained the dependent variable.  Logistic Regression Results for Expert Decision Of the 20 variables, 6 were found to be statistically significant ( p < .05; Table 3 ), and the patient’s age was an effect modifier; it changed the estimates for self-rated health by >10%. Experts were more likely to refer patients who had no or intermittent help (odds ratio [OR] = 3.0, p = .018, 95%confidence interval [CI] = 1.2–7.3), had major walking restrictions (OR = 6.5, p = .002, 95% CI = 2.0–20.9), had less than excellent self-rated health (good health: OR = 3.1, p = .017, 95% CI = 1.2–7.7; fair–poor health: OR = 4.0, p = .005, 95% CI = 1.5–10.5), had longer LOS (OR = 1.2 per day, p = .004, 95% CI = 1.0–1.3), had higher depression scores (OR = 1.1, p = .011, 95% CI = 1.0–1.1), or had more comorbidities (OR = 1.2, p = .010, 95% CI = 1.1–1.5). Similar results were obtained when participants with imputed depression scores were excluded from the model, except that age obtained statistical significance (OR = 1.1, p = .037, 95% CI = 1.0–1.2). Combination factors (interactions) identified by the experts were examined. However, they either did not occur in a large enough quantity to include in the models or were not statistically significant. The receiver operating characteristic curves were used to determine the optimal cut-point for classification. The optimal cut-point was 0.69. This corresponded to a sensitivity and specificity of 87.6% and 65.2%, respectively. The AUC was 86.3%. In general, an AUC greater than 80% indicates a good model for classifying participants with an outcome of interest against those without the outcome ( Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). The overall predictive value for the model was 83.2%, with a cross-validated predictive value of 80.1%.  Logistic Regression Results for Expert Decision Of the 20 variables, 6 were found to be statistically significant ( p < .05; Table 3 ), and the patient’s age was an effect modifier; it changed the estimates for self-rated health by >10%. Experts were more likely to refer patients who had no or intermittent help (odds ratio [OR] = 3.0, p = .018, 95%confidence interval [CI] = 1.2–7.3), had major walking restrictions (OR = 6.5, p = .002, 95% CI = 2.0–20.9), had less than excellent self-rated health (good health: OR = 3.1, p = .017, 95% CI = 1.2–7.7; fair–poor health: OR = 4.0, p = .005, 95% CI = 1.5–10.5), had longer LOS (OR = 1.2 per day, p = .004, 95% CI = 1.0–1.3), had higher depression scores (OR = 1.1, p = .011, 95% CI = 1.0–1.1), or had more comorbidities (OR = 1.2, p = .010, 95% CI = 1.1–1.5). Similar results were obtained when participants with imputed depression scores were excluded from the model, except that age obtained statistical significance (OR = 1.1, p = .037, 95% CI = 1.0–1.2). Combination factors (interactions) identified by the experts were examined. However, they either did not occur in a large enough quantity to include in the models or were not statistically significant. The receiver operating characteristic curves were used to determine the optimal cut-point for classification. The optimal cut-point was 0.69. This corresponded to a sensitivity and specificity of 87.6% and 65.2%, respectively. The AUC was 86.3%. In general, an AUC greater than 80% indicates a good model for classifying participants with an outcome of interest against those without the outcome ( Hanley & McNeil, 1982 ). The overall predictive value for the model was 83.2%, with a cross-validated predictive value of 80.1%.  Discussion Study findings address an important component of care coordination, which is an Institute of Medicine and National Quality Forum priority ( Adams & Corrigan, 2003 ; National Quality Forum, 2006 ). The period surrounding hospital discharge is a busy time, involving multiple disciplines, often with little time for collaboration and careful deliberation ( Shepperd et al., 2004 ). In this study, experts in discharge planning provided the knowledge to build this classification model. Providing experts with comprehensive, high-quality information from actual clinical cases and the time to consider their decisions carefully contributed to the identification of additional patients who might have benefited from referrals. It is important to note that 23% of the additional patients identified by experts but not referred by hospital clinicians were rehospitalized by 12 weeks ( Bowles et al., 2008 ). The resulting six-factor model may provide guidance to busy clinicians about some key patient characteristics that are associated with experts’ decisions to refer. For example, the model suggests careful evaluation of walking ability because those with major walking restrictions were 6.5 times more likely to be referred. Multiple sources agree that physical function, which includes walking, is an important predictor of the need for PAC and outcomes ( Cornette et al., 2006 ; Nsameluh, Holland, & Gaspar, 2007 ). Length of stay was identified as a predictor of a referral. The mean LOS was 7 days, which corresponds to the mean LOS during the time in which most of the study data were collected (mean = 6.8 days in 1995). By 2005, the average LOS fell to 5.4 days ( Medicare Payment Advisory Commission [MedPac], 2007b ). However, even though the experts knew that the current LOS is likely to be lower, they still identified it as an important factor as a proxy for severity of illness, complicated hospital course, ( Fogel, Hyman, Rock, & Wolf-Klein, 2000 ) or predictor of poor outcomes ( Cornette et al., 2005 ). Advanced age ( Holland, Harris, Leibson, Pankratz, & Krichbaum, 2006 ) and number of comorbidities ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 ) commonly are associated with risk for poor outcomes. Usually, these factors are documented and readily available in the medical record. However, other factors such as depression and self-rated health are not measured routinely in acute care. Study findings suggest that it may be important to add these variables to routine assessment. In addition, usually, it is noted whether a patient has a caregiver or not. But these findings and others suggest that further probing into their availability is important. Nearly forty percent of older adults discharged from the hospital reported unmet needs needed help from a caregiver within the first week ( Mistiaen, Duijnhouwer, Wijkel, deBont, & Veeger, 1997 ). The model is quite proficient (87.6% accurate) at predicting who should be referred but is suboptimal (65.2%) at classifying those who do not need a referral. Use of this model may run the risk of promoting over-referral and requires further study to assess quality and cost implications. The experts referred 183 additional patients than were referred in real life. Notably, in the 12-week outcome analysis, these patients were rehospitalized at a rate of 23% ( Bowles et al., 2008 ). With a rehospitalization rate that high, it may be cost-effective to provide PAC services for more patients if those services result in decreased future costs. Several recent studies suggest the clinical and economic value of correctly identifying patients and assuring appropriate follow-up care ( Naylor et al., 1994 , 1999 , 2004 ; Steeman et al., 2006 ). This remains an important area for future study. Limitations Because of the following limitations, the model is preliminary and, although helpful at this stage, is not fully developed. This study was limited to subjects in Southeastern Pennsylvania. The types of medical conditions and treatments were limited and the sample was largely a high-risk group. In a more balanced sample, additional factors that affect the referral decision may be identified. In addition, the sample lacked representation of some characteristics in large enough frequency to explore combinations of factors fully. For example, only 3% of the sample was cognitively impaired. The study was limited also to the opinion of eight multidisciplinary experts. Finally, the experts were instructed to make their referral decisions without regard for reimbursement or Medicare criteria such as being homebound, which may have increased their willingness to refer. This approach is supported in a report to Congress by MedPac (2005): “Providers should base their decision about where beneficiaries receive post-acute services on patient characteristics and resource needs, not on Medicare payments” (p. 105). These findings, if replicable and linked to improved outcomes, may have important policy implications.  Discussion Study findings address an important component of care coordination, which is an Institute of Medicine and National Quality Forum priority ( Adams & Corrigan, 2003 ; National Quality Forum, 2006 ). The period surrounding hospital discharge is a busy time, involving multiple disciplines, often with little time for collaboration and careful deliberation ( Shepperd et al., 2004 ). In this study, experts in discharge planning provided the knowledge to build this classification model. Providing experts with comprehensive, high-quality information from actual clinical cases and the time to consider their decisions carefully contributed to the identification of additional patients who might have benefited from referrals. It is important to note that 23% of the additional patients identified by experts but not referred by hospital clinicians were rehospitalized by 12 weeks ( Bowles et al., 2008 ). The resulting six-factor model may provide guidance to busy clinicians about some key patient characteristics that are associated with experts’ decisions to refer. For example, the model suggests careful evaluation of walking ability because those with major walking restrictions were 6.5 times more likely to be referred. Multiple sources agree that physical function, which includes walking, is an important predictor of the need for PAC and outcomes ( Cornette et al., 2006 ; Nsameluh, Holland, & Gaspar, 2007 ). Length of stay was identified as a predictor of a referral. The mean LOS was 7 days, which corresponds to the mean LOS during the time in which most of the study data were collected (mean = 6.8 days in 1995). By 2005, the average LOS fell to 5.4 days ( Medicare Payment Advisory Commission [MedPac], 2007b ). However, even though the experts knew that the current LOS is likely to be lower, they still identified it as an important factor as a proxy for severity of illness, complicated hospital course, ( Fogel, Hyman, Rock, & Wolf-Klein, 2000 ) or predictor of poor outcomes ( Cornette et al., 2005 ). Advanced age ( Holland, Harris, Leibson, Pankratz, & Krichbaum, 2006 ) and number of comorbidities ( Naylor et al., 1999 , 2004 ) commonly are associated with risk for poor outcomes. Usually, these factors are documented and readily available in the medical record. However, other factors such as depression and self-rated health are not measured routinely in acute care. Study findings suggest that it may be important to add these variables to routine assessment. In addition, usually, it is noted whether a patient has a caregiver or not. But these findings and others suggest that further probing into their availability is important. Nearly forty percent of older adults discharged from the hospital reported unmet needs needed help from a caregiver within the first week ( Mistiaen, Duijnhouwer, Wijkel, deBont, & Veeger, 1997 ). The model is quite proficient (87.6% accurate) at predicting who should be referred but is suboptimal (65.2%) at classifying those who do not need a referral. Use of this model may run the risk of promoting over-referral and requires further study to assess quality and cost implications. The experts referred 183 additional patients than were referred in real life. Notably, in the 12-week outcome analysis, these patients were rehospitalized at a rate of 23% ( Bowles et al., 2008 ). With a rehospitalization rate that high, it may be cost-effective to provide PAC services for more patients if those services result in decreased future costs. Several recent studies suggest the clinical and economic value of correctly identifying patients and assuring appropriate follow-up care ( Naylor et al., 1994 , 1999 , 2004 ; Steeman et al., 2006 ). This remains an important area for future study. Limitations Because of the following limitations, the model is preliminary and, although helpful at this stage, is not fully developed. This study was limited to subjects in Southeastern Pennsylvania. The types of medical conditions and treatments were limited and the sample was largely a high-risk group. In a more balanced sample, additional factors that affect the referral decision may be identified. In addition, the sample lacked representation of some characteristics in large enough frequency to explore combinations of factors fully. For example, only 3% of the sample was cognitively impaired. The study was limited also to the opinion of eight multidisciplinary experts. Finally, the experts were instructed to make their referral decisions without regard for reimbursement or Medicare criteria such as being homebound, which may have increased their willingness to refer. This approach is supported in a report to Congress by MedPac (2005): “Providers should base their decision about where beneficiaries receive post-acute services on patient characteristics and resource needs, not on Medicare payments” (p. 105). These findings, if replicable and linked to improved outcomes, may have important policy implications.  Limitations Because of the following limitations, the model is preliminary and, although helpful at this stage, is not fully developed. This study was limited to subjects in Southeastern Pennsylvania. The types of medical conditions and treatments were limited and the sample was largely a high-risk group. In a more balanced sample, additional factors that affect the referral decision may be identified. In addition, the sample lacked representation of some characteristics in large enough frequency to explore combinations of factors fully. For example, only 3% of the sample was cognitively impaired. The study was limited also to the opinion of eight multidisciplinary experts. Finally, the experts were instructed to make their referral decisions without regard for reimbursement or Medicare criteria such as being homebound, which may have increased their willingness to refer. This approach is supported in a report to Congress by MedPac (2005): “Providers should base their decision about where beneficiaries receive post-acute services on patient characteristics and resource needs, not on Medicare payments” (p. 105). These findings, if replicable and linked to improved outcomes, may have important policy implications.  Limitations Because of the following limitations, the model is preliminary and, although helpful at this stage, is not fully developed. This study was limited to subjects in Southeastern Pennsylvania. The types of medical conditions and treatments were limited and the sample was largely a high-risk group. In a more balanced sample, additional factors that affect the referral decision may be identified. In addition, the sample lacked representation of some characteristics in large enough frequency to explore combinations of factors fully. For example, only 3% of the sample was cognitively impaired. The study was limited also to the opinion of eight multidisciplinary experts. Finally, the experts were instructed to make their referral decisions without regard for reimbursement or Medicare criteria such as being homebound, which may have increased their willingness to refer. This approach is supported in a report to Congress by MedPac (2005): “Providers should base their decision about where beneficiaries receive post-acute services on patient characteristics and resource needs, not on Medicare payments” (p. 105). These findings, if replicable and linked to improved outcomes, may have important policy implications.  Conclusions This study suggests a preliminary model that can be used to identify hospitalized older adults in need of PAC services. It is currently being tested in three hospitals. From this data, the research team has developed models for the emergency department and with and without depression. By assuring the systematic collection of these six items, the multidisciplinary team is alerted to patients who may benefit from PAC services. The experts identified many more patients for referral than were referred in practice. The experts had information from standardized, reliable research instruments; time; and ability to consider each other’s viewpoints while making their decisions in contrast to the hectic hospital environment. This study is a step in the direction toward better PAC referral decision making. Future studies will use a larger, more diverse sample to validate the model externally and increase the specificity; determine the impact on referral rates, workload, and outcomes; and examine factors related to site of care such as home care, nursing home, or rehabilitation.  Tables TABLE 1 An Example of a Case Study Sent to the Experts Age, race, gender: The patient is a 78-year-old White man. Health state: The patient was admitted for shortness of breath,     coughing, and chest tightness. A chest X-ray was performed,     and his diagnosis was pneumonia and exacerbation of chronic     obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). He was admitted and     treated with IV antibiotics and nebulizer treatments. Past     medical history is significant for coronary artery disease, atrial     fibrillation, COPD, hypercholesterolemia, and diabetes mellitus     secondary to steroid use. Medications prior to this admission     include aspirin, Cartia, Combivent, Coumadin, Digoxin,     Flovent, Nitrostat, and Augmentin (for the last 2 days).     Discharge medications included Levaquin and Glucotrol.     Length of stay was 3 days. Developmental state: The patient attended school until the 10th      grade. He is retired. He scored 9/10 on the mental status      examination and 9 on the depression scale (16–60 =      depression). He is independent in all activities of daily living.      He has no health aids and does not feel that he needs any. He      has no dietary restrictions. He reports fatigue and shortness of      breath while dressing, walking, and bathing. He rated his      health as fair at the present time. He has not used any formal      health services and does not feel he needs any. Health care system factors: The patient has had no      hospitalizations in the past 6 months. He saw his doctor twice      in the past 6 months. Family system factors: The patient is married and lives with his      spouse. He considers his wife and son to be his primary      caregivers. They are available whenever needed. Environmental factors, patterns of living: The patient lives in a      single-family home. There is a bathroom on the level of the      bedroom and kitchen. Socioeconomic factors: The patient reports his income as      $5,000–$10,000/year and is insured by Medicare Parts A and      B and private health insurance. TABLE 2 Variables Considered in the Logistic Regression Variable n (%) Mean ± SD Function: bathing     No restriction 219 (61.7)     Minor restriction 49 (13.8)     Help of equipment 55 (15.5)     Daily person assist 32 (9.0) Function: eating     No restriction 117 (33.0)     Minor restriction 178 (50.1)     Occasional help 20 (5.6)     Daily assistance 40 (11.3) Function: walking     No restriction 106 (29.9)     Minor restriction 117 (33.0)     Major restriction 132 (37.2)     Function: dressing     No restriction 209 (58.9)     Restrictions 146 (41.1) Mental status     Normal mental status 343 (96.6) 9.56 ± 0.769     Cognitively impaired 12 (3.4) Who lives with patient?     Spouse 175 (49.3)     Other person 81 (22.8)     No one 98 (27.6) Subjective health rating     Excellent 44 (12.4)     Good 128 (36.1)     Fair/poor 183 (51.5) Rehospitalization in past 6 months     None 166 (46.8)     One prior hospitalization 122 (34.4)     Two or more prior hospitalizations 62 (17.5) Length of stay (days) 355 7.08 ± 6.05 Complicated hospital stay     No 297 (83.7)     Yes 58 (16.3) Surgery occurred during admission     No 249 (70.1)     Yes 106 (29.9) Patient is at risk for falls     No 343 (96.6)     Yes 12 (3.4) Help available     No help or do not know 30 (8.5)     Yes 325 (91.5) How often is help available     None or intermittent 102 (28.7)     Whenever needed 253 (71.3) Patient perspective on total number     of resources needed     No resources needed 252 (71.0)     One or more resources needed 101 (28.5) Age (years) 354 74.25 ± 5.7 Income level     ?$20,000 203 (57.2)     <$20,000 152 (42.8) Total number of comorbid diagnoses 354 4.71 ± 2.3 Number of medications on discharge 351 5.73 ± 3.3 Depression score admission (0–60) 259 11.44 ± 10.6 Imputed depression score admission 355 12.08 ± 9.5 TABLE 3 Final Logistic Regression Model for the Experts’ Referral Decision 95% CI for odds Variable ( n = 255) a Estimate SE p Odds of referral Lower Upper How often is help available? .018     Never or intermittent 1.084 0.458 .018 2.96 1.204 7.263     Whenever needed (ref) b Walking function .044     No restriction (ref) b     Minor restriction 0.437 0.363 .229 1.55 0.760 3.153     Major restriction 1.868 0.598 .002 6.47 2.004 20.899 Subjective health rating .016     Excellent (ref) b     Good 1.117 0.470 .017 3.05 1.216 7.671     Fair or poor 1.387 0.493 .005 4.00 1.523 10.523 Length of stay (days) 0.137 0.048 .004 1.15 1.043 1.259 Depression score 0.061 0.024 .011 1.06 1.014 1.115 Age (years) 0.050 0.030 .102 1.05 0.990 1.115 Number of comorbidities 0.209 0.081 .010 1.23 1.051 1.446 Note. CI = confidence interval. a Sample decreased to 255 because of missing depression scores. b Reference group used in the model. 