IL-17-Producing ?? T Cells Introduction/Abstract IL-17 is produced by CD4+ ?? T cells, but also CD8+ ?? T cells, NKT cells, and ?? T cells, plus some non-T cells, including macrophages and neutrophils. The ability of IL-17 to deploy neutrophils to sites of inflammation imparts this cytokine with a key role in diseases of several types. Surprisingly, ?? T cells are responsible for much of the IL-17 produced in several disease models, particularly early on.  4. Conclusions In several of the disease models reviewed here, evidence was presented showing that IL-17 producing ?? T cells not only respond during the disease, but also make a difference to the disease outcome [ 5 , 6 , 9 , 15 , 19 , 20 ]. Moreover, in some instances, IL-17-producing ?? T cells appeared to play a more important role than CD4+ ??TCR+ Th17 cells [ 6 , 9 , 19 ]. Based on these findings, together with the many examples of diseases in which IL-17-producing ?? T cells have now been shown to respond, we suspect that IL-17-producing ?? T cells are generally as important to disease outcome as are CD4+ ??TCR+ Th17 cells. IL-17-producing ?? T cells appear to differ from Th17 cells in that they can be rapidly induced to produce cytokine, frequently respond in relatively large numbers, and often show no antigen specificity in their response. Thus, they are likely to make a very different contribution than Th17 cells to the immune response ( Fig. 1 ). At least one report has now shown that human ?? T cells also can make IL-17, and these appear to be elevated in tuberculosis patients [ 13 ]. Therefore, IL-17-producing ?? T cells will likely prove to be a critical part of both the mouse and human immune systems.  Figure Fig. 1 Proposed differences between IL-17-producing ?? T cell development and Th-17 development. ?? T cells are presumed to be “naive” in mice that have not been deliberately stimulated, though some have been shown to bear memory markers. The scheme for Th17 cells was modified from that proposed in a review by Betelli et al. [ 26 ]. 