Tumor Cell Targeting Using Folate-Conjugated Fluorescent Quantum Dots and Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis BACKGROUND Luminescent nanobioprobes with cell-targeting specificity are likely to find important applications in bioanalysis, biomedicine, and clinical diagnosis. Quantum dots (QDs) are unique and promising materials for such a purpose because of their fluorescence and large surface area for attaching cell-targeting molecules. METHODS We produced water-dispersible QDs by coating hydrophobic QDs with small amphiphilic polyethylene glycol (PEG) molecules via hydrophobic interactions. We covalently coupled folate (FA) onto the water-dispersible PEG-coated QDs (PEG-QDs) to produce FA-coupled PEG-QDs (FA-PEG-QDs). RESULTS These FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles functioned as fluorescent nanobioprobes that specifically recognized folate receptors (FRs) overexpressed in human nasopharyngeal cells (KB cells) but not in an FR-deficient lung carcinoma cell line (A549 cells). Using confocal fluorescence microscopy, we demonstrated uptake of FA-PEG-QDs by KB cells but no uptake of folate-free PEG-QDs. The specificity of this receptor-mediated internalization was confirmed by comparing the uptake by KB vs A549 cells. CONCLUSIONS Our results suggest that such cell-targeting fluorescent nanobioprobes are potentially very powerful tools for recognizing target cells and delivering and tracking drugs and other therapeutic materials.  Materials and Methods REAGENTS Folate (molecular weight 440), DMSO, and MAA were purchased from Guoyaojituan; dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) and N -hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) from Sigma-Aldrich; 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidyl-ethanolamine- N -[amino(polyethylene-glycol)2000] (aminoPEG-2000) and 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidyl-ethanolamine- N -[methoxy(polyethylene glycol)750] (mPEG-750) from Avanti Polar Lipids Inc.; and KB and A549 cells from China Type Culture Collection. All the media used for cell culture were obtained from Gibco and purchased from Invitrogen Corp. SYNTHESIS OF CdSe/ZnS QDs AND WATER-DISPERSIBLE FA-MAA-QDs We synthesized monodisperse hydrophobic CdSe/ZnS QDs with a diameter of about 5 nm as described ( 32 ), using trioctylphosphine oxide as the solvent in the synthesis. We prepared the water-dispersible FA-MAA-QDs according to a published procedure ( 29 ). Briefly, a mixture of MAA and dried CdSe/ZnS QDs was first stirred vigorously for 1 h to prepare MAA-capped QDs via ligand exchange. The MAA-capped QDs were then activated with DCC and NHS for 30 min. Finally, the FA was added and stirred overnight to produce FA-MAA-QDs. PREPARATION OF PEG-QDs The water-dispersible PEG-QDs were prepared based on the method of Dubertret et al. ( 3 ) with some modifications. We used a molar ratio of 30% mPEG-1000 and 70% aminoPEG-2000 phospholipids. We dissolved the PEG and QDs at a 300:1 mol/L ratio in 10 mL chloroform. The chloroform was evaporated over a 30-min period using a circumrotate evaporation instrument, and the residue was dried by heating to 80 °C for 10 min. The dry film was resuspended by adding hot water (about 80 °C), followed by filtering with a 0.1- ? m syringe filter to remove the large, hollow PEG micelles. We centrifuged the emulsion at 500 000 g for 2 h with a Beckman ultracentrifuge and resuspended the pellet in 1 mL ultrapure water. This generated clear and stable PEG-QDs. PREPARATION OF FA-PEG-QDs Briefly, FA was activated with DCC and NHS at a 1:2:2 mol/L ratio in DMSO for 12 h and filtered with a syringe filter (pore size 0.2 ? m). The PEG-QDs were added to the solution at a molar ratio of 10:1 (FA:PEG-QDs). After reacting for 4 h at room temperature in the dark, the reactants were dialyzed against a 0.05 mol/L sodium bicarbonate buffer (SpectraPor6; molecular weight cutoff 1000). It is important to note that the addition of DCC and NHS to folate forms a highly reactive intermediate (FA-NHS), which can subsequently react with the free amino group present in PEG-QDs to form the resulting FA-PEG-QDs, as shown in Fig. 1 . TRANSMISSION ELECTRON MICROSCOPY IMAGING We examined the size and the morphology of the FA-PEG-QDs by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using a JEOL JEM-100CX with 1 drop of the FA-PEG-QD solution mounted on a thin film of amorphous carbon deposited on a copper grid. DYNAMIC LIGHT SCATTERING MEASUREMENT We measured the effective size and size distribution of the FA-PEG-QD suspensions by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments). FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles were dispersed in 1 mL ultrapure water. The solution was filtered through a 0.1- ? m syringe filter membrane to remove any impurities and then directly analyzed. ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPY IMAGING We characterized the appearance and monodispersity of the FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a PicoScan atomic force microscope (Molecular Imaging). Sample solution (10 ? L) was dropped onto a freshly cleaved ruby muscovite mica substrate (Digital Instruments) and allowed to dry for about 2 h. Freshly prepared samples were mounted on the AFM stage and imaged under MAC Mode in air (relative humidity 40%–50%, approximately 25 °C) using MAClever type II probes (spring constant 2.8 N/m, resonant frequency approximately 85 kHz; Molecular Imaging). The scan rate was about 1.5 line/s. MEASUREMENT OF FLUORESCENCE SPECTRA We measured the fluorescence spectra of the free hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs using a PerkinElmer LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer with a 388-nm laser for excitation and analyzed the spectra using FL WinLab 4.00.02 software (PerkinElmer). MEASUREMENT OF QUANTUM YIELD We measured the quantum yields of the free hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs using a PerkinElmer LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer according to a published procedure ( 33 ), using Rhodamine 640 dissolved in absolute ethanol as the reference standard (quantum yield 100%). We calculated the relative quantum yield of the QDs from the following equation: ? x = ? S T ( m x / m S T ) ( ? x / ? S T ) 2 where the subscripts ST and x denote the standard and tested sample, respectively, ? is the fluorescence quantum yield, m is the slope from the plot of the integrated fluorescence intensity vs the absorbance of the sample or the standard at different concentrations, and ? is the refractive index of the solvent. MEASUREMENT OF THE ZETA POTENTIAL The ? potential is a measure of the potential at the interface between a solid surface and the liquid medium. We used a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments) to measure the ? potential of PEG-QD and FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles dispersed in 1 mL of ultrapure water. QUANTIFICATION OF FA ON FA-PEG-QDs We measured the amount of folate conjugated to the QDs using a fluorescamine assay ( 34 ). A series of standard solutions of free FA were reacted with 1 mL of 5 × 10?4 mol/L fluorescamine, and the integrated fluorescence intensity of their reaction product from 460 to 485 nm was calculated to plot a calibration curve of fluorescence intensity vs the concentration of FA. Subsequently, we mixed the FA-PEG-QD solution at indicated concentrations of QDs with fluorescamine and similarly determined the emission intensity. The concentration of FA in the solution of FA-PEG-QDs was obtained according to the calibration curve. Finally, we calculated the number of FA molecules on a single of FA-PEG-QD according to the following equation: N F A = C F A / C QDs where N FA is the number of FA molecules on each FA-PEG-QD, C FA is the concentration of FA in the tested FA-PEG-QD solution, and C QDs is the concentration of QDs in the tested FA-PEG-QD solution. CELL CULTURE The FR-overexpressing human nasopharyngeal cell line (KB) and FR-deficient lung carcinoma cell line (A549) were grown in folate-free RPMI 1640 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin G sodium, and 0.1 g/L streptomycin sulfate. To study the uptake and imaging of the conjugated FA, we seeded the KB and A549 cell lines on a 35-mm culture glass plate at a density 3 × 105 cells/well. After 36 h of incubation, we rinsed the cells with sterile PBS and added 2 mL of the corresponding fresh media containing the indicated concentrations of FA-PEG-QDs to the plates. Plates were returned to the incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) for the indicated incubation period. After each indicated time interval of incubation, the plates were taken out and rinsed several times with sterile PBS, and 2 mL of fresh serum-free medium was added. After incubation for another 10 min at 37 °C, the plates were directly imaged under an inversion fluorescence microscope (Nikon ECLIPSE TE2000-U) or a confocal laser scanning fluorescence microscope (Leica TCS-SP2). To confirm receptor-mediated uptake, competition experiments were conducted where the KB cells were pretreated for 1 h with 2 mL of 1 mmol/L free FA solution before FA-PEG-QD treatment. CELL VIABILITY ASSAY We tested the effect of FA-MAA-QDs and FA-PEG-QDs on KB cell proliferation using an MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazlo-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] cell viability assay ( 35 ). We added 200 ? L of KB cells suspended in FA-deficient RPMI 1640 to each well of a 96-well plate (4 × 104 cells/mL). The cells were incubated for 24 h in an incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) and for another 24 h after the culture medium was replaced with 200 ? L FA-deficient RPMI 1640 containing the FA-PEG-QDs and FA-MAA-QDs at indicated concentrations. Then we added 20 ? L of 5 g/L MTT solution to each well. The cells were further incubated for 4 h, the culture medium containing MTT was removed, and 150 ? L DMSO was added to each well. The resulting mixture was mixed for approximately 5 min at room temperature. The absorbance (A) of the mixture was measured at 570 nm using a Microplate Reader Model 550 (Bio-Rad). The control experiments were carried out in the same manner as described above, except that no FA-PEG-QDs or FA-MAA-QDs were added.  REAGENTS Folate (molecular weight 440), DMSO, and MAA were purchased from Guoyaojituan; dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC) and N -hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) from Sigma-Aldrich; 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidyl-ethanolamine- N -[amino(polyethylene-glycol)2000] (aminoPEG-2000) and 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidyl-ethanolamine- N -[methoxy(polyethylene glycol)750] (mPEG-750) from Avanti Polar Lipids Inc.; and KB and A549 cells from China Type Culture Collection. All the media used for cell culture were obtained from Gibco and purchased from Invitrogen Corp.  SYNTHESIS OF CdSe/ZnS QDs AND WATER-DISPERSIBLE FA-MAA-QDs We synthesized monodisperse hydrophobic CdSe/ZnS QDs with a diameter of about 5 nm as described ( 32 ), using trioctylphosphine oxide as the solvent in the synthesis. We prepared the water-dispersible FA-MAA-QDs according to a published procedure ( 29 ). Briefly, a mixture of MAA and dried CdSe/ZnS QDs was first stirred vigorously for 1 h to prepare MAA-capped QDs via ligand exchange. The MAA-capped QDs were then activated with DCC and NHS for 30 min. Finally, the FA was added and stirred overnight to produce FA-MAA-QDs.  PREPARATION OF PEG-QDs The water-dispersible PEG-QDs were prepared based on the method of Dubertret et al. ( 3 ) with some modifications. We used a molar ratio of 30% mPEG-1000 and 70% aminoPEG-2000 phospholipids. We dissolved the PEG and QDs at a 300:1 mol/L ratio in 10 mL chloroform. The chloroform was evaporated over a 30-min period using a circumrotate evaporation instrument, and the residue was dried by heating to 80 °C for 10 min. The dry film was resuspended by adding hot water (about 80 °C), followed by filtering with a 0.1- ? m syringe filter to remove the large, hollow PEG micelles. We centrifuged the emulsion at 500 000 g for 2 h with a Beckman ultracentrifuge and resuspended the pellet in 1 mL ultrapure water. This generated clear and stable PEG-QDs.  PREPARATION OF FA-PEG-QDs Briefly, FA was activated with DCC and NHS at a 1:2:2 mol/L ratio in DMSO for 12 h and filtered with a syringe filter (pore size 0.2 ? m). The PEG-QDs were added to the solution at a molar ratio of 10:1 (FA:PEG-QDs). After reacting for 4 h at room temperature in the dark, the reactants were dialyzed against a 0.05 mol/L sodium bicarbonate buffer (SpectraPor6; molecular weight cutoff 1000). It is important to note that the addition of DCC and NHS to folate forms a highly reactive intermediate (FA-NHS), which can subsequently react with the free amino group present in PEG-QDs to form the resulting FA-PEG-QDs, as shown in Fig. 1 .  TRANSMISSION ELECTRON MICROSCOPY IMAGING We examined the size and the morphology of the FA-PEG-QDs by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using a JEOL JEM-100CX with 1 drop of the FA-PEG-QD solution mounted on a thin film of amorphous carbon deposited on a copper grid.  DYNAMIC LIGHT SCATTERING MEASUREMENT We measured the effective size and size distribution of the FA-PEG-QD suspensions by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments). FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles were dispersed in 1 mL ultrapure water. The solution was filtered through a 0.1- ? m syringe filter membrane to remove any impurities and then directly analyzed.  ATOMIC FORCE MICROSCOPY IMAGING We characterized the appearance and monodispersity of the FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a PicoScan atomic force microscope (Molecular Imaging). Sample solution (10 ? L) was dropped onto a freshly cleaved ruby muscovite mica substrate (Digital Instruments) and allowed to dry for about 2 h. Freshly prepared samples were mounted on the AFM stage and imaged under MAC Mode in air (relative humidity 40%–50%, approximately 25 °C) using MAClever type II probes (spring constant 2.8 N/m, resonant frequency approximately 85 kHz; Molecular Imaging). The scan rate was about 1.5 line/s.  MEASUREMENT OF FLUORESCENCE SPECTRA We measured the fluorescence spectra of the free hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs using a PerkinElmer LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer with a 388-nm laser for excitation and analyzed the spectra using FL WinLab 4.00.02 software (PerkinElmer).  MEASUREMENT OF QUANTUM YIELD We measured the quantum yields of the free hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs using a PerkinElmer LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer according to a published procedure ( 33 ), using Rhodamine 640 dissolved in absolute ethanol as the reference standard (quantum yield 100%). We calculated the relative quantum yield of the QDs from the following equation: ? x = ? S T ( m x / m S T ) ( ? x / ? S T ) 2 where the subscripts ST and x denote the standard and tested sample, respectively, ? is the fluorescence quantum yield, m is the slope from the plot of the integrated fluorescence intensity vs the absorbance of the sample or the standard at different concentrations, and ? is the refractive index of the solvent.  MEASUREMENT OF THE ZETA POTENTIAL The ? potential is a measure of the potential at the interface between a solid surface and the liquid medium. We used a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments) to measure the ? potential of PEG-QD and FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles dispersed in 1 mL of ultrapure water.  QUANTIFICATION OF FA ON FA-PEG-QDs We measured the amount of folate conjugated to the QDs using a fluorescamine assay ( 34 ). A series of standard solutions of free FA were reacted with 1 mL of 5 × 10?4 mol/L fluorescamine, and the integrated fluorescence intensity of their reaction product from 460 to 485 nm was calculated to plot a calibration curve of fluorescence intensity vs the concentration of FA. Subsequently, we mixed the FA-PEG-QD solution at indicated concentrations of QDs with fluorescamine and similarly determined the emission intensity. The concentration of FA in the solution of FA-PEG-QDs was obtained according to the calibration curve. Finally, we calculated the number of FA molecules on a single of FA-PEG-QD according to the following equation: N F A = C F A / C QDs where N FA is the number of FA molecules on each FA-PEG-QD, C FA is the concentration of FA in the tested FA-PEG-QD solution, and C QDs is the concentration of QDs in the tested FA-PEG-QD solution.  CELL CULTURE The FR-overexpressing human nasopharyngeal cell line (KB) and FR-deficient lung carcinoma cell line (A549) were grown in folate-free RPMI 1640 medium with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin G sodium, and 0.1 g/L streptomycin sulfate. To study the uptake and imaging of the conjugated FA, we seeded the KB and A549 cell lines on a 35-mm culture glass plate at a density 3 × 105 cells/well. After 36 h of incubation, we rinsed the cells with sterile PBS and added 2 mL of the corresponding fresh media containing the indicated concentrations of FA-PEG-QDs to the plates. Plates were returned to the incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) for the indicated incubation period. After each indicated time interval of incubation, the plates were taken out and rinsed several times with sterile PBS, and 2 mL of fresh serum-free medium was added. After incubation for another 10 min at 37 °C, the plates were directly imaged under an inversion fluorescence microscope (Nikon ECLIPSE TE2000-U) or a confocal laser scanning fluorescence microscope (Leica TCS-SP2). To confirm receptor-mediated uptake, competition experiments were conducted where the KB cells were pretreated for 1 h with 2 mL of 1 mmol/L free FA solution before FA-PEG-QD treatment.  CELL VIABILITY ASSAY We tested the effect of FA-MAA-QDs and FA-PEG-QDs on KB cell proliferation using an MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazlo-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] cell viability assay ( 35 ). We added 200 ? L of KB cells suspended in FA-deficient RPMI 1640 to each well of a 96-well plate (4 × 104 cells/mL). The cells were incubated for 24 h in an incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2) and for another 24 h after the culture medium was replaced with 200 ? L FA-deficient RPMI 1640 containing the FA-PEG-QDs and FA-MAA-QDs at indicated concentrations. Then we added 20 ? L of 5 g/L MTT solution to each well. The cells were further incubated for 4 h, the culture medium containing MTT was removed, and 150 ? L DMSO was added to each well. The resulting mixture was mixed for approximately 5 min at room temperature. The absorbance (A) of the mixture was measured at 570 nm using a Microplate Reader Model 550 (Bio-Rad). The control experiments were carried out in the same manner as described above, except that no FA-PEG-QDs or FA-MAA-QDs were added.  Results and Discussion SIZE CHARACTERIZATION We first determined the size of the FA-PEG-QDs by transmission electron microscopy. The TEM image showed that the FA-PEG-QDs appeared as particles of about 5 nm in diameter ( Fig. 2A ). AFM analysis clearly showed that the FA-PEG-QDs were spherical in shape with a mean (SD) height of 7 ( 2 ) nm ( Fig. 2B ). The larger diameter determined by AFM was because the QD core was coated with a PEG shell coupled with FA ligands. Both analyses showed that these FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles had good uniformity in size and monodispersity. DLS was then used to measure the size distribution of the prepared FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles in suspension. Fig. 2C shows the effective size as well as the size distributions of the FA-PEG-QDs suspended in ultra-pure water. The results demonstrated that the FA-PEG-QDs in ultrapure water had a relatively narrow size distribution, ranging from 13 to 32 nm in diameter. The mean diameter of the FA-PEG-QDs was 22 ( 10 ) nm. The larger diameter observed from DLS analysis included not only the QD core, which is measurable using TEM, but also the hydrodynamic diameter from the PEG coating, the covalently linked FA molecules, and the hydrated layer. OPTICAL CHARACTERIZATION AND ZETA POTENTIAL OF FA-PEG-QDs We examined the optical characteristics of the QD nanoparticles by measuring the absorption and fluorescence spectra. Fig. 3A shows the absorption spectrum of FA-PEG-QDs in ultrapure water. As shown in Fig. 3B , the PEG-QDs had a fluorescence emission peak at 594 nm, close to that of the same free hydrophobic QDs in hexane (595 nm). The fluorescence emission peak of the FA-PEG-QDs (593 nm) was slightly blue-shifted compared to that of the PEG-QDs (594 nm) and free QDs (595 nm), probably owing to the ligands on the surface of the QD nanoparticles and the difference in the QD environments—n-hexane for free hydrophobic QDs and water for the PEG-coated QDs. A second fluorescence emission peak at 450 nm was observed for the FA-PEG-QDs owing to the fluorescence spectrum of FA conjugated to the QD nanoparticles, which clearly demonstrated that the FA had been successfully coupled to the QDs. We measured photoluminescence quantum yields of the free hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs using Rhodamine 640 as a reference standard. The mean (SD) quantum yields of the original hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs were 34.8% (3%), 12.1% (1.6%), and 7.2% (2.2%), respectively. Thus, the results showed that the quantum yield of PEG-QDs was about 35% that of the original hydrophobic QDs, whereas the quantum yield of FA-PEG-QDs was about 21% that of the original hydrophobic QDs, indicating that the modified QDs retained substantial fluorescent properties of the original QDs. To investigate the uniformity of the coupling of FA to QDs, we measured the ? potential of the FA-PEG-QDs. The ? potential is a measure of the potential at the interface between a solid surface and the liquid medium. As FA contains 2 carboxy groups, 1 carboxy group would remain after the FA covalently binds to the PEG-QDs due to the inert property of the ? -carboxyl group and the stereohindrance effect. Consequently, the ? potential of the FA-PEG-QDs would be shifted negatively compared with FA-free PEG-QDs. Indeed, we found that PEG-QDs had a negative ? potential, whereas FA-PEG-QDs had a positive ? potential ( Fig. 3C ). This indicated that the FA had been conjugated to the PEG-QDs, consistent with the fluorescence emission spectrum of the FA-PEG-QDs. The sharp peak in the ? potential distribution of the nanoparticles indicated that each FA-PEG-QD had a similar number of coupled FA molecules. QUANTIFICATION OF FA ON THE QDs, STABILITY AND CELL TOXICITY OF FA-PEG-QDs We carried out a fluorescamine assay ( 34 ) to determine the number of FA molecules conjugated to the QDs. Fluorescamine can react with all substances containing primary amino groups, and each coupled FA molecule on the QDs has 1 primary amino group. This reaction yields intensely fluorescent products (excitation at 380 nm, emission at 480 nm) with a fluorescence emission peak at 480 nm ( Fig. 4A ). According to the calibration curve ( y = 4.903 + 1.069 x , r = 0.9986) plotted based on the integrated fluorescence intensity around 480 nm of the reaction product vs the concentration of FA, we obtained different concentrations (9.09 × 10?4, 5.04 × 10?4, 2.01 × 10?4 mol/L, respectively) of FA corresponding to different concentrations (3.0 × 10?5, 1.5 × 10?5, 0.75 × 10?5 mol/L) of QDs in the tested FA-PEG-QDs solution. According to Equation 2, approximately 30 ( 4 ) FA molecules were coupled to 1 FA-PEG-QD. To be useful for cell targeting, the QD moiety of the FA-PEG-QDs would need to have strong and stable fluorescence in aqueous solutions. Thus, we compared the stability of the fluorescence intensity of QDs in the FA-PEG-QDs with FA-MAA-QDs in the FA-deficient RPMI 1640 culture medium. The results showed that the fluorescence intensity from FA-MAA-QDs was very unstable in the aqueous culture medium, with faint fluorescence even at the earlier point of measurement ( Fig. 4B ). The fluorescence intensity of FA-PEG-QDs was more than 10 times stronger than that of the FA-MAA-QDs within the first few hours and remained stronger even at 48 h. These results demonstrate that FA-PEG-QDs are superior to FA-MAA-QDs for applications in biomedical research. It should be noted that with similar amounts of QDs used, the initial fluorescence intensity of both FA-PEG-QDs and FA-MAA-QDs should be almost the same. Under the experimental conditions, the fluorescence intensity of the FA-MAA-QDs was so unstable that it decayed to near the basal value at the earliest possible measurable time point. In contrast, the fluorescence intensity of the FA-PEG-QDs was much more stable and decayed by about half fluorescence intensity at about 9 h. It is well known that QDs have a certain extent of toxicity to cells, which limits their applications. We therefore examined the toxicity of FA-MAA-QDs and FA-PEG-QDs on KB cells using an MTT cell viability assay. The cell viability was determined according to the following equation: Cell viability ( % ) = ( A treated / A control ) × 100 where Acontrol was obtained in the absence of QDs and Atreated was obtained in the presence of FA-PEG-QDs or FA-MAA-QDs. As shown in Fig. 4C , FA-MAA-QDs had a severe toxic effect on KB cells at 100 nmol/L, whereas FA-PEG-QDs had little effect on the KB cells. Only at 200 nmol/L or higher did FA-PEG-QDs have any toxic effect on the KB cells. Thus, these results indicate that FA-PEG-QDs are superior to FA-MAA-QDs for live cell targeting. The data in Fig. 4C also suggest that not only do both FA-MAA-QDs and FA-PEG-QDs have no cytotoxicity, but they even promote the growth of cells when their concentration is lower than 50 nmol/L. The increase in cell viability might be related to the effect of nanomaterials on organisms, which is extremely complicated. According to previous reports on the effect of QDs on cell viability ( 36 – 40 ), factors such as the size, shape, and type of QDs; surface charge and functional groups on QDs; concentration of QDs; and type of cells tested may affect cell viability. In some cases, QDs will restrain the proliferation of cells ( 36 , 40 ), and in some cases, QDs have no cytotoxicity and even promote the growth of cells ( 37 , 38 ). It is difficult, however, to explain why QDs promote the growth of cells at present. FA-PEG-QDs SPECIFICALLY TARGETING FR-POSITIVE KB CELLS AND INTERNALIZED BY KB CELLS FA has a high affinity for FR and can be internalized though FR-mediated endocytosis. To investigate whether the FA on FA-PEG-QDs can mediate specific cell targeting, we incubated the FR-positive KB and FR-negative A549 cells with 100 nmol/L FA-PEG-QDs for 2 h and then washed the cells to remove unbound FA-PEG-QDs. Fluorescence imaging analysis showed strong orange fluorescence from FA-PEG-QDs on the KB cells ( Fig. 5, A–C ) but not on the A549 cells ( Fig. 5, D–F ), demonstrating that the FA-PEG-QDs specifically target the FR-positive tumor cells. To study the intracellular uptake of the FA-PEG-QDs, KB and A549 cells were treated with 200 nmol/L FA-PEG-QDs for 4 h, and the cells were examined under a confocal laser-scanning microscope. As shown in Fig. 6A , strong fluorescence from the FA-PEG-QDs was found inside the KB cells due to internalization of the FA-PEG-QDs into the KB cells. In contrast, KB cells incubated with PEG-QDs without FA ( Fig. 6C ) and A549 cells incubated with FA-PEG-QDs had only faint fluorescence inside the cells ( Fig. 6B ). These weak background signals were likely due to nonspecific endocytosis that occurs in all cell types, since they were independent of either FA ( Fig. 6C ) or FRs ( Fig. 6B ). Consistently, when KB cells were first incubated with excess free FA to block FRs and subsequently incubated with FA-PEG-QDs, the intracellular fluorescence was reduced to similarly weak levels ( Fig. 6D ). Thus, we conclude that FA-PEG-QDs not only specifically target FR-positive cells, but are also internalized through receptor-mediated endocytosis, suggesting that FA- PEG-QDs are potentially powerful tools for targeting cancer cells for in vivo labeling/imaging (because of fluorescence), delivering therapeutic compounds (because of internalization), and tracking the targeting drugs (because of both fluorescence and internalization). The FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles have a homogeneous size distribution and FA coupling, and retain the fluorescent properties of the parental QDs. With these properties, they are superior to other reported FA-coupled QDs or nanospheres for biomedical applications requiring aqueous conditions. These FA-PEG-QD nanobioprobes also show cell-targeting specificity through cell-surface FRs and internalization through FR-mediated endocytosis. We believe that the FA-PEG-QD nanobioprobes, with their superior properties of fluorescence, specificity, monodispersity, and smaller diameter for endocytosis, would be ideal for biomedical applications such as specifically killing cancer cells by adding antitumor drugs to the FA-PEG-QDs.  SIZE CHARACTERIZATION We first determined the size of the FA-PEG-QDs by transmission electron microscopy. The TEM image showed that the FA-PEG-QDs appeared as particles of about 5 nm in diameter ( Fig. 2A ). AFM analysis clearly showed that the FA-PEG-QDs were spherical in shape with a mean (SD) height of 7 ( 2 ) nm ( Fig. 2B ). The larger diameter determined by AFM was because the QD core was coated with a PEG shell coupled with FA ligands. Both analyses showed that these FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles had good uniformity in size and monodispersity. DLS was then used to measure the size distribution of the prepared FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles in suspension. Fig. 2C shows the effective size as well as the size distributions of the FA-PEG-QDs suspended in ultra-pure water. The results demonstrated that the FA-PEG-QDs in ultrapure water had a relatively narrow size distribution, ranging from 13 to 32 nm in diameter. The mean diameter of the FA-PEG-QDs was 22 ( 10 ) nm. The larger diameter observed from DLS analysis included not only the QD core, which is measurable using TEM, but also the hydrodynamic diameter from the PEG coating, the covalently linked FA molecules, and the hydrated layer.  OPTICAL CHARACTERIZATION AND ZETA POTENTIAL OF FA-PEG-QDs We examined the optical characteristics of the QD nanoparticles by measuring the absorption and fluorescence spectra. Fig. 3A shows the absorption spectrum of FA-PEG-QDs in ultrapure water. As shown in Fig. 3B , the PEG-QDs had a fluorescence emission peak at 594 nm, close to that of the same free hydrophobic QDs in hexane (595 nm). The fluorescence emission peak of the FA-PEG-QDs (593 nm) was slightly blue-shifted compared to that of the PEG-QDs (594 nm) and free QDs (595 nm), probably owing to the ligands on the surface of the QD nanoparticles and the difference in the QD environments—n-hexane for free hydrophobic QDs and water for the PEG-coated QDs. A second fluorescence emission peak at 450 nm was observed for the FA-PEG-QDs owing to the fluorescence spectrum of FA conjugated to the QD nanoparticles, which clearly demonstrated that the FA had been successfully coupled to the QDs. We measured photoluminescence quantum yields of the free hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs using Rhodamine 640 as a reference standard. The mean (SD) quantum yields of the original hydrophobic QDs, PEG-QDs, and FA-PEG-QDs were 34.8% (3%), 12.1% (1.6%), and 7.2% (2.2%), respectively. Thus, the results showed that the quantum yield of PEG-QDs was about 35% that of the original hydrophobic QDs, whereas the quantum yield of FA-PEG-QDs was about 21% that of the original hydrophobic QDs, indicating that the modified QDs retained substantial fluorescent properties of the original QDs. To investigate the uniformity of the coupling of FA to QDs, we measured the ? potential of the FA-PEG-QDs. The ? potential is a measure of the potential at the interface between a solid surface and the liquid medium. As FA contains 2 carboxy groups, 1 carboxy group would remain after the FA covalently binds to the PEG-QDs due to the inert property of the ? -carboxyl group and the stereohindrance effect. Consequently, the ? potential of the FA-PEG-QDs would be shifted negatively compared with FA-free PEG-QDs. Indeed, we found that PEG-QDs had a negative ? potential, whereas FA-PEG-QDs had a positive ? potential ( Fig. 3C ). This indicated that the FA had been conjugated to the PEG-QDs, consistent with the fluorescence emission spectrum of the FA-PEG-QDs. The sharp peak in the ? potential distribution of the nanoparticles indicated that each FA-PEG-QD had a similar number of coupled FA molecules.  QUANTIFICATION OF FA ON THE QDs, STABILITY AND CELL TOXICITY OF FA-PEG-QDs We carried out a fluorescamine assay ( 34 ) to determine the number of FA molecules conjugated to the QDs. Fluorescamine can react with all substances containing primary amino groups, and each coupled FA molecule on the QDs has 1 primary amino group. This reaction yields intensely fluorescent products (excitation at 380 nm, emission at 480 nm) with a fluorescence emission peak at 480 nm ( Fig. 4A ). According to the calibration curve ( y = 4.903 + 1.069 x , r = 0.9986) plotted based on the integrated fluorescence intensity around 480 nm of the reaction product vs the concentration of FA, we obtained different concentrations (9.09 × 10?4, 5.04 × 10?4, 2.01 × 10?4 mol/L, respectively) of FA corresponding to different concentrations (3.0 × 10?5, 1.5 × 10?5, 0.75 × 10?5 mol/L) of QDs in the tested FA-PEG-QDs solution. According to Equation 2, approximately 30 ( 4 ) FA molecules were coupled to 1 FA-PEG-QD. To be useful for cell targeting, the QD moiety of the FA-PEG-QDs would need to have strong and stable fluorescence in aqueous solutions. Thus, we compared the stability of the fluorescence intensity of QDs in the FA-PEG-QDs with FA-MAA-QDs in the FA-deficient RPMI 1640 culture medium. The results showed that the fluorescence intensity from FA-MAA-QDs was very unstable in the aqueous culture medium, with faint fluorescence even at the earlier point of measurement ( Fig. 4B ). The fluorescence intensity of FA-PEG-QDs was more than 10 times stronger than that of the FA-MAA-QDs within the first few hours and remained stronger even at 48 h. These results demonstrate that FA-PEG-QDs are superior to FA-MAA-QDs for applications in biomedical research. It should be noted that with similar amounts of QDs used, the initial fluorescence intensity of both FA-PEG-QDs and FA-MAA-QDs should be almost the same. Under the experimental conditions, the fluorescence intensity of the FA-MAA-QDs was so unstable that it decayed to near the basal value at the earliest possible measurable time point. In contrast, the fluorescence intensity of the FA-PEG-QDs was much more stable and decayed by about half fluorescence intensity at about 9 h. It is well known that QDs have a certain extent of toxicity to cells, which limits their applications. We therefore examined the toxicity of FA-MAA-QDs and FA-PEG-QDs on KB cells using an MTT cell viability assay. The cell viability was determined according to the following equation: Cell viability ( % ) = ( A treated / A control ) × 100 where Acontrol was obtained in the absence of QDs and Atreated was obtained in the presence of FA-PEG-QDs or FA-MAA-QDs. As shown in Fig. 4C , FA-MAA-QDs had a severe toxic effect on KB cells at 100 nmol/L, whereas FA-PEG-QDs had little effect on the KB cells. Only at 200 nmol/L or higher did FA-PEG-QDs have any toxic effect on the KB cells. Thus, these results indicate that FA-PEG-QDs are superior to FA-MAA-QDs for live cell targeting. The data in Fig. 4C also suggest that not only do both FA-MAA-QDs and FA-PEG-QDs have no cytotoxicity, but they even promote the growth of cells when their concentration is lower than 50 nmol/L. The increase in cell viability might be related to the effect of nanomaterials on organisms, which is extremely complicated. According to previous reports on the effect of QDs on cell viability ( 36 – 40 ), factors such as the size, shape, and type of QDs; surface charge and functional groups on QDs; concentration of QDs; and type of cells tested may affect cell viability. In some cases, QDs will restrain the proliferation of cells ( 36 , 40 ), and in some cases, QDs have no cytotoxicity and even promote the growth of cells ( 37 , 38 ). It is difficult, however, to explain why QDs promote the growth of cells at present.  FA-PEG-QDs SPECIFICALLY TARGETING FR-POSITIVE KB CELLS AND INTERNALIZED BY KB CELLS FA has a high affinity for FR and can be internalized though FR-mediated endocytosis. To investigate whether the FA on FA-PEG-QDs can mediate specific cell targeting, we incubated the FR-positive KB and FR-negative A549 cells with 100 nmol/L FA-PEG-QDs for 2 h and then washed the cells to remove unbound FA-PEG-QDs. Fluorescence imaging analysis showed strong orange fluorescence from FA-PEG-QDs on the KB cells ( Fig. 5, A–C ) but not on the A549 cells ( Fig. 5, D–F ), demonstrating that the FA-PEG-QDs specifically target the FR-positive tumor cells. To study the intracellular uptake of the FA-PEG-QDs, KB and A549 cells were treated with 200 nmol/L FA-PEG-QDs for 4 h, and the cells were examined under a confocal laser-scanning microscope. As shown in Fig. 6A , strong fluorescence from the FA-PEG-QDs was found inside the KB cells due to internalization of the FA-PEG-QDs into the KB cells. In contrast, KB cells incubated with PEG-QDs without FA ( Fig. 6C ) and A549 cells incubated with FA-PEG-QDs had only faint fluorescence inside the cells ( Fig. 6B ). These weak background signals were likely due to nonspecific endocytosis that occurs in all cell types, since they were independent of either FA ( Fig. 6C ) or FRs ( Fig. 6B ). Consistently, when KB cells were first incubated with excess free FA to block FRs and subsequently incubated with FA-PEG-QDs, the intracellular fluorescence was reduced to similarly weak levels ( Fig. 6D ). Thus, we conclude that FA-PEG-QDs not only specifically target FR-positive cells, but are also internalized through receptor-mediated endocytosis, suggesting that FA- PEG-QDs are potentially powerful tools for targeting cancer cells for in vivo labeling/imaging (because of fluorescence), delivering therapeutic compounds (because of internalization), and tracking the targeting drugs (because of both fluorescence and internalization). The FA-PEG-QD nanoparticles have a homogeneous size distribution and FA coupling, and retain the fluorescent properties of the parental QDs. With these properties, they are superior to other reported FA-coupled QDs or nanospheres for biomedical applications requiring aqueous conditions. These FA-PEG-QD nanobioprobes also show cell-targeting specificity through cell-surface FRs and internalization through FR-mediated endocytosis. We believe that the FA-PEG-QD nanobioprobes, with their superior properties of fluorescence, specificity, monodispersity, and smaller diameter for endocytosis, would be ideal for biomedical applications such as specifically killing cancer cells by adding antitumor drugs to the FA-PEG-QDs. 