Haplotype-tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms in the GSTP1 gene promoter and susceptibility to lung cancer ? Background Glutathione S-transferase (GST) P1 is a major phase II xenobiotic-metabolizing enzyme in the human lung. Our laboratory had previously identified nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the GSTP1 gene promoter, which were then grouped into three main haplotypes (Hap1, Hap2, and Hap3) based on statistical inference. Hap3 was found to display a high expression phenotype. The main objective of the current study was to test the association between GSTP1 promoter haplotypes with the risk of lung cancer after determining the promoter haplotypes experimentally through cloning and sequencing. Methods We conducted a case–control analysis of 150 subjects with lung cancer and 329 controls with no personal history of the disease. The three statistically inferred GSTP1 promoter haplotypes were confirmed experimentally through cloning and sequencing. Haplotype-tagging SNPs were selected and GSTP1 haplotypes were tested for genetic association to lung cancer using unconditional logistic regression after adjusting for confounders. Statistical interaction between GSTP1 promoter haplotypes with either cigarette smoking or dietary fruit and vegetable intake were tested using the likelihood ratio test. Results We did not find protective effects of Hap3 against lung cancer, despite an adequately powered design for this main effect. Homozygous variants of tagSNPs –1738 T >A and –354 G > T, which tag Hap2, showed an increased (but statistically non-significant) risk of lung cancer among all subjects as well as among individuals with low fruit and vegetable intake, compared to homozygous wildtypes for these SNPs. We did not find significant interactions between Hap2 and dietary intake of fruits and vegetables. Conclusions Our results do not support significant main and modifying effects for GSTP1 promoter haplotypes on susceptibility to lung cancer in this population, but reinforce the protective effects of dietary intake of fruits and vegetables. 