Isolated Benign Primary Cutaneous Plasmacytosis in Children Two Illustrative Cases Background Plasma cells are normally found in bone marrow and the intestinal tract. They appear in the skin in malignant conditions, autoimmune diseases, infection, and idiopathic and poorly understood disorders such as primary nodular amyloidosis. It is uncommon to find collections of plasma cells in the skin in the absence of these conditions. Observations We present 2 cases of cutaneous plasmacytosis, one in a white, female adolescent aged 15 years with an 11-year history of a solitary, asymptomatic, violaceous plaque on the left anterior tibia and the other in a white, male child aged 7 years with a 2-year history of a solitary erythematous plaque on the right anterior tibia. In both patients, infiltration of mature polyclonal plasma cells was confined to an area on the skin with papulonodules. There was no history of previous trauma, malignant conditions, autoimmune disease, or infection in either child. Conclusion Although incipient or occult systemic disease cannot be definitively ruled out, the course of these 2 individuals suggests that isolated primary cutaneous plasmacytosis in children is a benign chronic process with no adverse sequelae.  COMMENT The diagnosis of primary cutaneous plasmacytosis is made by a combination of histologic and clinical findings, a polyclonal plasma cell infiltrate, and studies with negative results for systemic disease such as malignant conditions, autoimmune diseases, or infections ( Table ). 1 – 3 The differential diagnosis for these solitary lesions in both children included cutaneous lymphoma, lupus erythematosus, and nodular amyloidosis ( Table ), all of which were unlikely in the clinical setting. Benign cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia with plasma cells was an alternative diagnosis. The chronicity of both lesions and prominence of plasma cells were more consistent with primary cutaneous plasmacytosis. The etiology of idiopathic plasma cell infiltrates is unknown. One hypothesis is that interleukin 6, which drives B-cell differentiation, is increased in plasmacytosis. 6 – 8 Therapy with intralesional corticosteroids has reduced interleukin 6 levels and produced improvement in a few individuals with plasmacytosis. 9 The immune system of infants and children is different qualitatively and quantitatively from that in adults. For instance, benign disorders in which idiopathic cutaneous eosinophilic infiltrates occur in infants and children include incontinentia pigmenti, erythema toxicum neonatorum, Ofuji syndrome, and eosinophilic pustular folliculitis. Benign disorders in which idiopathic neutrophilic infiltrates occur in infants and children include transient neonatal pustular melanosis and palmoplantar eccrine hidradenitis. Primary cutaneous plasmacytosis may be another example of localized benign cutaneous infiltrates of immune cells in children that are uncommon in adults. It may be a childhood version of benign cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia. In the 2 patients described herein, there was no identifiable inciting agent (trauma or local infection) to explain cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia. The course for primary cutaneous plasmacytosis is typically long-term. An aggressive clinical course has been observed in a small number of adults with multiple cutaneous plasma cell infiltrates and extracutaneous manifestations, for which the outcome has been fatal owing to lymphoid interstitial pneumonia, renal failure, or leukemia. 1 We found 1 reported case of primary cutaneous plasmacytosis in a white female child aged 7 years with a 4-year history of polyclonal cutaneous plasma cell infiltrates in a 10-cm plaque on the right axillary and scapular region. 10 The child had type 1 diabetes mellitus but no other systemic disease. Because of the small numbers of individuals with primary cutaneous plasmacytosis and the uncertainty about prognosis, an adult with unexplained multiple cutaneous plasma cell infiltrates should be carefully evaluated and followed up for progression and/or transformation of disease. Our 2 cases of isolated cutaneous plasmacytosis in children are illustrative because (1) the disorder is rare in children and in whites and (2) in both patients there were negative results from an extensive workup for malignant conditions, autoimmune diseases, or infections, causing concern and great expense for the patients and their families. The long course of the lesions and the otherwise good health of both children argue for an idiopathic benign condition in children that may represent a different entity than plasmacytosis in adults, requiring close follow-up and a conservative approach to therapy.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Clinical presentation. A, Case 1: A white female adolescent aged 15 years with a 12-year history of a linear dark reddish-brown, violaceous plaque containing some papules and nodules on the left anterior leg. B, Case 2: A white male child aged 7 years with a 2-year history of a cluster of dark reddish-brown papulonodules on the right anterior leg. Figure 2 Routine hematoxylin-eosin histopathologic examination of the lesions in Figure 1 . Both biopsy specimens showed dense superficial infiltrates of mononuclear cells with numerous plasma cells in the papillary and upper reticular dermis (A and B, case 1; C and D, case 2). No atypia of the infiltrating cells was present. Results from ancillary studies showed a polyclonal process in both cases (A and C, original magnification ×10; B and D, original magnification ×40). Table Plasma Cells in the Skin Category/Disease Histologic Findings Malignant condition ?Cutaneous plasmacytoma Large collection of monoclonal plasma cells ?Marginal zone B-cell lymphoma, follicle center B-cell lymphoma Plasma cells sprinkled around periphery of germinal center formations ?Skin cancers Plasma cell infiltrates in association with epithelial malignant conditions; Kaposi sarcoma Autoimmune disease ?Lupus erythematosus and scleroderma Sprinkling of plasma cells in predominantly lymphohistiocytic infiltrates Infection ?Bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial, treponemal Plasma cells and neutrophils, clues to cutaneous infection Other ?Plasmacellularis vulvitis and balanitis (Zoon) Sheets of polyclonal plasma cells in bandlike infiltrates under epithelium ?Primary cutaneous plasmacytosis Collections of polyclonal plasma cells in the upper dermis ?Nodular amyloidosis Nodules of cellular material and plasma cells around fat lobules, adnexa, and vessels ?Cutaneous Rosai-Dorfman disease Sheets of plasma cells in dense nodular infiltrates with emperipolesis ?Inflammatory conditions Plasma cells in infiltrates in the scalp and mucosa 