Promising novel immunotherapies and combinations for prostate cancer The field of therapeutic cancer vaccines is currently in a state of active preclinical and clinical investigation, and certain novel therapies involving tumor immunotherapy have recently come to the forefront of prostate cancer research. While no therapeutic cancer vaccine has yet been approved by the US FDA, recent findings have demonstrated that new paradigms of combination therapies involving vaccines, employed in clinical trials with appropriate design and end points, may ultimately lead to cancer vaccines being used to treat various malignancies. Several characteristics of prostate cancer make it an ideal target for immunotherapy. Its relative indolence allows sufficient time to generate immune responses, which usually take weeks or months to mount. In addition, prostate cancer-associated antigens direct the immune response to prostate cancer cells, thus sparing normal tissue. This review focuses on the future of promising new vaccines and novel perspectives in the treatment of prostate cancer.  Conclusion Vaccine strategies for the treatment of prostate cancer are under active investigation, using a wide variety of approaches including whole-tumor-cell vaccines, DC approaches and vector-driven delivery of TAAs. Preclinical and clinical results of studies employing these various vaccine approaches have demonstrated immunologic responses that, in some instances, correlate with clinical activity of these vaccines. Larger clinical studies are needed to validate these findings. Novel vaccine strategies are also being implemented, including the addition of costimulatory molecules to help activate and proliferate T-cell responses, and combination therapies with cytokines, antibodies, hormones and chemotherapy that may help reduce regulatory Tregs and initiate an antigen cascade that could allow additional tumor antigens to be targeted by the immune system.  Future perspective In the treatment of cancer, it is becoming more evident that traditional response criteria, which focus strictly on reduction of tumor size, may not be the best criteria for determining the efficacy of vaccine therapy. Tumors treated with vaccines may grow initially before shrinking, or may stabilize or grow at a slower rate. Therefore, overall survival may be a better end point than disease-free survival for evaluating vaccines in clinical trials. Furthermore, clinical and preclinical data suggest that vaccines are more effective in patients with small tumor volume and less aggressive disease [ 31 , 60 ]. There are several possible reasons for this: Activation of an immune response outpaces tumor growth; In a large tumor, T-cell infiltration and penetrance is incomplete; Immunosuppression in patients heavily pre-treated with cytotoxic chemotherapy and radiation impedes optimal immune stimulation; Immunosuppressive cytokines produced by tumor cells and/or suppressive cells in the microenvironment of a large tumor further hinder immune response. Based on these considerations, vaccine therapies may lead to better outcomes in adjuvant settings than in metastatic settings, while tumor burden is still relatively low. As previously discussed, sipuleucel-T demonstrated an overall survival advantage without a significant benefit in time-to-progression [ 31 ]. Better understanding of APCs and the mechanisms of T-cell activation have led to the development of a new generation of vaccines that incorporate costimulatory molecules. One finding on the physiology of adoptive cell-mediated immune response is that T-cell quality and avidity are more important than quantity. Use of costimulatory molecules and cytokine adjuvants can increase the function and cytolytic activity of T cells [ 52 , 61 ]. Another advancement in our understanding of the mechanism of immune response regulation is the identification of Tregs. A subtype of CD4+ T cells – Tregs – are responsible for down-regulating host immune activation, thereby reducing the risk of autoimmunity. Tregs may play an important role in immune tolerance and anergy to TAAs; higher levels of Tregs correlate with negative clinical outcomes [ 62 , 63 ]. Types of regulatory cells include CD4+CD25highFoxP3+ Tregs, immature macrophages and CD4+NKT+ cells [ 64 , 65 ]. Ongoing research is focusing on ways to inhibit these cells and thus increase the efficacy of tumor vaccines. Executive summary Immune enhancement Tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) are, by definition, weakly immunogenic. Strong antigen presentation by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) is required to sufficiently activate cytotoxic T cells (CTLs). T cells are activated in a dual-signal process: the first signal binds the peptide–MHC complex on the surface of the APC to the T-cell receptor (TCR); the second signal involves the interaction of T-cell costimulatory molecules on the surface of the APC with their corresponding ligands on the surface of the T cell. Strategies to enhance dendritic cell (DC) and CTL activation and function have employed various cytokines including granulocyte- macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15. Prostate cancer vaccines Allogeneic whole-tumor-cell vaccines: Allogeneic whole-tumor-cell vaccines are derived from various tumor cell lines and are easier to prepare. Whole tumor cells are rendered replication-defective by radiation, frequently combined with nonspecific immunostimulants, GVAX and ONY-P1 – investigated in clinical trials. APC vaccines: DCs play a crucial role in the activation of naive CD4 and CD8 T cells. DCs have been loaded with peptides, proteins and tumor lysates, infected with viral vectors, TAAs and mRNAs, or fused with tumor cells. Sipuleucel-T (Provenge; Dendreon, Inc.) – autologous APC vaccine pulsed ex vivo with PA2024, a recombinant fusion protein of human prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) and GM-CSF. The final Phase III analysis is scheduled in mid 2009. Vector-based vaccines: Vector-based vaccines allow for insertion of multiple genes for TAAs and costimulatory molecules and cytokines. Some vectors cause an inflammatory response at the injection site, instigating migration of APCs to the site. Many vectors can infect the APCs, allowing for better antigen processing. PSA-TRICOM, a poxvirus-based vaccine expressing PSA and three costimulatory molecules (B7.1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3), has shown promising Phase II results. Combination therapies Radiation plus vaccine: Radiation can alter tumor-cell phenotype and upregulate the expression of some TAAs, costimulatory molecules and cytokine receptors. Androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) plus vaccine: ADT has been shown to potentiate immune responses and mitigate immune tolerance to prostate cancer antigens. Chemotherapy plus vaccine: Certain chemotherapy agents have been shown to positively modulate the immune response. Mechanisms include upregulation of TAAs and MHC class I, depletion of regulatory T cells (Tregs), and increased cytokine production. Monoclonal antibodies plus vaccine: Blocking CTLA-4 with a neutralizing antibody has been shown to sustain and potentiate immune responses.  Immune enhancement Tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) are, by definition, weakly immunogenic. Strong antigen presentation by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) is required to sufficiently activate cytotoxic T cells (CTLs). T cells are activated in a dual-signal process: the first signal binds the peptide–MHC complex on the surface of the APC to the T-cell receptor (TCR); the second signal involves the interaction of T-cell costimulatory molecules on the surface of the APC with their corresponding ligands on the surface of the T cell. Strategies to enhance dendritic cell (DC) and CTL activation and function have employed various cytokines including granulocyte- macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IL-2, IL-7 and IL-15.  Prostate cancer vaccines Allogeneic whole-tumor-cell vaccines: Allogeneic whole-tumor-cell vaccines are derived from various tumor cell lines and are easier to prepare. Whole tumor cells are rendered replication-defective by radiation, frequently combined with nonspecific immunostimulants, GVAX and ONY-P1 – investigated in clinical trials. APC vaccines: DCs play a crucial role in the activation of naive CD4 and CD8 T cells. DCs have been loaded with peptides, proteins and tumor lysates, infected with viral vectors, TAAs and mRNAs, or fused with tumor cells. Sipuleucel-T (Provenge; Dendreon, Inc.) – autologous APC vaccine pulsed ex vivo with PA2024, a recombinant fusion protein of human prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) and GM-CSF. The final Phase III analysis is scheduled in mid 2009. Vector-based vaccines: Vector-based vaccines allow for insertion of multiple genes for TAAs and costimulatory molecules and cytokines. Some vectors cause an inflammatory response at the injection site, instigating migration of APCs to the site. Many vectors can infect the APCs, allowing for better antigen processing. PSA-TRICOM, a poxvirus-based vaccine expressing PSA and three costimulatory molecules (B7.1, ICAM-1 and LFA-3), has shown promising Phase II results.  Combination therapies Radiation plus vaccine: Radiation can alter tumor-cell phenotype and upregulate the expression of some TAAs, costimulatory molecules and cytokine receptors. Androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) plus vaccine: ADT has been shown to potentiate immune responses and mitigate immune tolerance to prostate cancer antigens. Chemotherapy plus vaccine: Certain chemotherapy agents have been shown to positively modulate the immune response. Mechanisms include upregulation of TAAs and MHC class I, depletion of regulatory T cells (Tregs), and increased cytokine production. Monoclonal antibodies plus vaccine: Blocking CTLA-4 with a neutralizing antibody has been shown to sustain and potentiate immune responses.  Figures Figure 1 Two-signal model of T-cell dependence on costimulation The second (costimulatory) signal is required for T-cell cytokine production and proliferation. MHC: Major histocompatibility complex; TCR: T-cell receptor. Reprinted with permission from [ 66 ]. Figure 2 Local radiation of tumor cells, at doses insufficient to kill a tumor, can modulate numerous classes of genes (e.g., Fas) This, in turn, may render these tumor cells more susceptible to killing by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Reprinted with permission from [ 67 ]. 