Trophic macrophages in development and disease Specialized phagocytes are found in the most primitive multicellular organisms. Their roles in homeostasis and in distinguishing self from non-self have evolved with the complexity of organisms and their immune systems. Equally important, but often overlooked, are the roles of macrophages in tissue development. As discussed in this Review, these include functions in branching morphogenesis, neuronal patterning, angiogenesis, bone morphogenesis and the generation of adipose tissue. In each case, macrophage depletion impairs the formation of the tissue and compromises its function. I argue that in several diseases, the unrestrained acquisition of these developmental macrophage functions exacerbates pathology. For example, macrophages enhance tumour progression and metastasis by affecting tumour-cell migration and invasion, as well as angiogenesis.  Conclusions Macrophages have important roles in the development of many and perhaps all tissues, as well as in their ongoing homeostasis. This is not an instructive role; macrophages do not change cell identity, but instead affect the regulation of rates of outgrowth, remodelling and organization of tissues. In this respect, these motile cells are well suited to this role, as they can be recruited as needed and disposed of at completion. I think that these are ancient roles of these primitive cells found in almost all metazoans and that as the immune system evolved, new functions were overlaid on these developmental and homeostatic functions, thereby exploiting the migratory, sensory and degradative properties of macrophages. This gradually led to the evolution of further subclasses, such as DCs. unfortunately, the trophic functions of these cells are dysregulated in many chronic diseases, some of which are associated with ageing, and their unrestrained activities can exacerbate pathology. Thus, a full appreciation of the developmental and tissue-maintenance roles of macrophages using methods such as temporal ablation of subpopulations of cells or macrophage-specific gene expression, will not only lead to deeper insights into macrophage biology but also allow the development of more precisely targeted anti-macrophage therapies. Some of these are in fact already being tested in clinical trials, for example, for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis 21 .  Reticuloendothelial system A classification system, the functional definition of which is based on phagocytosis, that groups macrophages and endothelial cells together.  Mononuclear phagocytic system The current classification of macrophages, which is an ontological classification based on their bone marrow and monocyte origin.  Definitive haematopoiesis Haematopoiesis that results in the generation of all blood cell types.  Osteopetrosis A disease that is associated with the failure to remodel bone, resulting in occluded marrow cavities — literally, `rock-like' bones.  Growth plate The area where osteoblasts initiate bone deposition and osteoclasts trigger bone remodelling.  Liposome-encapsulated clodronate Clodronate (dichloromethylene bisphosphonate) that is encapsulated in liposomes and that is taken up preferentially by macrophages through phagocytosis. The clodronate then kills the macrophages.  Hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis The feedback system that regulates reproduction through the synthesis of sex steroid hormones in males and females. The highest level of control is in the hypothalamus, a region of the brain that secretes gonadotrophin-releasing hormone, which in turn stimulates the pituitary to produce gonadotrophins that act on the gonads to stimulate sex hormone synthesis.  Visual evoked potential A neuronal response to repeated visual cues.  Retinal striate conductance The pathway of neuronal impulses from the retina up the optic nerve to the striatum in the brain. The timing of this is a measure of neuronal conductance from a peripheral organ to the brain.  Hyaloid vessel system A vessel system that is laid down during the development of the eye and needs to be remodelled to allow unobstructed vision.  Decidualization The process of stromal transformation in response to an invading embryo in the uterus. The transformed stroma protects and provides sustenance to the embryo and converts into a portion of the placenta as embryonic development proceeds.  Aortic ring sprouting assay An angiogenic assay that depends on vascular sprouting from small rings of aorta cultured ex vivo .  Brown fat A type of fat involved in thermogenesis, so called because of the large number of mitochondria that give it its brown colour.  Polyoma middle T (PyMT) mouse model A transgenic mouse model of breast cancer. The cancer is caused by the restricted expression of the polyoma middle T oncoprotein by mammary epithelial cells, which is under the control of the mouse mammary tumour virus promoter. This model is highly metastatic and recapitulates much of what is seen in human cancers.  Angiogenic switch The marked increase in vascularization that is observed as benign tumours transition to malignancy. 