Cyclin D1b protein expression in breast cancer is independent of cyclin D1a and associated with poor disease outcome Aberrant expression of cyclin D1 protein is a common feature of breast cancer. However, the CCND1 gene encodes two gene products, cyclin D1a and cyclin D1b, which have discrete mechanisms of regulation and impact on cell behavior. A polymorphism at nucleotide 870 in the CCND1 gene, rs603965, influences the relative production of the encoded proteins and can impart increased risk for tumor development. Here, the impact of both the G/A870 polymorphism and cyclin D1b protein production on breast cancer risk, disease phenotype and patient outcome was analysed. In a large multiethnic case–control study, the G/A870 polymorphism conferred no significant risk for breast cancer overall or by stage or estrogen receptor (ER) status. However, the cyclin D1b protein was found to be upregulated in breast cancer, independent of cyclin D1a levels, and exhibited heterogeneous levels in breast cancer specimens. High cyclin D1a expression inversely correlated with the Ki67 proliferation marker and was not associated with clinical outcome. In contrast, elevated cyclin D1b expression was independently associated with adverse outcomes, including recurrence, distant metastasis and decreased survival. Interestingly, cyclin D1b was particularly associated with poor outcome in the context of ER-negative breast cancer. Thus, specific cyclin D1 isoforms are associated with discrete forms of breast cancer and high cyclin D1b protein levels hold prognostic potential.  Summary The relevance of G/A870 polymorphism to breast cancer has been the subject of several earlier studies ( Krippl et al ., 2003 ; Ceschi et al ., 2005 ; Shu et al ., 2005 ; Naidu et al ., 2008 ; Yu et al ., 2008 ). Although the overall conclusions of these studies have been disparate, a recent meta-analysis of published cases suggested that the polymorphism is weakly related to increased breast cancer risk ( Pabalan et al ., 2008 ). Our findings are in agreement, in revealing a negligible impact of the polymorphism on breast cancer risk. Owing to the size and ethnic heterogeneity of our cohort, we believe that a consensus is arising related to the modest impact of the G/A870 polymorphism in breast cancer, which contrasts with the stronger influence observed in other tumor types ( Pabalan et al ., 2008 ). It is now clear from a number of studies that modifiers external to the polymorphism are associated with the accumulation of cyclin D1b. For example, factors associated with chromatin remodeling and translation potently modulate the abundance of the cyclin D1b isoform ( Batsche et al ., 2006 ; Sanchez et al ., 2008 ). Specifically, loss of the Brm chromatin remodeling protein results in a substantial increase in the cyclin D1b transcript as a result of less efficient splicing. Through an independent mechanism, the Ewing’s sarcoma oncogene and the ets family transcription factor (FLI1) results in the upregulation of cyclin D1b through the alteration of transcript elongation. In addition, a dissociation between the G/A870 genotype and the relative expression of cyclin D1b has been observed in multiple tumor types, including colorectal, mantle cell lymphoma and non-small-cell lung cancer ( Bala and Peltomaki, 2001 ; Carrere et al ., 2005 ; Krieger et al ., 2006 ; Gupta et al ., 2008 ). In this context, it is important to appreciate that both genotypic and histochemical based analyses have merit in dissecting an impact on cancer risk or disease outcome. However, owing to the lack of direct correlation between genotype and protein production, direct analyses of the cyclin D1b protein product is perhaps the only means to define the impact of the protein on disease. As cyclin D1a and cyclin D1b proteins are closely related (they derive from the same primary transcript), it is critical to discern whether the expressions of cyclin D1a and D1b are coupled or independent factors. A clear advantage in the analyses of cyclin D1b is the possible use of cyclin D1a- and D1b-specific antibodies. As described earlier, and further validated herein, the available reagents can clearly differentiate between cyclin D1a and D1b ( Burd et al ., 2006 ; Marzec et al ., 2006 ; Sanchez et al ., 2008 ; Wang et al ., 2008 ). Using such reagents, we quantitatively determined the levels of each protein unambiguously, and these results were further supported by quantitative analyses on RNA transcripts from primary breast cancer. These analyses show that the expressions of cyclin D1a and cyclin D1b are not related by means of a simple linear relationship. Such a finding is supported by our analyses of cyclin D1b levels in breast cancer, and similar analyses in mantle cell lymphoma ( Carrere et al ., 2005 ; Krieger et al ., 2006 ) and prostate cancer ( Comstock et al ., 2009 ). Consistent with these results, in cell culture models, the levels of cyclin D1 isoforms are differentially regulated by ER antagonists and DNA damage signals ( Wang et al ., 2008 ). Thus, the relative production of cyclin D1a and D1b may reflect differences in the tumor-specific signaling pathways or tissue context of the tumor. As such, outcomes associated with cyclin D1b are not merely a reflection of an overabundance of cyclin D1 protein. The importance of cyclin D1 as a marker for outcome in breast cancer is somewhat controversial. Although >50% of breast cancers express cyclin D1 at elevated levels, a significant majority of these tumors are of the ER-positive luminal subtype, which is generally associated with better prognosis ( Gillett et al ., 1994 , 1996 ; Barnes and Gillett, 1998 ; Roy and Thompson, 2006 ). From our analyses, we found that cyclin D1a levels were elevated predominantly in ER-positive tumors, were inversely correlated with Ki67 and had little impact on disease outcome in the cohort analysed when dichotomized about the median into high and low expressors. In contrast, elevated levels of cyclin D1b protein were independent of a variety of clinicopathological features, including Ki67 and ER. However, in marked contrast to cyclin D1a, elevated cyclin D1b was associated with poor overall survival, recurrence and metastasis independent of other commonly analysed prognostic variables. Thus, cyclin D1b identifies a unique subset of tumors associated with increased disease progression. In keeping with cyclin D1b acting independently of cyclin D1a, the association of cyclin D1b with disease outcome was not modulated by the status of cyclin D1a. In addition, cyclin D1b levels were independent of Her2. However, owing to the limited number of Her2-positive tumors in our cohorts, we were unable to address whether cyclin D1b status influenced disease outcome in this subset. In contrast, stratification of patients based on ER status provides a compelling rationale for investigating cyclin D1b function in discrete subtypes of breast cancer. Among ER-positive breast cancers, high levels of cyclin D1b, although trending toward poor outcome, were not significant. On the basis of the preclinical studies ( Wang et al ., 2008 ), it will be crucial to specifically interrogate the association of cyclin D1b levels to the response to endocrine therapies (for example, tamoxifen) in a setting free of cytotoxic agents. Clearly, larger studies will be required to specifically define the influence of cyclin D1b levels in ER-positive breast cancer and address the critical question of response to hormonal therapy. In contrast with ER-positive cancers, high levels of cyclin D1b were strongly associated with poor disease outcome in ER-negative breast cancers. As this form of the disease is characterized by relatively low cyclin D1a expression, this finding suggests that cyclin D1b may be particularly relevant in the etiology, progression and the ultimate poor prognosis associated with ER-negative breast cancer. Presumably, the differing survival could reflect an important impact of cyclin D1b on therapeutic interventions involved in the treatment of ER-negative breast cancer. However, this possibility remains to be explored in preclinical models. Combined, these studies provide critical insight into the association of the G/A870 polymorphism and cyclin D1 isoform expression with risk and progression of breast cancer, and in so doing show that cyclin D1b levels are independently associated with adverse disease outcome.  Supplementary Material Materials & Methods Supplemental tables 