Assessing tumor hypoxia by positron emission tomography with Cu-ATSM For the last several decades, hypoxia has been recognized to be one of the key factors in tumor aggression and an important impediment to local and distant control of malignant tumors. In addition, hypoxia is a major cause of failure of both radiation therapy and chemotherapy. It has been shown that hypoxia is an independent negative prognostic factor for patient outcome in various solid tumors. Clinical studies using polarographic oxygen electrodes, as a tool for measuring hypoxia, were the first to demonstrate the presence of hypoxia in human tumors and its association with poor prognosis. However, this method is invasive and has technical limitations that prevent its routine clinical use. Over the years, imaging as a noninvasive method has attracted a lot of attention and several radiotracers have been developed for noninvasive evaluation of hypoxia. One of the most promising radiotracers is the copper(II) complex of diacetyl-2,3- bis ( N 4 -methyl-3-thiosemicarbazonato) ligand (Cu-ATSM) for imaging with positron emission tomography. In this review, the preclinical evaluation of Cu-ATSM as well as its clinical value in several solid tumors will be discussed.  Conclusions Pretherapy information on the oxygenation status of a tumor could play an important role in treatment selection. Studies of human solid tumors have shown that 60Cu-ATSM-PET is a promising method for assessment of tumor hypoxia and has the potential to be clinically useful in the management of oncologic patients. Although the information about tumor oxygenation and thus outcome can be obtained with the oxygen electrode method, imaging with 60Cu-ATSM-PET offers several important advantages including the ability to perform repeated, noninvasive assessment of hypoxia within the entire tumor regardless of the tumor’s location. Future clinical studies with 64Cu-ATSM would be of great importance in establishing this tracer as a clinical imaging method for selecting hypoxic tumors to be treated with hypoxia-targeted therapies and monitoring the effectiveness of such therapies. This method can be used to identify patients for clinical trials of treatment strategies designed to overcome hypoxia. 