MicroRNA polymorphisms: the future of pharmacogenomics, molecular epidemiology and individualized medicine Referred to as the micromanagers of gene expression, microRNAs (miRNAs) are evolutionarily conserved small noncoding RNAs. Polymorphisms in the miRNA pathway (miR-polymorphisms) are emerging as powerful tools to study the biology of a disease and have the potential to be used in disease prognosis and diagnosis. Detection of miR-polymorphisms holds promise in the field of miRNA pharmacogenomics, molecular epidemiology and for individualized medicine. MiRNA pharmacogenomics can be defined as the study of miRNAs and polymorphisms affecting miRNA function in order to predict drug behavior and to improve drug efficacy. Advancements in the miRNA field indicate the clear involvement of miRNAs and genetic variations within the miRNA pathway in the progression and prognosis of diseases such as cancer, neurological disorders, muscular hypertrophy, gastric mucosal atrophy, cardiovascular disease and Type II diabetes. Various algorithms are available to predict miRNA-target mRNA sites; however, it is advisable to use multiple algorithms to confirm the predictions. Polymorphisms that may potentially affect miRNA-mediated regulation of the cell can be present not only in the 3?-UTR of a miRNA target gene, but also in the genes involved in miRNA biogenesis and in pri-, pre- and mature-miRNA sequences. A polymorphism in processed miRNAs may affect expression of several genes and have serious consequences, whereas a polymorphism in miRNA target site, in the 3?-UTR of the target mRNA, may be more target and/or pathway specific. In this review, we for the first time suggest a classification of miRNA polymorphisms/mutations. We also describe the importance and implications of miR-polymorphisms in gene regulation, disease progression, pharmacogenomics and molecular epidemiology.  Implications of miR-polymorphisms to pharmacogenomics & epidemiology MiRNAs are associated with disease progression and can be used in the clinic to predict drug prognosis. MiR-polymorphisms have been shown to affect drug response and have the potential to confer drug resistance ( Figure 4 ) [ 9 ]. A GWA study of human SNPs has revealed the association of several polymorphisms in the miRNA binding sites [ 40 ]. Some of these variations may have biological relevance and are worth further investigation in case–control studies examining their association with certain biological or pathological events. Some of the recent case–control studies have revealed the important role of miR-polymorphisms; these polymorphisms should be further functionally characterized. Table 2 lists some of the functional algorithms that are available on the web to predict miRNA-targets and the evolutionary conservation of a miRNA and its binding site. Each of these algorithms follows distinct criteria to predict a miRNA-target sequence. A miRNA-target mRNA site predicted by one program many times is not the same as that predicted by another algorithm. Hence, it is advisable to use multiple algorithms to predict a miRNA binding sites on the target mRNA [ 39 , 92 , 93 ]. MiRNA-dependent target repression requires both sequence similarities and target accessibility. The best method to identify a miR-polymorphism is to combine computational predictions and functional studies. Evolutionary conservation of a miRNA binding site may be a key to help identify a valid miRNA binding site; however, the length of the 3?-UTR has increased with evolutionary age and the human 3?-UTRs, which are the longest, may hold some novel miRNA sites that would otherwise be ignored by the conservation algorithms. Also the length of 3?-UTRs provide significant potential for miRNA-mediated transcript-specific gene regulation, where a target gene can be regulated by several miRNAs and by various other regulatory elements in coordination. Recently it was demonstrated that proliferating cells tends to express mRNAs with shortened 3?-UTRs and fewer miRNA target sites as compared with the nonproliferating cells [ 94 ]. Further analysis to how functional miR-polymorphisms affect the interactions between miRNA and other regulatory elements present 3?-UTRs will shed more light on the functional aspect of miR-polymorphisms and will establish the 3?-UTR as a hot spot for epidemiology and individualized medicine.  Implications of miR-polymorphisms to pharmacogenomics & epidemiology MiRNAs are associated with disease progression and can be used in the clinic to predict drug prognosis. MiR-polymorphisms have been shown to affect drug response and have the potential to confer drug resistance ( Figure 4 ) [ 9 ]. A GWA study of human SNPs has revealed the association of several polymorphisms in the miRNA binding sites [ 40 ]. Some of these variations may have biological relevance and are worth further investigation in case–control studies examining their association with certain biological or pathological events. Some of the recent case–control studies have revealed the important role of miR-polymorphisms; these polymorphisms should be further functionally characterized. Table 2 lists some of the functional algorithms that are available on the web to predict miRNA-targets and the evolutionary conservation of a miRNA and its binding site. Each of these algorithms follows distinct criteria to predict a miRNA-target sequence. A miRNA-target mRNA site predicted by one program many times is not the same as that predicted by another algorithm. Hence, it is advisable to use multiple algorithms to predict a miRNA binding sites on the target mRNA [ 39 , 92 , 93 ]. MiRNA-dependent target repression requires both sequence similarities and target accessibility. The best method to identify a miR-polymorphism is to combine computational predictions and functional studies. Evolutionary conservation of a miRNA binding site may be a key to help identify a valid miRNA binding site; however, the length of the 3?-UTR has increased with evolutionary age and the human 3?-UTRs, which are the longest, may hold some novel miRNA sites that would otherwise be ignored by the conservation algorithms. Also the length of 3?-UTRs provide significant potential for miRNA-mediated transcript-specific gene regulation, where a target gene can be regulated by several miRNAs and by various other regulatory elements in coordination. Recently it was demonstrated that proliferating cells tends to express mRNAs with shortened 3?-UTRs and fewer miRNA target sites as compared with the nonproliferating cells [ 94 ]. Further analysis to how functional miR-polymorphisms affect the interactions between miRNA and other regulatory elements present 3?-UTRs will shed more light on the functional aspect of miR-polymorphisms and will establish the 3?-UTR as a hot spot for epidemiology and individualized medicine.  Future perspective In the past 2 years alone, over 2000 miRNA sequences from 58 different species were submitted to the miRBase, the central online repository for miRNA, making a total of 5071 miRNA loci, expressing 5922 distinct mature miRNA sequences [ 12 ]. Many of these miRNAs may be clade- (a taxonomic group with a single common ancestor) or even organism-specific [ 17 – 19 ]. Since polymorphisms in a miRNA pathway can result in the loss or gain of a miRNA function and can affect expression of hundreds of genes, this new class of polymorphisms may provide clues to many unanswered fundamental questions associated with disease and evolution. There are fewer genes and proteins than anticipated in the genome of humans and other species; how then can we account for the various races or the many species that exist today? Since cells with mutant miRNA with altered functions are almost certainly subject to selective pressures, miR-polymorphisms may introduce a whole new perspective to the theory of evolution and may explain wide differences between races and also between species. In the future polymorphisms in miRNA target sites may become one of the largest forms of variation present among species. We propose in Table 1 and Figure 3 that various types of miR-polymorphisms exist in the human genome. However, each type of miR-polymorphism and its effects needs to be experimentally verified. These polymorphisms may potentially influence miRNA biogenesis and target regulation and may have deleterious effect on the cell and the individual. Other than polymorphisms, various miRNA genes affected by epigenetic silencing due to aberrant hypermethylation were found to be an early and frequent event in breast cancer development. In this review we also propose that miR-polymorphisms can alter epigenetic regulation of a miRNA and can be a mechanism of disease progression. MiR-polymorphism-mediated epigenetic alteration of miRNA regulation is a new, unexplored area of research. Hence it seems that silencing miRNA-mediated regulation is a common mechanism involved in disease progression and may result in abnormal function of the cell. Cells with abnormal miRNA functions could be selected and amplified, contributing to diseases. Thus miR-polymorphisms are emerging as a powerful tool to study the biology of a disease, and have tremendous potential to be used in disease prognosis and diagnosis. Understanding the role and functions of miR-polymorphisms has a promising future in pharmacogenomics, molecular epidemiology and individualized medicine. Executive summary ? Generally, miRNAs regulate gene-expression or a target gene by binding to its 3?-UTR. MiRNAs can potentially regulate expression of multiple genes and pathways. MicroRNA-polymorphisms/-SNPs/-mutations can interfere with microRNA function ? A cell with a variant microRNA (miRNA) may be naturally selected. A sequence variation in the miRNA pathway can affect the expression of multiple genes and may affect the overall clinical efficacy of a drug. Classifying miR-polymorphisms & mutations ? In a population, miR-polymorphisms can be present either in a heterozygous or homozygous configuration, in the form of insertions, deletions, amplifications or chromosomal translocations, resulting in loss or gain of a miRNA site/function. ? Polymorphisms affecting mi-RNA biogenesis such as polymorphisms in pri- and pre-miRNA transcripts; polymorphisms in mature miRNA, including miRNA 5?-seed region and miRNA 3?-mismatch tolerant region (3?-MTR); polymorphisms affecting expression of the proteins involved in various steps of miRNA biogenesis in such as transcription, processing, export and targeting. ? At or near a miRNA target site such as polymorphisms at miRNA binding region, where the seed region of miRNA binds and where3?-MTR of a miRNA binds; polymorphisms near miRNA binding region, affecting the accessibility of a miRNA–RISC complex and affecting the coordination of miRNA with other regulatory elements present in 3?-UTR of the target transcript. ? Altering epigenetic regulation of miRNA genes: in this review we propose that polymorphisms affecting acetylation and methylation of genes will have a broad impact. Role of miR-polymorphisms in disease progression, diagnosis & prognosis ? Neurological disorders: Tourette’s syndrome and attention deficit–hyperactivity disorder patients: a polymorphism in SLITRK1 gene strengthens an existing miR-189 target site; Henoch-Schonlein Purpura patients: three polymorphisms (i.e., 606+50G/A, 606+43G/T in miR-140 and 606+14C/T in miR-691) affect expression of REEP1 gene; aggressive behavior: A>G polymorphism, affecting miR-96 mediated regulation of the HTR1B gene. ? Muscular hypertrophy: in Texel sheep, a G>A mutation in GDF8 allele of the myostatin gene, creates a potential illegitimate miRNA target sites for miR-1 and miR-206 and downregulation of myostatin gene. ? Hypertension and cardiovascular disease: An 1166A>C polymorphism affects miR-155 mediated regulation of the AGTR1 gene. ? Cancer: pre-miRNA polymorphism associated with cancers such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-small-cell lung cancer, papillary thyroid carcinoma and breast cancer are reported. Colorectal cancer: Eeight polymorphisms within miRNA-binding sites were found to have a positive association with a risk of sporadic colorectal cancer. Papillary thyroid carcinoma: KIT gene, two polymorphisms in the miR-221/222 and miR-146a/146b miRNA binding sites. Breast cancer – ITGB4 SNP may influence breast tumor aggressiveness and survival, and it may have prognostic value in the clinic. A chromosomal translocation disrupts the let-7 miRNA mediated regulation of HMGa2 oncogene. ? Gastric mucosal atrophy: a polymorphism of miR-27a genome region was found to be associated with the development of gastric mucosal atrophy in Japanese male subjects. ? Type II diabetes: ACAA-insertion/deletion polymorphism, associated with Type II diabetes, was found to be present in between the miR-657 and miR-453 binding sites within the 3?-UTR of IGF2R . MiR-polymorphisms alter drug response ? The role of miRNA in drug-resistance/sensitivity was recently realized in a study that demonstrated that a miRSNP 829 C-T, present in the DHFR gene, near a miR-24 binding site, was associated with methotrexate drug resistance/sensitivity. The SNP is present with a 14.2% allelic frequency in the Japanese population. The finding may be useful in predicting the clinical outcome of methotrexate treatment in the clinic. MiRNA pharmacogenomics ? MiRNA pharmacogenomics can be defined as the study of miRNAs and polymorphisms affecting miRNA function in order to predict drug behavior and to improve drug efficiency. MiR-polymorphisms could be potential predictors of drug response in the clinic and may provide more accurate methods of determining appropriate drug dosages based on a patient’s genetic makeup, thus decreasing the likelihood of drug overdose. Implications of miR-polymorphisms to pharmacogenomics & epidemiology ? A combination of the computational predictions and the functional studies are needed to validate a functional miR-polymorphism. Thus miRNAs and miR-polymorphisms are powerful tools to study disease progression and can be used in the clinic to predict drug prognosis.  Future perspective In the past 2 years alone, over 2000 miRNA sequences from 58 different species were submitted to the miRBase, the central online repository for miRNA, making a total of 5071 miRNA loci, expressing 5922 distinct mature miRNA sequences [ 12 ]. Many of these miRNAs may be clade- (a taxonomic group with a single common ancestor) or even organism-specific [ 17 – 19 ]. Since polymorphisms in a miRNA pathway can result in the loss or gain of a miRNA function and can affect expression of hundreds of genes, this new class of polymorphisms may provide clues to many unanswered fundamental questions associated with disease and evolution. There are fewer genes and proteins than anticipated in the genome of humans and other species; how then can we account for the various races or the many species that exist today? Since cells with mutant miRNA with altered functions are almost certainly subject to selective pressures, miR-polymorphisms may introduce a whole new perspective to the theory of evolution and may explain wide differences between races and also between species. In the future polymorphisms in miRNA target sites may become one of the largest forms of variation present among species. We propose in Table 1 and Figure 3 that various types of miR-polymorphisms exist in the human genome. However, each type of miR-polymorphism and its effects needs to be experimentally verified. These polymorphisms may potentially influence miRNA biogenesis and target regulation and may have deleterious effect on the cell and the individual. Other than polymorphisms, various miRNA genes affected by epigenetic silencing due to aberrant hypermethylation were found to be an early and frequent event in breast cancer development. In this review we also propose that miR-polymorphisms can alter epigenetic regulation of a miRNA and can be a mechanism of disease progression. MiR-polymorphism-mediated epigenetic alteration of miRNA regulation is a new, unexplored area of research. Hence it seems that silencing miRNA-mediated regulation is a common mechanism involved in disease progression and may result in abnormal function of the cell. Cells with abnormal miRNA functions could be selected and amplified, contributing to diseases. Thus miR-polymorphisms are emerging as a powerful tool to study the biology of a disease, and have tremendous potential to be used in disease prognosis and diagnosis. Understanding the role and functions of miR-polymorphisms has a promising future in pharmacogenomics, molecular epidemiology and individualized medicine. Executive summary ? Generally, miRNAs regulate gene-expression or a target gene by binding to its 3?-UTR. MiRNAs can potentially regulate expression of multiple genes and pathways. MicroRNA-polymorphisms/-SNPs/-mutations can interfere with microRNA function ? A cell with a variant microRNA (miRNA) may be naturally selected. A sequence variation in the miRNA pathway can affect the expression of multiple genes and may affect the overall clinical efficacy of a drug. Classifying miR-polymorphisms & mutations ? In a population, miR-polymorphisms can be present either in a heterozygous or homozygous configuration, in the form of insertions, deletions, amplifications or chromosomal translocations, resulting in loss or gain of a miRNA site/function. ? Polymorphisms affecting mi-RNA biogenesis such as polymorphisms in pri- and pre-miRNA transcripts; polymorphisms in mature miRNA, including miRNA 5?-seed region and miRNA 3?-mismatch tolerant region (3?-MTR); polymorphisms affecting expression of the proteins involved in various steps of miRNA biogenesis in such as transcription, processing, export and targeting. ? At or near a miRNA target site such as polymorphisms at miRNA binding region, where the seed region of miRNA binds and where3?-MTR of a miRNA binds; polymorphisms near miRNA binding region, affecting the accessibility of a miRNA–RISC complex and affecting the coordination of miRNA with other regulatory elements present in 3?-UTR of the target transcript. ? Altering epigenetic regulation of miRNA genes: in this review we propose that polymorphisms affecting acetylation and methylation of genes will have a broad impact. Role of miR-polymorphisms in disease progression, diagnosis & prognosis ? Neurological disorders: Tourette’s syndrome and attention deficit–hyperactivity disorder patients: a polymorphism in SLITRK1 gene strengthens an existing miR-189 target site; Henoch-Schonlein Purpura patients: three polymorphisms (i.e., 606+50G/A, 606+43G/T in miR-140 and 606+14C/T in miR-691) affect expression of REEP1 gene; aggressive behavior: A>G polymorphism, affecting miR-96 mediated regulation of the HTR1B gene. ? Muscular hypertrophy: in Texel sheep, a G>A mutation in GDF8 allele of the myostatin gene, creates a potential illegitimate miRNA target sites for miR-1 and miR-206 and downregulation of myostatin gene. ? Hypertension and cardiovascular disease: An 1166A>C polymorphism affects miR-155 mediated regulation of the AGTR1 gene. ? Cancer: pre-miRNA polymorphism associated with cancers such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-small-cell lung cancer, papillary thyroid carcinoma and breast cancer are reported. Colorectal cancer: Eeight polymorphisms within miRNA-binding sites were found to have a positive association with a risk of sporadic colorectal cancer. Papillary thyroid carcinoma: KIT gene, two polymorphisms in the miR-221/222 and miR-146a/146b miRNA binding sites. Breast cancer – ITGB4 SNP may influence breast tumor aggressiveness and survival, and it may have prognostic value in the clinic. A chromosomal translocation disrupts the let-7 miRNA mediated regulation of HMGa2 oncogene. ? Gastric mucosal atrophy: a polymorphism of miR-27a genome region was found to be associated with the development of gastric mucosal atrophy in Japanese male subjects. ? Type II diabetes: ACAA-insertion/deletion polymorphism, associated with Type II diabetes, was found to be present in between the miR-657 and miR-453 binding sites within the 3?-UTR of IGF2R . MiR-polymorphisms alter drug response ? The role of miRNA in drug-resistance/sensitivity was recently realized in a study that demonstrated that a miRSNP 829 C-T, present in the DHFR gene, near a miR-24 binding site, was associated with methotrexate drug resistance/sensitivity. The SNP is present with a 14.2% allelic frequency in the Japanese population. The finding may be useful in predicting the clinical outcome of methotrexate treatment in the clinic. MiRNA pharmacogenomics ? MiRNA pharmacogenomics can be defined as the study of miRNAs and polymorphisms affecting miRNA function in order to predict drug behavior and to improve drug efficiency. MiR-polymorphisms could be potential predictors of drug response in the clinic and may provide more accurate methods of determining appropriate drug dosages based on a patient’s genetic makeup, thus decreasing the likelihood of drug overdose. Implications of miR-polymorphisms to pharmacogenomics & epidemiology ? A combination of the computational predictions and the functional studies are needed to validate a functional miR-polymorphism. Thus miRNAs and miR-polymorphisms are powerful tools to study disease progression and can be used in the clinic to predict drug prognosis.  Executive summary ? Generally, miRNAs regulate gene-expression or a target gene by binding to its 3?-UTR. MiRNAs can potentially regulate expression of multiple genes and pathways. MicroRNA-polymorphisms/-SNPs/-mutations can interfere with microRNA function ? A cell with a variant microRNA (miRNA) may be naturally selected. A sequence variation in the miRNA pathway can affect the expression of multiple genes and may affect the overall clinical efficacy of a drug. Classifying miR-polymorphisms & mutations ? In a population, miR-polymorphisms can be present either in a heterozygous or homozygous configuration, in the form of insertions, deletions, amplifications or chromosomal translocations, resulting in loss or gain of a miRNA site/function. ? Polymorphisms affecting mi-RNA biogenesis such as polymorphisms in pri- and pre-miRNA transcripts; polymorphisms in mature miRNA, including miRNA 5?-seed region and miRNA 3?-mismatch tolerant region (3?-MTR); polymorphisms affecting expression of the proteins involved in various steps of miRNA biogenesis in such as transcription, processing, export and targeting. ? At or near a miRNA target site such as polymorphisms at miRNA binding region, where the seed region of miRNA binds and where3?-MTR of a miRNA binds; polymorphisms near miRNA binding region, affecting the accessibility of a miRNA–RISC complex and affecting the coordination of miRNA with other regulatory elements present in 3?-UTR of the target transcript. ? Altering epigenetic regulation of miRNA genes: in this review we propose that polymorphisms affecting acetylation and methylation of genes will have a broad impact. Role of miR-polymorphisms in disease progression, diagnosis & prognosis ? Neurological disorders: Tourette’s syndrome and attention deficit–hyperactivity disorder patients: a polymorphism in SLITRK1 gene strengthens an existing miR-189 target site; Henoch-Schonlein Purpura patients: three polymorphisms (i.e., 606+50G/A, 606+43G/T in miR-140 and 606+14C/T in miR-691) affect expression of REEP1 gene; aggressive behavior: A>G polymorphism, affecting miR-96 mediated regulation of the HTR1B gene. ? Muscular hypertrophy: in Texel sheep, a G>A mutation in GDF8 allele of the myostatin gene, creates a potential illegitimate miRNA target sites for miR-1 and miR-206 and downregulation of myostatin gene. ? Hypertension and cardiovascular disease: An 1166A>C polymorphism affects miR-155 mediated regulation of the AGTR1 gene. ? Cancer: pre-miRNA polymorphism associated with cancers such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-small-cell lung cancer, papillary thyroid carcinoma and breast cancer are reported. Colorectal cancer: Eeight polymorphisms within miRNA-binding sites were found to have a positive association with a risk of sporadic colorectal cancer. Papillary thyroid carcinoma: KIT gene, two polymorphisms in the miR-221/222 and miR-146a/146b miRNA binding sites. Breast cancer – ITGB4 SNP may influence breast tumor aggressiveness and survival, and it may have prognostic value in the clinic. A chromosomal translocation disrupts the let-7 miRNA mediated regulation of HMGa2 oncogene. ? Gastric mucosal atrophy: a polymorphism of miR-27a genome region was found to be associated with the development of gastric mucosal atrophy in Japanese male subjects. ? Type II diabetes: ACAA-insertion/deletion polymorphism, associated with Type II diabetes, was found to be present in between the miR-657 and miR-453 binding sites within the 3?-UTR of IGF2R . MiR-polymorphisms alter drug response ? The role of miRNA in drug-resistance/sensitivity was recently realized in a study that demonstrated that a miRSNP 829 C-T, present in the DHFR gene, near a miR-24 binding site, was associated with methotrexate drug resistance/sensitivity. The SNP is present with a 14.2% allelic frequency in the Japanese population. The finding may be useful in predicting the clinical outcome of methotrexate treatment in the clinic. MiRNA pharmacogenomics ? MiRNA pharmacogenomics can be defined as the study of miRNAs and polymorphisms affecting miRNA function in order to predict drug behavior and to improve drug efficiency. MiR-polymorphisms could be potential predictors of drug response in the clinic and may provide more accurate methods of determining appropriate drug dosages based on a patient’s genetic makeup, thus decreasing the likelihood of drug overdose. Implications of miR-polymorphisms to pharmacogenomics & epidemiology ? A combination of the computational predictions and the functional studies are needed to validate a functional miR-polymorphism. Thus miRNAs and miR-polymorphisms are powerful tools to study disease progression and can be used in the clinic to predict drug prognosis.  Executive summary ? Generally, miRNAs regulate gene-expression or a target gene by binding to its 3?-UTR. MiRNAs can potentially regulate expression of multiple genes and pathways. MicroRNA-polymorphisms/-SNPs/-mutations can interfere with microRNA function ? A cell with a variant microRNA (miRNA) may be naturally selected. A sequence variation in the miRNA pathway can affect the expression of multiple genes and may affect the overall clinical efficacy of a drug. Classifying miR-polymorphisms & mutations ? In a population, miR-polymorphisms can be present either in a heterozygous or homozygous configuration, in the form of insertions, deletions, amplifications or chromosomal translocations, resulting in loss or gain of a miRNA site/function. ? Polymorphisms affecting mi-RNA biogenesis such as polymorphisms in pri- and pre-miRNA transcripts; polymorphisms in mature miRNA, including miRNA 5?-seed region and miRNA 3?-mismatch tolerant region (3?-MTR); polymorphisms affecting expression of the proteins involved in various steps of miRNA biogenesis in such as transcription, processing, export and targeting. ? At or near a miRNA target site such as polymorphisms at miRNA binding region, where the seed region of miRNA binds and where3?-MTR of a miRNA binds; polymorphisms near miRNA binding region, affecting the accessibility of a miRNA–RISC complex and affecting the coordination of miRNA with other regulatory elements present in 3?-UTR of the target transcript. ? Altering epigenetic regulation of miRNA genes: in this review we propose that polymorphisms affecting acetylation and methylation of genes will have a broad impact. Role of miR-polymorphisms in disease progression, diagnosis & prognosis ? Neurological disorders: Tourette’s syndrome and attention deficit–hyperactivity disorder patients: a polymorphism in SLITRK1 gene strengthens an existing miR-189 target site; Henoch-Schonlein Purpura patients: three polymorphisms (i.e., 606+50G/A, 606+43G/T in miR-140 and 606+14C/T in miR-691) affect expression of REEP1 gene; aggressive behavior: A>G polymorphism, affecting miR-96 mediated regulation of the HTR1B gene. ? Muscular hypertrophy: in Texel sheep, a G>A mutation in GDF8 allele of the myostatin gene, creates a potential illegitimate miRNA target sites for miR-1 and miR-206 and downregulation of myostatin gene. ? Hypertension and cardiovascular disease: An 1166A>C polymorphism affects miR-155 mediated regulation of the AGTR1 gene. ? Cancer: pre-miRNA polymorphism associated with cancers such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-small-cell lung cancer, papillary thyroid carcinoma and breast cancer are reported. Colorectal cancer: Eeight polymorphisms within miRNA-binding sites were found to have a positive association with a risk of sporadic colorectal cancer. Papillary thyroid carcinoma: KIT gene, two polymorphisms in the miR-221/222 and miR-146a/146b miRNA binding sites. Breast cancer – ITGB4 SNP may influence breast tumor aggressiveness and survival, and it may have prognostic value in the clinic. A chromosomal translocation disrupts the let-7 miRNA mediated regulation of HMGa2 oncogene. ? Gastric mucosal atrophy: a polymorphism of miR-27a genome region was found to be associated with the development of gastric mucosal atrophy in Japanese male subjects. ? Type II diabetes: ACAA-insertion/deletion polymorphism, associated with Type II diabetes, was found to be present in between the miR-657 and miR-453 binding sites within the 3?-UTR of IGF2R . MiR-polymorphisms alter drug response ? The role of miRNA in drug-resistance/sensitivity was recently realized in a study that demonstrated that a miRSNP 829 C-T, present in the DHFR gene, near a miR-24 binding site, was associated with methotrexate drug resistance/sensitivity. The SNP is present with a 14.2% allelic frequency in the Japanese population. The finding may be useful in predicting the clinical outcome of methotrexate treatment in the clinic. MiRNA pharmacogenomics ? MiRNA pharmacogenomics can be defined as the study of miRNAs and polymorphisms affecting miRNA function in order to predict drug behavior and to improve drug efficiency. MiR-polymorphisms could be potential predictors of drug response in the clinic and may provide more accurate methods of determining appropriate drug dosages based on a patient’s genetic makeup, thus decreasing the likelihood of drug overdose. Implications of miR-polymorphisms to pharmacogenomics & epidemiology ? A combination of the computational predictions and the functional studies are needed to validate a functional miR-polymorphism. Thus miRNAs and miR-polymorphisms are powerful tools to study disease progression and can be used in the clinic to predict drug prognosis.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 MiRNA biogenesis and function (A) A miRNA gene is transcribed by RNA polymerase II, resulting in a hairpin-shaped pri-miRNA that is approximately 500–3000 bases long. (B) The pri-miRNA is further processed by Drosha/Pasha to form a 60–70-nucleotide long pre-miRNA, (C) which is transported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm with the help of Exportin-5/Ran GTP through nuclear pore complexes. (D) The pre-miRNA is then identified and further cleaved in the cytoplasm by an RNase III endonuclease, Dicer (E) , to release two complementary short RNA molecules (F). (G) The argonaut protein complex selectively binds to the guide strand and facilitates the formation of the miRNA–RISC assembly [ 18 ]. (H) Upon miRNA binding the RISC complex is activated and, by a mechanism that is still unclear, locates its binding site in the 3?-UTR of the target mRNA contributes to regulation of gene expression by translation inhibition and/or mRNA degradation [ 4 , 19 – 21 ]. Polymorphisms involved in any of these eight steps can potentially affect miRNA-mediated regulation of the cell. MiRNA: MicroRNA; RISC: RNA-induced silencing complex. Figure 2 MiRNA–mRNA hybrid regions Using the human let-7 family of miRNAs (let7a-g and i), we compare the pre- and the processed miRNA regions. (A) MiRNA primarily consists of two regions: the 5?-region of a miRNA, from positions 2–7, called the ‘seed’ region, which is thought to confer much of the target recognition specificity; and the miRNA region, other than seed region, which is able to tolerate mismatches to a certain extent. To refer to the 3?-region of a miRNA, other than the seed region, we coin the term 3?-MTR. MiRNA binds to the target mRNA with Watson–Crick complementarity. Unlike the miRNA 3?-MTR, the seed region is very sensitive to mismatch. Although very rare, a miRNA seed region polymorphism has a potential to affect the expression of hundreds of target genes. On the other hand, polymorphisms in the target mRNA, where the miRNA-seed region binds, can potentially affect the miRNA-mediated regulation of individual target genes. Although the 3?-MTR of a miRNA can tolerate SNPs to a certain extent, multiple SNPs, insertions, deletions or translocations in this region, can potentially affect the miRNA-mediated regulation of the target gene. (B) A few pre-miRNA precursors of the human let-7 miRNA family are shown (using MiRNAMP, see Table 2 for details). Although variations in the 3?-MTR exist within the let-7 miRNA family of miRNAs, all the members have a unique conserved seed sequence (GAGGUA). MiRNA: MicroRNA; MTR: Mismatch tolerant region. Figure 3 MiR-polymorphisms affecting miRNA function We predict that polymorphisms present in the target mRNA, pri-miRNA, pre-miRNA, processed miRNA, Drosha, Dicer, exportin5-ranGTP and in the RISC complex may affect miRNA-mediated regulation in the cell. The miR-polymorphisms can be present in the form of insertions, deletions, amplifications, chromosomal translocations and so on, leading to loss or gain of a miRNA site/function [ 9 ]. The miR-polymorphisms could exist in either a heterozygous or homozygous state within a population. Since miRNAs are predicted to regulate genes involved in multiple pathways [ 14 ], miR-polymorphisms may affect the miRNA-mediated regulation of genes involved in cell death, cell proliferation, stress resistance and altered fat metabolism, and may potentially contribute to diseases and drug response [ 9 ]. MiRNA: MicroRNA; RISC: RNA-induced silencing complex. Figure 4 A model whereby miR-polymorphisms influence drug response The miRNA binds to the RISC and the resulting complex locates and binds to the 3?-UTR of a drug target gene (a gene product that is directly inhibited by binding of a drug), regulating its expression and resulting in less net drug-target protein in the cell. MiRNA polymorphisms can also interfere with miRNA binding and function, resulting in increased translation of the drug-target protein in cells that express the polymorphism, leading to drug resistance [ 4 , 5 , 9 , 10 ]. If the miRNA target protein is a ‘drug-effector protein’ (a protein that enhances the effect of a drug), its increased level resulting from a miR-polymorphism will result in drug sensitivity. Vice versa will also be true: if a miR-polymorphism results in a gain of miRNA function, it will cause downregulation of both drug-target and the drug-effector proteins resulting in drug sensitivity and drug resistance, respectively. MiRNA: MicroRNA; RISC: RNA-induced silencing complex. Table 1 Suggested classification of miR-polymorphisms and -mutations. Types of miR-polymorphisms or -mutations miR-polymorphisms miRNA, target Association Ref. (A) Affecting miRNA biogenesis (broad impact * ) 1) In pri- and pre-miRNA transcripts C>T MiR-15/16 Leukemia [ 31 , 48 ] i) Pri-miRNA transcript 12 SNPs Multiple [ 46 ] ii) Pre-miRNA hairpin Seven SNPs Multiple [ 47 ] MiR-196a [ 51 ] MiR-146a [ 52 ] MiR-196a2 [ 53 ] Viral miR-K5 Affects Drosha processing [ 60 ] 2) Polymorphisms in mature miRNA (rare, broad impact) SNP MiR-608 [ 47 ] i) miRNA 5?-seed region Mutation Plant miR-319a [ 54 ] ii) miRNA 3?-MTR Seed SNP MiR-125a [ 56 ] 3) Affecting expression of the proteins involved in various steps of miRNA biogenesis ND ND ND ND i) Transcription ii) Processing iii) Export iii) Targeting (B) MiRNA target site polymorphisms (abundant, narrow impact ‡ ) 1) At a miRNA binding site var321-SLITRK1 MiR-189, SLITRK1 miR-140, REEP1 Tourette’s syndrome [ 89 ] i) Where the seed region of miRNA binds 606+50G/A, 606+43G>T MiR-140, REEP1 Hereditary spastic paraplegia 31 [ 63 ] ii) Where 3?-MTR of a miRNA binds G>A (Sheep) MiR-1, 206, myostatin Hereditary spastic paraplegia 31 [ 63 ] 829 C>T MiR-24, DHFR Sheep, muscular hypertrophy [ 43 ] 2) Near a miRNA binding site 606+14C>T MiR-691, REEP1 Drug-resistance [ 4 , 5 , 9 , 10 ] i) Affecting the accessibility of a miRNA–RISC complex. 1166A>C (rs5186) MiR-155, AGTR1 Hereditary spastic paraplegia 31 [ 64 ] ii) Affecting the coordination of miRNA with other regulatory elements present in 3?-UTR of the target transcript. A>G (rs13212041) MiR-96, HTR1B Hypertension [ 67 , 68 ] C>T(rs93410170) MiR-206, ER-? Aggressive behavior [ 65 ] rs12720208 MiR-433, FGF20 Breast Cancer [ 57 ] C>G (rs17281995) MiR-337, 582, 200a, 184 and Parkinson’s disease [ 66 ] C>G (rs17281995) 212, CD86 Colorectal cancer [ 70 ] rs1051690 MiR-618, 612, INSR Colorectal cancer [ 69 ] Two SNPs KIT miR-221/222,146a/b Colorectal cancer [ 69 ] SNP rs743554 ITGB4 Papillary thyroid carcinoma [ 29 ] Translocation Let-7, HMGa2 Breast cancer [ 57 ] Polymorphism MiR-27a Breast cancer [ 71 ] G>A (rs62625044) MiR-510, HTR3A Gastric mucosal atrophy [ 73 ] ACAA-ins/del MiR-657, IGF2R Irritable bowel syndrome [ 74 ] Type II diabetes [ 90 ] (C) Altering epigenetic regulation of miRNA genes § (broad impact * ) i) Methylation ND ND ND ii) Acetylation * Broad impact: affecting expression of hundreds of genes. ‡ Narrow impact: affecting expression of only few genes, more gene/pathway specific effect. § In this review we propose that a miR-polymorphism or miR-mutation can potentially alter epigenetic regulation of a miRNA and can be a mechanism of disease progression. 3?-MTR: 3?-mismatch tolerant region of a miRNA; AGTR1: Angiotensin receptor 1; CD86: Cluster of differentiation 86; DHFR; Dihydrofolate reductase; ER- ? : Estrogen receptor- ? ; FGF20: Fibroblast growth factor 20; HMGa2: High Mobility Group A2; HTR1B: 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 1B; HTR3A: Serotonin receptor type 3 subunit; IGF2R: Insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor; INSR: Insulin receptor; ITGB4: Integrin ? 4; MiR: MicroRNA; MTR: Mismatch tolerant region; MTX: Methotrexate; ND: Not discovered yet (proposed); REEP1: Receptor expression-enhancing protein 1; SLITRK1: Human Slit and Trk-like 1. Table 2 List of algorithms to predict miRNA target interaction. Algorithm (URL) Brief description of the algorithm MiRBase ( http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/ ) Includes a searchable miRNA sequence database, a miRBase registry with miRNA gene nomenclature, and a miRBase targets database with predicted miRNA targets in animals [ 12 ] MiRanda ( http://cbio.mskcc.org/mirnaviewer/ ) Developed at the Computational Biology Center of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center(NY, USA) miRanda is an algorithm for finding genomic targets for miRNA, provides evolutionary conservation of the target mRNA, sequence complementarity of the mature miRNA and the target site, the binding energy of the miRNA–target duplex [ 95 ] TargetScan ( http://www.targetscan.org/ ) TargetScan is also a miRNA target prediction algorithm that predicts biological targets of miRNAs by searching for the presence of conserved 8mer and 7mer sites that match the seed region of each miRNA [ 96 ] PicTar ( http://pictar.bio.nyu.edu/ ) PicTar computes a maximum likelihood score that indicates to what extent a given mRNA 3?-UTR is targeted by a fixed set of miRNA [ 95 ] DIANA-MicroT ( http://diana.pcbi.upenn.edu/cgi-bin/micro_t.cgi ) Finds conserved miRNA target duplexes in human and mice with the least free-energy [ 97 ] PolymiRTS database( http://compbio.utmem.edu/miRSNP/help.php#search ) PolymiRTS database is a collection of naturally occurring DNA variations in putative miRNA target sites and integrates sequence polymorphism, phenotype and expression microarray data [ 98 ] MicroInspector ( http://mirna.imbb.forth.gr/microinspector/ ) MicroInspector generates a list of possible target sites, which are then sorted by free-energy values [ 99 ] Patrocles( http://www.patrocles.org/Patrocles.htm ) Compiles SNPs in the 3?-UTR of human and mouse genes that either create or destroy miRNA target sites [ 43 ] MiRNAMP ( http://mirnamap.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/ ) Provides miRNA expression profiles (tissue specificity and the differential expression in cancer/normal cells) A miRNA-target mRNA site predicted by one program most of the time may not be the same as predicted by another algorithm. Hence, it is advisable to use multiple algorithms to predict a miRNA binding site on the target mRNA [ 34 , 70 , 71 ].  Figures and Tables Figure 1 MiRNA biogenesis and function (A) A miRNA gene is transcribed by RNA polymerase II, resulting in a hairpin-shaped pri-miRNA that is approximately 500–3000 bases long. (B) The pri-miRNA is further processed by Drosha/Pasha to form a 60–70-nucleotide long pre-miRNA, (C) which is transported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm with the help of Exportin-5/Ran GTP through nuclear pore complexes. (D) The pre-miRNA is then identified and further cleaved in the cytoplasm by an RNase III endonuclease, Dicer (E) , to release two complementary short RNA molecules (F). (G) The argonaut protein complex selectively binds to the guide strand and facilitates the formation of the miRNA–RISC assembly [ 18 ]. (H) Upon miRNA binding the RISC complex is activated and, by a mechanism that is still unclear, locates its binding site in the 3?-UTR of the target mRNA contributes to regulation of gene expression by translation inhibition and/or mRNA degradation [ 4 , 19 – 21 ]. Polymorphisms involved in any of these eight steps can potentially affect miRNA-mediated regulation of the cell. MiRNA: MicroRNA; RISC: RNA-induced silencing complex. Figure 2 MiRNA–mRNA hybrid regions Using the human let-7 family of miRNAs (let7a-g and i), we compare the pre- and the processed miRNA regions. (A) MiRNA primarily consists of two regions: the 5?-region of a miRNA, from positions 2–7, called the ‘seed’ region, which is thought to confer much of the target recognition specificity; and the miRNA region, other than seed region, which is able to tolerate mismatches to a certain extent. To refer to the 3?-region of a miRNA, other than the seed region, we coin the term 3?-MTR. MiRNA binds to the target mRNA with Watson–Crick complementarity. Unlike the miRNA 3?-MTR, the seed region is very sensitive to mismatch. Although very rare, a miRNA seed region polymorphism has a potential to affect the expression of hundreds of target genes. On the other hand, polymorphisms in the target mRNA, where the miRNA-seed region binds, can potentially affect the miRNA-mediated regulation of individual target genes. Although the 3?-MTR of a miRNA can tolerate SNPs to a certain extent, multiple SNPs, insertions, deletions or translocations in this region, can potentially affect the miRNA-mediated regulation of the target gene. (B) A few pre-miRNA precursors of the human let-7 miRNA family are shown (using MiRNAMP, see Table 2 for details). Although variations in the 3?-MTR exist within the let-7 miRNA family of miRNAs, all the members have a unique conserved seed sequence (GAGGUA). MiRNA: MicroRNA; MTR: Mismatch tolerant region. Figure 3 MiR-polymorphisms affecting miRNA function We predict that polymorphisms present in the target mRNA, pri-miRNA, pre-miRNA, processed miRNA, Drosha, Dicer, exportin5-ranGTP and in the RISC complex may affect miRNA-mediated regulation in the cell. The miR-polymorphisms can be present in the form of insertions, deletions, amplifications, chromosomal translocations and so on, leading to loss or gain of a miRNA site/function [ 9 ]. The miR-polymorphisms could exist in either a heterozygous or homozygous state within a population. Since miRNAs are predicted to regulate genes involved in multiple pathways [ 14 ], miR-polymorphisms may affect the miRNA-mediated regulation of genes involved in cell death, cell proliferation, stress resistance and altered fat metabolism, and may potentially contribute to diseases and drug response [ 9 ]. MiRNA: MicroRNA; RISC: RNA-induced silencing complex. Figure 4 A model whereby miR-polymorphisms influence drug response The miRNA binds to the RISC and the resulting complex locates and binds to the 3?-UTR of a drug target gene (a gene product that is directly inhibited by binding of a drug), regulating its expression and resulting in less net drug-target protein in the cell. MiRNA polymorphisms can also interfere with miRNA binding and function, resulting in increased translation of the drug-target protein in cells that express the polymorphism, leading to drug resistance [ 4 , 5 , 9 , 10 ]. If the miRNA target protein is a ‘drug-effector protein’ (a protein that enhances the effect of a drug), its increased level resulting from a miR-polymorphism will result in drug sensitivity. Vice versa will also be true: if a miR-polymorphism results in a gain of miRNA function, it will cause downregulation of both drug-target and the drug-effector proteins resulting in drug sensitivity and drug resistance, respectively. MiRNA: MicroRNA; RISC: RNA-induced silencing complex. Table 1 Suggested classification of miR-polymorphisms and -mutations. Types of miR-polymorphisms or -mutations miR-polymorphisms miRNA, target Association Ref. (A) Affecting miRNA biogenesis (broad impact * ) 1) In pri- and pre-miRNA transcripts C>T MiR-15/16 Leukemia [ 31 , 48 ] i) Pri-miRNA transcript 12 SNPs Multiple [ 46 ] ii) Pre-miRNA hairpin Seven SNPs Multiple [ 47 ] MiR-196a [ 51 ] MiR-146a [ 52 ] MiR-196a2 [ 53 ] Viral miR-K5 Affects Drosha processing [ 60 ] 2) Polymorphisms in mature miRNA (rare, broad impact) SNP MiR-608 [ 47 ] i) miRNA 5?-seed region Mutation Plant miR-319a [ 54 ] ii) miRNA 3?-MTR Seed SNP MiR-125a [ 56 ] 3) Affecting expression of the proteins involved in various steps of miRNA biogenesis ND ND ND ND i) Transcription ii) Processing iii) Export iii) Targeting (B) MiRNA target site polymorphisms (abundant, narrow impact ‡ ) 1) At a miRNA binding site var321-SLITRK1 MiR-189, SLITRK1 miR-140, REEP1 Tourette’s syndrome [ 89 ] i) Where the seed region of miRNA binds 606+50G/A, 606+43G>T MiR-140, REEP1 Hereditary spastic paraplegia 31 [ 63 ] ii) Where 3?-MTR of a miRNA binds G>A (Sheep) MiR-1, 206, myostatin Hereditary spastic paraplegia 31 [ 63 ] 829 C>T MiR-24, DHFR Sheep, muscular hypertrophy [ 43 ] 2) Near a miRNA binding site 606+14C>T MiR-691, REEP1 Drug-resistance [ 4 , 5 , 9 , 10 ] i) Affecting the accessibility of a miRNA–RISC complex. 1166A>C (rs5186) MiR-155, AGTR1 Hereditary spastic paraplegia 31 [ 64 ] ii) Affecting the coordination of miRNA with other regulatory elements present in 3?-UTR of the target transcript. A>G (rs13212041) MiR-96, HTR1B Hypertension [ 67 , 68 ] C>T(rs93410170) MiR-206, ER-? Aggressive behavior [ 65 ] rs12720208 MiR-433, FGF20 Breast Cancer [ 57 ] C>G (rs17281995) MiR-337, 582, 200a, 184 and Parkinson’s disease [ 66 ] C>G (rs17281995) 212, CD86 Colorectal cancer [ 70 ] rs1051690 MiR-618, 612, INSR Colorectal cancer [ 69 ] Two SNPs KIT miR-221/222,146a/b Colorectal cancer [ 69 ] SNP rs743554 ITGB4 Papillary thyroid carcinoma [ 29 ] Translocation Let-7, HMGa2 Breast cancer [ 57 ] Polymorphism MiR-27a Breast cancer [ 71 ] G>A (rs62625044) MiR-510, HTR3A Gastric mucosal atrophy [ 73 ] ACAA-ins/del MiR-657, IGF2R Irritable bowel syndrome [ 74 ] Type II diabetes [ 90 ] (C) Altering epigenetic regulation of miRNA genes § (broad impact * ) i) Methylation ND ND ND ii) Acetylation * Broad impact: affecting expression of hundreds of genes. ‡ Narrow impact: affecting expression of only few genes, more gene/pathway specific effect. § In this review we propose that a miR-polymorphism or miR-mutation can potentially alter epigenetic regulation of a miRNA and can be a mechanism of disease progression. 3?-MTR: 3?-mismatch tolerant region of a miRNA; AGTR1: Angiotensin receptor 1; CD86: Cluster of differentiation 86; DHFR; Dihydrofolate reductase; ER- ? : Estrogen receptor- ? ; FGF20: Fibroblast growth factor 20; HMGa2: High Mobility Group A2; HTR1B: 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 1B; HTR3A: Serotonin receptor type 3 subunit; IGF2R: Insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor; INSR: Insulin receptor; ITGB4: Integrin ? 4; MiR: MicroRNA; MTR: Mismatch tolerant region; MTX: Methotrexate; ND: Not discovered yet (proposed); REEP1: Receptor expression-enhancing protein 1; SLITRK1: Human Slit and Trk-like 1. Table 2 List of algorithms to predict miRNA target interaction. Algorithm (URL) Brief description of the algorithm MiRBase ( http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/ ) Includes a searchable miRNA sequence database, a miRBase registry with miRNA gene nomenclature, and a miRBase targets database with predicted miRNA targets in animals [ 12 ] MiRanda ( http://cbio.mskcc.org/mirnaviewer/ ) Developed at the Computational Biology Center of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center(NY, USA) miRanda is an algorithm for finding genomic targets for miRNA, provides evolutionary conservation of the target mRNA, sequence complementarity of the mature miRNA and the target site, the binding energy of the miRNA–target duplex [ 95 ] TargetScan ( http://www.targetscan.org/ ) TargetScan is also a miRNA target prediction algorithm that predicts biological targets of miRNAs by searching for the presence of conserved 8mer and 7mer sites that match the seed region of each miRNA [ 96 ] PicTar ( http://pictar.bio.nyu.edu/ ) PicTar computes a maximum likelihood score that indicates to what extent a given mRNA 3?-UTR is targeted by a fixed set of miRNA [ 95 ] DIANA-MicroT ( http://diana.pcbi.upenn.edu/cgi-bin/micro_t.cgi ) Finds conserved miRNA target duplexes in human and mice with the least free-energy [ 97 ] PolymiRTS database( http://compbio.utmem.edu/miRSNP/help.php#search ) PolymiRTS database is a collection of naturally occurring DNA variations in putative miRNA target sites and integrates sequence polymorphism, phenotype and expression microarray data [ 98 ] MicroInspector ( http://mirna.imbb.forth.gr/microinspector/ ) MicroInspector generates a list of possible target sites, which are then sorted by free-energy values [ 99 ] Patrocles( http://www.patrocles.org/Patrocles.htm ) Compiles SNPs in the 3?-UTR of human and mouse genes that either create or destroy miRNA target sites [ 43 ] MiRNAMP ( http://mirnamap.mbc.nctu.edu.tw/ ) Provides miRNA expression profiles (tissue specificity and the differential expression in cancer/normal cells) A miRNA-target mRNA site predicted by one program most of the time may not be the same as predicted by another algorithm. Hence, it is advisable to use multiple algorithms to predict a miRNA binding site on the target mRNA [ 34 , 70 , 71 ]. 