Indirect action of TNF-alpha in liver injury during the CD8+ T-cell response to an Adeno-Associated Virus vector in mice CD8+ T-cells can cause hepatocellular injury by two distinct mechanisms. In addition to their direct cytotoxic effect, there is also collateral liver injury, which occurs when cells are killed in an antigen independent manner. While immune effector cytokines Interferon-gamma (IFN?) and Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF?) have both been implicated in various forms of hepatitis, their respective roles in direct and/or collateral liver damage remains unclear. In order to investigate these elements of liver injury, we have developed a new experimental model of CD8+ T-cell mediated hepatitis based on an Adeno-Associated Virus-based gene therapy vector. This vector is used to deliver antigen to hepatocytes, and CD8+ T-cells specific for the vector-encoded transgene are adoptively transferred to produce liver immunopathology. In this experimental model, CD8+ T-cell IFN? acts on Kupffer cells, inducing TNF? secretion and liver injury. Both IFN? and TNF? are important in this injury process, but TNF? acts as an autocrine amplifier of Kupffer cell function, rather than as a direct effector of hepatocellular damage. Conclusion: TNF? indirectly promotes liver damage, and is not a direct hepatotoxic agent. IFN? also indirectly contributes to liver injury via Kupffer cell activation while, in parallel, directly promoting hepatitis via induction of hepatocyte MHC class I. In principle, it may be possible to ameliorate this immunopathologic indirect mechanism by developing therapies that target Kupffer cells, without impairing CD8+ T-cell mediated antiviral immunity. This would have great therapeutic potential in chronic viral hepatitis.  Materials and Methods Mice C57BL/6, B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ (CD45.1 transgenic), B6.129-Tnfrsf1atm1Mak/J (TNFR1 deficient), and B6.129S7-Ifngr1tm1Agt/J (IFN?R deficient) mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). T-cell receptor transgenic OT-1 mice, specific for the SIINFEKL peptide derived from ovalbumin, were maintained in-house. All mice were sex and age matched and on a C57BL/6 background. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. AAV Vectors Serotype 2 AAV vectors containing eGFP or an eGFP-SIINFEKL fusion sequence under the control of an EF1? promoter were obtained from the Columbus Children’s Research Institute, Viral Vector Core Facility (Columbus, OH). Briefly, plasmids encoding the EF1? promoter, together with eGFP or an eGFP-SIINFEKL fusion, the rep and cap genes from AAV, and neo/tk selection elements were transfected into HeLa-derived producer cells, which were subsequently infected with wild-type adenovirus type 5. Recombinant AAV2 (rAAV2) was purified from the lysed cells, and purified using heparin chromatography as described previously ( 10 ). Purified rAAV2 tested negative for adenovirus (?1 Ad 5 PFU / 109 rAAV2 DNAse-resistant particles). Intra-hepatic injection Mice at 8 – 9 weeks of age were anesthetized with Avertin, and the right lobe of the liver was exposed via a 2-cm ventral midline incision. Using a 29-gauge insulin syringe, 60µl of vector suspension (5.88 × 1010 DNAse-resistant particles) was injected into the liver. The peritoneal cavity was sutured with Vicryl (Ethicon) and the skin closed with wound clips. Bone Marrow Chimeras Mice at 8 – 9 weeks of age were irradiated with 10.0 Gy using an RS2000 x-ray irradiator (Rad Source Technologies, Coral Springs, FL). T-cells were depleted from femoral and tibial bone marrow cells of donor mice using anti-CD4 (RL172.4) and anti-CD8 (3.155) antibodies (Abs), and guinea pig complement (Gibco-BRL/Invitrogen). Irradiated mice were injected with 9×106 T-depleted bone marrow cells via the tail vein. Mice received 0.16 mg/ml sulfamethoxazole and 0.32 mg/ml trimethoprim in their drinking water for 4 weeks, then were given 1mg of clodronate liposomes (Encapsula Nano Sciences, Nashville, TN) i.v. to remove radioresistant, as well as radiosensitive macrophages in the liver as previously described ( 11 ). Blood analysis showed 85 – 95% lymphocyte and ?99% macrophages reconstitution by donor bone marrow. OT-1 purification and adoptive transfer Purified CD8+ T-cells were obtained from spleen and lymph node cells by depletion of B-cells, CD4+ T-cells, NK cells, and dendritic cells with an Ab mixture (212.A1; anti-MHC class II, 2.4-G2; anti-FcR, GK1.5; anti-CD4, and HB191; anti-NK1.1). Cells coated with primary Abs were removed with magnetic beads coated with the secondary Abs. Naïve B-cells were removed using beads coated with anti-IgM (Qiagen). Mice received 5×106 OT-1 cells (of >85% purity) via the tail vein. Real-time PCR RNA was extracted from liver tissue using TRIzol (Invitrogen), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA was converted to cDNA and used for real-time quantitative RT-PCR. TNF?, IFN?, Caspase-12, CHOP, TRAIL, GAPDH, and H2-Kb assays were obtained from Applied Biosystems. The resulting relative expression values obtained by qRT-PCR were treated as non-parametric and analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. To determine the abundance of OT-1 T-cells in tissue, DNA was liberated from liver tissue using proteinase K (Qiagen), and treated with RNAse before qPCR analysis. Real-time PCR reactions were run using a MyiQ system (BioRad). Each reaction used sense and anti-sense primers for the genomic ?-actin sequence (5’ CCCATCTACGAGGGCTATGC; 5’ CTCTCAGCTGTGGTGGTGAA), and genomic primers for the OT-1 transgene (5’ GATTCTCAGTCCAACAGTTTGATGA; 5’ CTGTTCATAATTGGCCCGA). Each reaction used probe sequences and cycle parameters, as previously described ( 12 ). Data were analyzed using BioRad MyiQ 2.0 software. Measurement of serum aminotransaminases Blood was collected via cardiac puncture. The samples coagulated at room temperature for 2–3 hours, and were then centrifuged to collect serum. Serum ALT was measured by the Strong Health Clinical Laboratories, Rochester, NY. The resulting data was analyzed for significance using the student’s t-test. Histology Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded liver sections were sectioned (5µm) and stained with H&E. Sections were subjected to heat-induced epitope retrieval using Dako TRS for 4 minutes at 123 °C at 18 psi. Primary Abs were polyclonal rabbit anti-CD3 (1:200, Dako A0452), rat anti-F4/80 (1:400, eBioscience E016242, clone BM8), monoclonal rabbit anti-active caspase 3 (1:250, Cell Signaling 9664L). Secondary Abs included biotinylated donkey anti-rat (Jackson) at 1:200 dilution to detect F4/80, biotinylated goat anti-rabbit (Vector) at 1:200 dilution to detect the anti-active caspase 3, followed by ABC-Elite (Vector). To detect the anti-CD3, an anti-rabbit polymer (Dako, Envision Plus) was used. To detect GFP, antigen retrieval with 5 minutes of protease K digestion was followed by 1:1000 dilution of Abcam polyclonal rabbit Ab (AB6556-25). DAB+ (Dako) was used as the chromogenic substrate in all of the immunohistochemical assays. Hepatitis was evaluated by an experienced liver pathologist, who scored “blind” the H&E-stained sections using a 4-point semi-quantitative scale (0–3+) based on the prevalence and size of the inflammatory foci. Liver lymphocyte isolation Intrahepatic lymphocytes were isolated using a variant of a previously described method ( 9 ). Livers were perfused with 5 ml of PBS via the portal vein, mechanically homogenized, then digested in serum free RPMI 1640 containing 0.05% collagenase IV (Sigma) and 0.002% DNAse I (Sigma) at 37°C for 40 minutes with gentle agitation. The cells were washed and resuspended in 2.75 ml of 40% OptiPrep (Accurate Chemical) and 2.25 ml of serum free RPMI. The OptiPrep suspension was then layered under 2.0 ml of serum free RPMI 1640 and centrifuged at 1100 × g for 25 minutes at 4°C. The cells at the interface were collected for further analysis. In vitro restimulation and intracellular cytokine staining Liver leukocytes were resuspended in RPMI 1640 containing 10% FBS, 1µl/ml GolgiPlug (BD), 70 U/ml IL-2 (Endogen), and Penicillin-Streptomycin solution (Gibco/Invitrogen) with or without 10µg/ml SIINFEKL peptide. After restimulation for 4–5 hours at 37°C, 5% CO2, the cells were stained with LIVE/DEAD® stain (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions plus 1µl/ml GolgiPlug. The cells were then stained for surface markers in HBSS containing 5% FBS plus 1µl/ml GolgiPlug. Cells were fixed in 2% formalin, permeabilized in PBS plus 1% saponin and 1% FBS, blocked with isotype Ab, and stained for intracellular IFN? and TNF? for 30 minutes at 4°C. Liver leukocytes were washed twice with HBSS containing 5% FBS and analyzed by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry For surface staining, cells were stained in a HBSS solution containing 5% FBS. Intracellular staining was done in PBS with 1% saponin and 1% FBS. The following Abs were used: TCR? (H57-597), NK1.1 (PK136), CD8 (53-6.7), IFN? (XMG1.2), TNF? (MP6-XT22), and F4/80 (BM8). Abs were obtained from BD PharMingen or eBiosciences. Streptavidin-PE Texas Red (Caltag) and Aqua LIVE/DEAD stain (Invitrogen) were also used. Flow cytometric analysis was performed on a LSR II (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Treestar).  Mice C57BL/6, B6.SJL-Ptprca Pepcb/BoyJ (CD45.1 transgenic), B6.129-Tnfrsf1atm1Mak/J (TNFR1 deficient), and B6.129S7-Ifngr1tm1Agt/J (IFN?R deficient) mice were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). T-cell receptor transgenic OT-1 mice, specific for the SIINFEKL peptide derived from ovalbumin, were maintained in-house. All mice were sex and age matched and on a C57BL/6 background. All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.  AAV Vectors Serotype 2 AAV vectors containing eGFP or an eGFP-SIINFEKL fusion sequence under the control of an EF1? promoter were obtained from the Columbus Children’s Research Institute, Viral Vector Core Facility (Columbus, OH). Briefly, plasmids encoding the EF1? promoter, together with eGFP or an eGFP-SIINFEKL fusion, the rep and cap genes from AAV, and neo/tk selection elements were transfected into HeLa-derived producer cells, which were subsequently infected with wild-type adenovirus type 5. Recombinant AAV2 (rAAV2) was purified from the lysed cells, and purified using heparin chromatography as described previously ( 10 ). Purified rAAV2 tested negative for adenovirus (?1 Ad 5 PFU / 109 rAAV2 DNAse-resistant particles).  Intra-hepatic injection Mice at 8 – 9 weeks of age were anesthetized with Avertin, and the right lobe of the liver was exposed via a 2-cm ventral midline incision. Using a 29-gauge insulin syringe, 60µl of vector suspension (5.88 × 1010 DNAse-resistant particles) was injected into the liver. The peritoneal cavity was sutured with Vicryl (Ethicon) and the skin closed with wound clips.  Bone Marrow Chimeras Mice at 8 – 9 weeks of age were irradiated with 10.0 Gy using an RS2000 x-ray irradiator (Rad Source Technologies, Coral Springs, FL). T-cells were depleted from femoral and tibial bone marrow cells of donor mice using anti-CD4 (RL172.4) and anti-CD8 (3.155) antibodies (Abs), and guinea pig complement (Gibco-BRL/Invitrogen). Irradiated mice were injected with 9×106 T-depleted bone marrow cells via the tail vein. Mice received 0.16 mg/ml sulfamethoxazole and 0.32 mg/ml trimethoprim in their drinking water for 4 weeks, then were given 1mg of clodronate liposomes (Encapsula Nano Sciences, Nashville, TN) i.v. to remove radioresistant, as well as radiosensitive macrophages in the liver as previously described ( 11 ). Blood analysis showed 85 – 95% lymphocyte and ?99% macrophages reconstitution by donor bone marrow.  OT-1 purification and adoptive transfer Purified CD8+ T-cells were obtained from spleen and lymph node cells by depletion of B-cells, CD4+ T-cells, NK cells, and dendritic cells with an Ab mixture (212.A1; anti-MHC class II, 2.4-G2; anti-FcR, GK1.5; anti-CD4, and HB191; anti-NK1.1). Cells coated with primary Abs were removed with magnetic beads coated with the secondary Abs. Naïve B-cells were removed using beads coated with anti-IgM (Qiagen). Mice received 5×106 OT-1 cells (of >85% purity) via the tail vein.  Real-time PCR RNA was extracted from liver tissue using TRIzol (Invitrogen), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA was converted to cDNA and used for real-time quantitative RT-PCR. TNF?, IFN?, Caspase-12, CHOP, TRAIL, GAPDH, and H2-Kb assays were obtained from Applied Biosystems. The resulting relative expression values obtained by qRT-PCR were treated as non-parametric and analyzed using the Mann-Whitney test. To determine the abundance of OT-1 T-cells in tissue, DNA was liberated from liver tissue using proteinase K (Qiagen), and treated with RNAse before qPCR analysis. Real-time PCR reactions were run using a MyiQ system (BioRad). Each reaction used sense and anti-sense primers for the genomic ?-actin sequence (5’ CCCATCTACGAGGGCTATGC; 5’ CTCTCAGCTGTGGTGGTGAA), and genomic primers for the OT-1 transgene (5’ GATTCTCAGTCCAACAGTTTGATGA; 5’ CTGTTCATAATTGGCCCGA). Each reaction used probe sequences and cycle parameters, as previously described ( 12 ). Data were analyzed using BioRad MyiQ 2.0 software.  Measurement of serum aminotransaminases Blood was collected via cardiac puncture. The samples coagulated at room temperature for 2–3 hours, and were then centrifuged to collect serum. Serum ALT was measured by the Strong Health Clinical Laboratories, Rochester, NY. The resulting data was analyzed for significance using the student’s t-test.  Histology Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded liver sections were sectioned (5µm) and stained with H&E. Sections were subjected to heat-induced epitope retrieval using Dako TRS for 4 minutes at 123 °C at 18 psi. Primary Abs were polyclonal rabbit anti-CD3 (1:200, Dako A0452), rat anti-F4/80 (1:400, eBioscience E016242, clone BM8), monoclonal rabbit anti-active caspase 3 (1:250, Cell Signaling 9664L). Secondary Abs included biotinylated donkey anti-rat (Jackson) at 1:200 dilution to detect F4/80, biotinylated goat anti-rabbit (Vector) at 1:200 dilution to detect the anti-active caspase 3, followed by ABC-Elite (Vector). To detect the anti-CD3, an anti-rabbit polymer (Dako, Envision Plus) was used. To detect GFP, antigen retrieval with 5 minutes of protease K digestion was followed by 1:1000 dilution of Abcam polyclonal rabbit Ab (AB6556-25). DAB+ (Dako) was used as the chromogenic substrate in all of the immunohistochemical assays. Hepatitis was evaluated by an experienced liver pathologist, who scored “blind” the H&E-stained sections using a 4-point semi-quantitative scale (0–3+) based on the prevalence and size of the inflammatory foci.  Liver lymphocyte isolation Intrahepatic lymphocytes were isolated using a variant of a previously described method ( 9 ). Livers were perfused with 5 ml of PBS via the portal vein, mechanically homogenized, then digested in serum free RPMI 1640 containing 0.05% collagenase IV (Sigma) and 0.002% DNAse I (Sigma) at 37°C for 40 minutes with gentle agitation. The cells were washed and resuspended in 2.75 ml of 40% OptiPrep (Accurate Chemical) and 2.25 ml of serum free RPMI. The OptiPrep suspension was then layered under 2.0 ml of serum free RPMI 1640 and centrifuged at 1100 × g for 25 minutes at 4°C. The cells at the interface were collected for further analysis.  In vitro restimulation and intracellular cytokine staining Liver leukocytes were resuspended in RPMI 1640 containing 10% FBS, 1µl/ml GolgiPlug (BD), 70 U/ml IL-2 (Endogen), and Penicillin-Streptomycin solution (Gibco/Invitrogen) with or without 10µg/ml SIINFEKL peptide. After restimulation for 4–5 hours at 37°C, 5% CO2, the cells were stained with LIVE/DEAD® stain (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions plus 1µl/ml GolgiPlug. The cells were then stained for surface markers in HBSS containing 5% FBS plus 1µl/ml GolgiPlug. Cells were fixed in 2% formalin, permeabilized in PBS plus 1% saponin and 1% FBS, blocked with isotype Ab, and stained for intracellular IFN? and TNF? for 30 minutes at 4°C. Liver leukocytes were washed twice with HBSS containing 5% FBS and analyzed by flow cytometry.  Flow cytometry For surface staining, cells were stained in a HBSS solution containing 5% FBS. Intracellular staining was done in PBS with 1% saponin and 1% FBS. The following Abs were used: TCR? (H57-597), NK1.1 (PK136), CD8 (53-6.7), IFN? (XMG1.2), TNF? (MP6-XT22), and F4/80 (BM8). Abs were obtained from BD PharMingen or eBiosciences. Streptavidin-PE Texas Red (Caltag) and Aqua LIVE/DEAD stain (Invitrogen) were also used. Flow cytometric analysis was performed on a LSR II (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Treestar).  Results Induction of liver immunopathology in AAV-transduced mice To study the effects of CD8+ T-cell activation in the liver, we exposed the livers of C57BL/6 mice via laparotomy, and injected rAAV2 vectors expressing a GFP-SIINFEKL fusion protein, or GFP alone, under the control of the EF1? promoter. To document the extent of hepatocyte transduction, such livers were sectioned and subjected to immunohistochemical staining for GFP. The vector had dispersed throughout the hepatic parenchyma, transducing a subset of hepatocytes in multiple lobes, not only in the lobe injected. Representative data are shown in on-line supplementary Figure S1 . After 3 weeks, 5 × 106 OT-1 CD8+ T-cells were given i.v. Histological evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained liver sections revealed that in the presence of GFP-SIINFEKL, the introduction of OT-1 T-cells resulted in an active hepatitis, consisting of numerous inflammatory foci ( Fig 1A ). Liver H&E stained sections collected at 24-hour intervals post OT-1 transfer were also coded, scored “blind” to determine the severity of hepatitis, then decoded and plotted ( Fig 1B ). Control mice that received the rAAV2 GFP vector showed normal histology, or minimal hepatitis after OT-1 transfer. However, mice that received the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector and OT-1 T-cells showed moderate hepatitis, maximal on day 3. These hepatitic foci consisted mostly of a mononuclear cell infiltrate, predominantly composed of CD3+ T-cells ( Fig 2A ) and F4/80+ Kupffer cells ( Fig 2B ). Immunohistochemical detection of cleaved/activated caspase 3 demonstrated numerous apoptotic cells within the inflammatory foci ( Fig 2C ). Although the apoptotic cells may have been of several types, it is clear that hepatocytes represented a significant proportion of the dying cells, based both on the large size of the active caspase 3-stained cells and on the presence of morphologically distinct Councilman bodies. In parallel, we tested the serum levels of alanine aminotransaminase (ALT) at 24-hr intervals post OT-1 cell transfer. The serum ALT levels were greatest at 72 hours after OT-1 transfer ( Fig 3A ) and then resolved, returning almost to background levels by day 6. To quantify OT-1 T-cells accumulation in the liver, we performed real-time quantitative PCR on liver DNA, using primer / probe combinations specific for the transgenic OT-1 T-Cell Receptor-beta (TCR?) chain ( Fig 3B ). The hepatitis severity scores shown in Figure 1B and the pattern of expansion and contraction of OT-1 cells correlated well with the serum ALT levels. To investigate the presence of IFN? and TNF? in our system, we analyzed mRNA from liver homogenates each day after OT-1 transfer using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. We found that both IFN? and TNF? transcripts were up-regulated during the first 48–72 hours, followed by a drop in expression ( Fig 3C, D ). These results are consistent with the involvement of IFN? and TNF? in promoting hepatitis during the CD8+ T-cells response to AAV-encoded antigen. Significance of IFN? and TNF? To test the significance of IFN? and TNF? during T cell-driven liver immunopathology, we injected the rAAV2 vectors into mice deficient in either the IFN?R or the TNFR1, and compared them to wild-type (WT) controls. Because the peaks for serum ALT and TNF? expression were all on day 3, we used this time-point to analyze the difference between WT and deficient mouse strains. In these experiments, the injection of OT-1 T-cells into rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector transduced IFN?R-deficient ( Fig 4A ) or TNFR1-deficient mice ( Fig 4B ) resulted in less liver injury as compared to WT controls. We next measured the expression of TNF? mRNA in both IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient animals, using GAPDH as an internal standard. OT-1 T-cell transfer into WT antigen-expressing mice resulted in a 20-fold increase in TNF? message. When we analyzed IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector plus OT-1 T-cells, there was reduced upregulation of TNF? expression in both gene-targeted strains compared to WT controls ( Fig 4 ). These data suggest that IFN? and TNF? signaling are both required for optimal liver injury and TNF? expression. OT-1 T-cells and liver macrophages produce IFN? and TNF? after restimulation To formulate an accurate model of how IFN? and TNF? contribute to liver injury, it was important to establish which cell types may be producing these cytokines. Based on other T-cell dependent models of hepatitis, it is possible that T-cells, NK cells, NKT cells and/or Kupffer cells could contribute to the local concentration of these molecules ( 5 , 7 , 13 – 15 ). To evaluate the cellular sources of the cytokines, we performed in vitro restimulation in the presence of Brefeldin A, IL-2 and the SIINFEKL peptide. Isolated liver leukocytes from rAAV2 vector transduced WT mice 3 days post OT-1 transfer, were restimulated for 4–5 hours at 37°C and then stained for cell surface identification markers and for the presence of intracellular IFN? and TNF?. When gating on live liver lymphocytes, CD8+ cells were the primary population showing positive IFN? staining ( Fig 5B ). This staining was significantly reduced when the SIINFEKL peptide was absent from the restimulation culture. Gating on NK1.1+ TCR?? cells or NK1.1+ TCR?+ cells showed less than 2% of the populations expressing either TNF? or IFN? ( Fig 5C, D ). Analysis of TNF? production showed that the majority of cytokine positive cells were positive for F4/80 ( Fig 5A ). These data therefore support a model of injury that is dependent on IFN? production by activated CD8+ T-cells and on TNF? production by activated Kupffer cells. Cellular targets of IFN? signaling IFN? contributes to liver injury in various experimental systems ( 2 , 5 , 8 , 16 ). However, it is not clear whether its contribution is mediated by effects on the parenchyma, the liver leukocytes, or both. To test this we generated bone marrow chimeras where the bone marrow-derived cells were replaced with IFN?R deficient bone marrow. To ensure complete replacement of Kupffer cells, radiation chimeras were treated with clodronate-loaded liposomes 4 weeks after bone marrow transfer. Subsequent, secondary repopulation of the liver resulted in an animal with >99% of Kupffer cells derived from donor bone marrow as previously described ( 11 ). Day 3 analysis of such chimeric mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector, followed by OT-1 T-cells, showed significant reduction in serum ALT in mice that received IFN?R deficient bone marrow, compared to control mice that received WT bone marrow ( Fig 6A ). Quantitation of liver homogenate mRNA also showed a 10-fold reduction of TNF? gene expression in IFN?R?/??WT mice. These data support the hypothesis that CD8+ T-cell IFN? drives Kupffer cell TNF? production, and that this signaling event contributes to liver injury. In the reverse chimera experiment, in which WT bone marrow was transferred into IFN?R deficient mice, we also observed reduced liver injury ( Fig 6B ). However, unlike what was seen in Figure 6A , IFN?R deficiency in solid tissues had no effect on the level of TNF? message expression. Together these data demonstrate the presence of an indirect mechanism of injury that depends on Kupffer cell activation by IFN? as well as a direct injury pathway that is promoted by IFN? signaling on the liver parenchyma. It has been previously suggested that IFN? can be directly cytotoxic to the liver by inducing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress mediated apoptosis ( 17 ). Caspase-12 and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) have both been associated with ER stress induced apoptosis in hepatocytes ( 18 , 19 ). Thus, to test whether IFN? was inducing ER stress within the liver, we measured Caspase-12 and CHOP mRNA from liver homogenates. Caspase-12 transcript was induced in control WT?WT chimeras, consistent with a direct effect of IFN? on the hepatocytes ( Figure 7A ). The absence of the IFN?R from bone marrow-derived cells in IFN?R?/??WT chimeras did not compromise caspase-12 induction, compared to the effect in WT?WT controls ( Fig 7A ). This also was consistent with a direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. In the WT?IFN?R?/? chimeric mice we observed a modest (around 20%), yet statistically significant reduction in caspase-12 mRNA ( Fig 7B ). Therefore, although liver injury was causing the expression of caspase-12 and an element of this was dependent on the IFN?R on solid tissues, the majority of caspase-12 induction could not be attributed to the direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. Expression of CHOP was only weakly induced in this system, with an increase to approximately 20% above background, and the lack of IFN?R on either bone marrow derived cells ( Fig 7C ), or the liver parenchyma ( Fig 7D ), did not significantly change the level of CHOP transcript in antigen expressing mice. Taken together, the data suggest that if there is a direct effect of IFN? in promoting ER stress in hepatocytes, this is a very small effect. Most of the induction of both caspase-12 and CHOP message is clearly independent of an action of IFN? on hepatocytes. One common effect of IFN? is the up-regulation of MHC molecules. We therefore considered the hypothesis that the decreased liver injury seen in IFN?R deficient mice resulted from reduced antigen availability, due to the loss of IFN? mediated induction of the MHC class I antigen presentation pathway. To test this hypothesis, we measured MHC class I H2-Kb transcript levels in the livers of mice from the previous IFN?R chimeras. As shown in Figure 7F , antigen expressing WT?IFN?R?/? mice did not induce H2-Kb. Conversely, in IFN?R?/??WT mice the induction of H2-Kb was preserved ( Fig 7E ). These data suggest that H2-Kb induction is driven by IFN?, acting via IFN?R expressed on the liver parenchyma. How does TNF? contribute to liver injury? The potential role of TNF? in liver injury is complex to dissect. The cytotoxic and anti-apoptotic functions of TNF? have been studied in various contexts ( 7 , 20 , 21 ). Data from experiments with TNFR1 deficient mice in Figure 4 showed that TNF? signaling was required for optimal TNF? expression and liver injury. Several reports show that autocrine TNF? signaling is required for complete IFN?-dependent macrophage activation ( 22 , 23 ). Therefore, TNF? signaling may be needed for Kupffer cell activation within the liver, and this activation could then contribute to liver injury. Conversely, TNF? signaling on the liver parenchyma might promote liver injury as demonstrated by experiments that couple TNF? with a transcription inhibitor ( 6 , 24 ). To test whether TNF? causes direct cytolytic damage to the liver parenchyma, we generated bone marrow chimeras using TNFR1 deficient mice as hosts, and gave them WT bone marrow followed by clodronate liposomes, rAAV2 vectors, and OT-1 T-cells as described for the experiments shown in Figure 6 . We found no significant difference in either serum ALT or TNF? message expression between WT?TNFR1 deficient mice and the WT?WT control chimeras ( Fig 8 ). These data suggest that TNF? does not directly act on hepatocytes, or on other radioresistant cells, to promote liver injury. While TRAIL expressing Kupffer cells have been shown to be cytotoxic ( 25 ) and TRAIL has been implicated in viral hepatitis ( 26 ), the expression of TRAIL was not altered by the lack of TNFR1 in either experiment ( S.Fig 2 ), making it an unlikely agent of liver injury.  Results Induction of liver immunopathology in AAV-transduced mice To study the effects of CD8+ T-cell activation in the liver, we exposed the livers of C57BL/6 mice via laparotomy, and injected rAAV2 vectors expressing a GFP-SIINFEKL fusion protein, or GFP alone, under the control of the EF1? promoter. To document the extent of hepatocyte transduction, such livers were sectioned and subjected to immunohistochemical staining for GFP. The vector had dispersed throughout the hepatic parenchyma, transducing a subset of hepatocytes in multiple lobes, not only in the lobe injected. Representative data are shown in on-line supplementary Figure S1 . After 3 weeks, 5 × 106 OT-1 CD8+ T-cells were given i.v. Histological evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained liver sections revealed that in the presence of GFP-SIINFEKL, the introduction of OT-1 T-cells resulted in an active hepatitis, consisting of numerous inflammatory foci ( Fig 1A ). Liver H&E stained sections collected at 24-hour intervals post OT-1 transfer were also coded, scored “blind” to determine the severity of hepatitis, then decoded and plotted ( Fig 1B ). Control mice that received the rAAV2 GFP vector showed normal histology, or minimal hepatitis after OT-1 transfer. However, mice that received the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector and OT-1 T-cells showed moderate hepatitis, maximal on day 3. These hepatitic foci consisted mostly of a mononuclear cell infiltrate, predominantly composed of CD3+ T-cells ( Fig 2A ) and F4/80+ Kupffer cells ( Fig 2B ). Immunohistochemical detection of cleaved/activated caspase 3 demonstrated numerous apoptotic cells within the inflammatory foci ( Fig 2C ). Although the apoptotic cells may have been of several types, it is clear that hepatocytes represented a significant proportion of the dying cells, based both on the large size of the active caspase 3-stained cells and on the presence of morphologically distinct Councilman bodies. In parallel, we tested the serum levels of alanine aminotransaminase (ALT) at 24-hr intervals post OT-1 cell transfer. The serum ALT levels were greatest at 72 hours after OT-1 transfer ( Fig 3A ) and then resolved, returning almost to background levels by day 6. To quantify OT-1 T-cells accumulation in the liver, we performed real-time quantitative PCR on liver DNA, using primer / probe combinations specific for the transgenic OT-1 T-Cell Receptor-beta (TCR?) chain ( Fig 3B ). The hepatitis severity scores shown in Figure 1B and the pattern of expansion and contraction of OT-1 cells correlated well with the serum ALT levels. To investigate the presence of IFN? and TNF? in our system, we analyzed mRNA from liver homogenates each day after OT-1 transfer using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. We found that both IFN? and TNF? transcripts were up-regulated during the first 48–72 hours, followed by a drop in expression ( Fig 3C, D ). These results are consistent with the involvement of IFN? and TNF? in promoting hepatitis during the CD8+ T-cells response to AAV-encoded antigen. Significance of IFN? and TNF? To test the significance of IFN? and TNF? during T cell-driven liver immunopathology, we injected the rAAV2 vectors into mice deficient in either the IFN?R or the TNFR1, and compared them to wild-type (WT) controls. Because the peaks for serum ALT and TNF? expression were all on day 3, we used this time-point to analyze the difference between WT and deficient mouse strains. In these experiments, the injection of OT-1 T-cells into rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector transduced IFN?R-deficient ( Fig 4A ) or TNFR1-deficient mice ( Fig 4B ) resulted in less liver injury as compared to WT controls. We next measured the expression of TNF? mRNA in both IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient animals, using GAPDH as an internal standard. OT-1 T-cell transfer into WT antigen-expressing mice resulted in a 20-fold increase in TNF? message. When we analyzed IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector plus OT-1 T-cells, there was reduced upregulation of TNF? expression in both gene-targeted strains compared to WT controls ( Fig 4 ). These data suggest that IFN? and TNF? signaling are both required for optimal liver injury and TNF? expression. OT-1 T-cells and liver macrophages produce IFN? and TNF? after restimulation To formulate an accurate model of how IFN? and TNF? contribute to liver injury, it was important to establish which cell types may be producing these cytokines. Based on other T-cell dependent models of hepatitis, it is possible that T-cells, NK cells, NKT cells and/or Kupffer cells could contribute to the local concentration of these molecules ( 5 , 7 , 13 – 15 ). To evaluate the cellular sources of the cytokines, we performed in vitro restimulation in the presence of Brefeldin A, IL-2 and the SIINFEKL peptide. Isolated liver leukocytes from rAAV2 vector transduced WT mice 3 days post OT-1 transfer, were restimulated for 4–5 hours at 37°C and then stained for cell surface identification markers and for the presence of intracellular IFN? and TNF?. When gating on live liver lymphocytes, CD8+ cells were the primary population showing positive IFN? staining ( Fig 5B ). This staining was significantly reduced when the SIINFEKL peptide was absent from the restimulation culture. Gating on NK1.1+ TCR?? cells or NK1.1+ TCR?+ cells showed less than 2% of the populations expressing either TNF? or IFN? ( Fig 5C, D ). Analysis of TNF? production showed that the majority of cytokine positive cells were positive for F4/80 ( Fig 5A ). These data therefore support a model of injury that is dependent on IFN? production by activated CD8+ T-cells and on TNF? production by activated Kupffer cells. Cellular targets of IFN? signaling IFN? contributes to liver injury in various experimental systems ( 2 , 5 , 8 , 16 ). However, it is not clear whether its contribution is mediated by effects on the parenchyma, the liver leukocytes, or both. To test this we generated bone marrow chimeras where the bone marrow-derived cells were replaced with IFN?R deficient bone marrow. To ensure complete replacement of Kupffer cells, radiation chimeras were treated with clodronate-loaded liposomes 4 weeks after bone marrow transfer. Subsequent, secondary repopulation of the liver resulted in an animal with >99% of Kupffer cells derived from donor bone marrow as previously described ( 11 ). Day 3 analysis of such chimeric mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector, followed by OT-1 T-cells, showed significant reduction in serum ALT in mice that received IFN?R deficient bone marrow, compared to control mice that received WT bone marrow ( Fig 6A ). Quantitation of liver homogenate mRNA also showed a 10-fold reduction of TNF? gene expression in IFN?R?/??WT mice. These data support the hypothesis that CD8+ T-cell IFN? drives Kupffer cell TNF? production, and that this signaling event contributes to liver injury. In the reverse chimera experiment, in which WT bone marrow was transferred into IFN?R deficient mice, we also observed reduced liver injury ( Fig 6B ). However, unlike what was seen in Figure 6A , IFN?R deficiency in solid tissues had no effect on the level of TNF? message expression. Together these data demonstrate the presence of an indirect mechanism of injury that depends on Kupffer cell activation by IFN? as well as a direct injury pathway that is promoted by IFN? signaling on the liver parenchyma. It has been previously suggested that IFN? can be directly cytotoxic to the liver by inducing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress mediated apoptosis ( 17 ). Caspase-12 and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) have both been associated with ER stress induced apoptosis in hepatocytes ( 18 , 19 ). Thus, to test whether IFN? was inducing ER stress within the liver, we measured Caspase-12 and CHOP mRNA from liver homogenates. Caspase-12 transcript was induced in control WT?WT chimeras, consistent with a direct effect of IFN? on the hepatocytes ( Figure 7A ). The absence of the IFN?R from bone marrow-derived cells in IFN?R?/??WT chimeras did not compromise caspase-12 induction, compared to the effect in WT?WT controls ( Fig 7A ). This also was consistent with a direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. In the WT?IFN?R?/? chimeric mice we observed a modest (around 20%), yet statistically significant reduction in caspase-12 mRNA ( Fig 7B ). Therefore, although liver injury was causing the expression of caspase-12 and an element of this was dependent on the IFN?R on solid tissues, the majority of caspase-12 induction could not be attributed to the direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. Expression of CHOP was only weakly induced in this system, with an increase to approximately 20% above background, and the lack of IFN?R on either bone marrow derived cells ( Fig 7C ), or the liver parenchyma ( Fig 7D ), did not significantly change the level of CHOP transcript in antigen expressing mice. Taken together, the data suggest that if there is a direct effect of IFN? in promoting ER stress in hepatocytes, this is a very small effect. Most of the induction of both caspase-12 and CHOP message is clearly independent of an action of IFN? on hepatocytes. One common effect of IFN? is the up-regulation of MHC molecules. We therefore considered the hypothesis that the decreased liver injury seen in IFN?R deficient mice resulted from reduced antigen availability, due to the loss of IFN? mediated induction of the MHC class I antigen presentation pathway. To test this hypothesis, we measured MHC class I H2-Kb transcript levels in the livers of mice from the previous IFN?R chimeras. As shown in Figure 7F , antigen expressing WT?IFN?R?/? mice did not induce H2-Kb. Conversely, in IFN?R?/??WT mice the induction of H2-Kb was preserved ( Fig 7E ). These data suggest that H2-Kb induction is driven by IFN?, acting via IFN?R expressed on the liver parenchyma. How does TNF? contribute to liver injury? The potential role of TNF? in liver injury is complex to dissect. The cytotoxic and anti-apoptotic functions of TNF? have been studied in various contexts ( 7 , 20 , 21 ). Data from experiments with TNFR1 deficient mice in Figure 4 showed that TNF? signaling was required for optimal TNF? expression and liver injury. Several reports show that autocrine TNF? signaling is required for complete IFN?-dependent macrophage activation ( 22 , 23 ). Therefore, TNF? signaling may be needed for Kupffer cell activation within the liver, and this activation could then contribute to liver injury. Conversely, TNF? signaling on the liver parenchyma might promote liver injury as demonstrated by experiments that couple TNF? with a transcription inhibitor ( 6 , 24 ). To test whether TNF? causes direct cytolytic damage to the liver parenchyma, we generated bone marrow chimeras using TNFR1 deficient mice as hosts, and gave them WT bone marrow followed by clodronate liposomes, rAAV2 vectors, and OT-1 T-cells as described for the experiments shown in Figure 6 . We found no significant difference in either serum ALT or TNF? message expression between WT?TNFR1 deficient mice and the WT?WT control chimeras ( Fig 8 ). These data suggest that TNF? does not directly act on hepatocytes, or on other radioresistant cells, to promote liver injury. While TRAIL expressing Kupffer cells have been shown to be cytotoxic ( 25 ) and TRAIL has been implicated in viral hepatitis ( 26 ), the expression of TRAIL was not altered by the lack of TNFR1 in either experiment ( S.Fig 2 ), making it an unlikely agent of liver injury.  Induction of liver immunopathology in AAV-transduced mice To study the effects of CD8+ T-cell activation in the liver, we exposed the livers of C57BL/6 mice via laparotomy, and injected rAAV2 vectors expressing a GFP-SIINFEKL fusion protein, or GFP alone, under the control of the EF1? promoter. To document the extent of hepatocyte transduction, such livers were sectioned and subjected to immunohistochemical staining for GFP. The vector had dispersed throughout the hepatic parenchyma, transducing a subset of hepatocytes in multiple lobes, not only in the lobe injected. Representative data are shown in on-line supplementary Figure S1 . After 3 weeks, 5 × 106 OT-1 CD8+ T-cells were given i.v. Histological evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained liver sections revealed that in the presence of GFP-SIINFEKL, the introduction of OT-1 T-cells resulted in an active hepatitis, consisting of numerous inflammatory foci ( Fig 1A ). Liver H&E stained sections collected at 24-hour intervals post OT-1 transfer were also coded, scored “blind” to determine the severity of hepatitis, then decoded and plotted ( Fig 1B ). Control mice that received the rAAV2 GFP vector showed normal histology, or minimal hepatitis after OT-1 transfer. However, mice that received the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector and OT-1 T-cells showed moderate hepatitis, maximal on day 3. These hepatitic foci consisted mostly of a mononuclear cell infiltrate, predominantly composed of CD3+ T-cells ( Fig 2A ) and F4/80+ Kupffer cells ( Fig 2B ). Immunohistochemical detection of cleaved/activated caspase 3 demonstrated numerous apoptotic cells within the inflammatory foci ( Fig 2C ). Although the apoptotic cells may have been of several types, it is clear that hepatocytes represented a significant proportion of the dying cells, based both on the large size of the active caspase 3-stained cells and on the presence of morphologically distinct Councilman bodies. In parallel, we tested the serum levels of alanine aminotransaminase (ALT) at 24-hr intervals post OT-1 cell transfer. The serum ALT levels were greatest at 72 hours after OT-1 transfer ( Fig 3A ) and then resolved, returning almost to background levels by day 6. To quantify OT-1 T-cells accumulation in the liver, we performed real-time quantitative PCR on liver DNA, using primer / probe combinations specific for the transgenic OT-1 T-Cell Receptor-beta (TCR?) chain ( Fig 3B ). The hepatitis severity scores shown in Figure 1B and the pattern of expansion and contraction of OT-1 cells correlated well with the serum ALT levels. To investigate the presence of IFN? and TNF? in our system, we analyzed mRNA from liver homogenates each day after OT-1 transfer using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. We found that both IFN? and TNF? transcripts were up-regulated during the first 48–72 hours, followed by a drop in expression ( Fig 3C, D ). These results are consistent with the involvement of IFN? and TNF? in promoting hepatitis during the CD8+ T-cells response to AAV-encoded antigen.  Induction of liver immunopathology in AAV-transduced mice To study the effects of CD8+ T-cell activation in the liver, we exposed the livers of C57BL/6 mice via laparotomy, and injected rAAV2 vectors expressing a GFP-SIINFEKL fusion protein, or GFP alone, under the control of the EF1? promoter. To document the extent of hepatocyte transduction, such livers were sectioned and subjected to immunohistochemical staining for GFP. The vector had dispersed throughout the hepatic parenchyma, transducing a subset of hepatocytes in multiple lobes, not only in the lobe injected. Representative data are shown in on-line supplementary Figure S1 . After 3 weeks, 5 × 106 OT-1 CD8+ T-cells were given i.v. Histological evaluation of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained liver sections revealed that in the presence of GFP-SIINFEKL, the introduction of OT-1 T-cells resulted in an active hepatitis, consisting of numerous inflammatory foci ( Fig 1A ). Liver H&E stained sections collected at 24-hour intervals post OT-1 transfer were also coded, scored “blind” to determine the severity of hepatitis, then decoded and plotted ( Fig 1B ). Control mice that received the rAAV2 GFP vector showed normal histology, or minimal hepatitis after OT-1 transfer. However, mice that received the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector and OT-1 T-cells showed moderate hepatitis, maximal on day 3. These hepatitic foci consisted mostly of a mononuclear cell infiltrate, predominantly composed of CD3+ T-cells ( Fig 2A ) and F4/80+ Kupffer cells ( Fig 2B ). Immunohistochemical detection of cleaved/activated caspase 3 demonstrated numerous apoptotic cells within the inflammatory foci ( Fig 2C ). Although the apoptotic cells may have been of several types, it is clear that hepatocytes represented a significant proportion of the dying cells, based both on the large size of the active caspase 3-stained cells and on the presence of morphologically distinct Councilman bodies. In parallel, we tested the serum levels of alanine aminotransaminase (ALT) at 24-hr intervals post OT-1 cell transfer. The serum ALT levels were greatest at 72 hours after OT-1 transfer ( Fig 3A ) and then resolved, returning almost to background levels by day 6. To quantify OT-1 T-cells accumulation in the liver, we performed real-time quantitative PCR on liver DNA, using primer / probe combinations specific for the transgenic OT-1 T-Cell Receptor-beta (TCR?) chain ( Fig 3B ). The hepatitis severity scores shown in Figure 1B and the pattern of expansion and contraction of OT-1 cells correlated well with the serum ALT levels. To investigate the presence of IFN? and TNF? in our system, we analyzed mRNA from liver homogenates each day after OT-1 transfer using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. We found that both IFN? and TNF? transcripts were up-regulated during the first 48–72 hours, followed by a drop in expression ( Fig 3C, D ). These results are consistent with the involvement of IFN? and TNF? in promoting hepatitis during the CD8+ T-cells response to AAV-encoded antigen.  Significance of IFN? and TNF? To test the significance of IFN? and TNF? during T cell-driven liver immunopathology, we injected the rAAV2 vectors into mice deficient in either the IFN?R or the TNFR1, and compared them to wild-type (WT) controls. Because the peaks for serum ALT and TNF? expression were all on day 3, we used this time-point to analyze the difference between WT and deficient mouse strains. In these experiments, the injection of OT-1 T-cells into rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector transduced IFN?R-deficient ( Fig 4A ) or TNFR1-deficient mice ( Fig 4B ) resulted in less liver injury as compared to WT controls. We next measured the expression of TNF? mRNA in both IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient animals, using GAPDH as an internal standard. OT-1 T-cell transfer into WT antigen-expressing mice resulted in a 20-fold increase in TNF? message. When we analyzed IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector plus OT-1 T-cells, there was reduced upregulation of TNF? expression in both gene-targeted strains compared to WT controls ( Fig 4 ). These data suggest that IFN? and TNF? signaling are both required for optimal liver injury and TNF? expression.  Significance of IFN? and TNF? To test the significance of IFN? and TNF? during T cell-driven liver immunopathology, we injected the rAAV2 vectors into mice deficient in either the IFN?R or the TNFR1, and compared them to wild-type (WT) controls. Because the peaks for serum ALT and TNF? expression were all on day 3, we used this time-point to analyze the difference between WT and deficient mouse strains. In these experiments, the injection of OT-1 T-cells into rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector transduced IFN?R-deficient ( Fig 4A ) or TNFR1-deficient mice ( Fig 4B ) resulted in less liver injury as compared to WT controls. We next measured the expression of TNF? mRNA in both IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient animals, using GAPDH as an internal standard. OT-1 T-cell transfer into WT antigen-expressing mice resulted in a 20-fold increase in TNF? message. When we analyzed IFN?R and TNFR1 deficient mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector plus OT-1 T-cells, there was reduced upregulation of TNF? expression in both gene-targeted strains compared to WT controls ( Fig 4 ). These data suggest that IFN? and TNF? signaling are both required for optimal liver injury and TNF? expression.  OT-1 T-cells and liver macrophages produce IFN? and TNF? after restimulation To formulate an accurate model of how IFN? and TNF? contribute to liver injury, it was important to establish which cell types may be producing these cytokines. Based on other T-cell dependent models of hepatitis, it is possible that T-cells, NK cells, NKT cells and/or Kupffer cells could contribute to the local concentration of these molecules ( 5 , 7 , 13 – 15 ). To evaluate the cellular sources of the cytokines, we performed in vitro restimulation in the presence of Brefeldin A, IL-2 and the SIINFEKL peptide. Isolated liver leukocytes from rAAV2 vector transduced WT mice 3 days post OT-1 transfer, were restimulated for 4–5 hours at 37°C and then stained for cell surface identification markers and for the presence of intracellular IFN? and TNF?. When gating on live liver lymphocytes, CD8+ cells were the primary population showing positive IFN? staining ( Fig 5B ). This staining was significantly reduced when the SIINFEKL peptide was absent from the restimulation culture. Gating on NK1.1+ TCR?? cells or NK1.1+ TCR?+ cells showed less than 2% of the populations expressing either TNF? or IFN? ( Fig 5C, D ). Analysis of TNF? production showed that the majority of cytokine positive cells were positive for F4/80 ( Fig 5A ). These data therefore support a model of injury that is dependent on IFN? production by activated CD8+ T-cells and on TNF? production by activated Kupffer cells.  OT-1 T-cells and liver macrophages produce IFN? and TNF? after restimulation To formulate an accurate model of how IFN? and TNF? contribute to liver injury, it was important to establish which cell types may be producing these cytokines. Based on other T-cell dependent models of hepatitis, it is possible that T-cells, NK cells, NKT cells and/or Kupffer cells could contribute to the local concentration of these molecules ( 5 , 7 , 13 – 15 ). To evaluate the cellular sources of the cytokines, we performed in vitro restimulation in the presence of Brefeldin A, IL-2 and the SIINFEKL peptide. Isolated liver leukocytes from rAAV2 vector transduced WT mice 3 days post OT-1 transfer, were restimulated for 4–5 hours at 37°C and then stained for cell surface identification markers and for the presence of intracellular IFN? and TNF?. When gating on live liver lymphocytes, CD8+ cells were the primary population showing positive IFN? staining ( Fig 5B ). This staining was significantly reduced when the SIINFEKL peptide was absent from the restimulation culture. Gating on NK1.1+ TCR?? cells or NK1.1+ TCR?+ cells showed less than 2% of the populations expressing either TNF? or IFN? ( Fig 5C, D ). Analysis of TNF? production showed that the majority of cytokine positive cells were positive for F4/80 ( Fig 5A ). These data therefore support a model of injury that is dependent on IFN? production by activated CD8+ T-cells and on TNF? production by activated Kupffer cells.  Cellular targets of IFN? signaling IFN? contributes to liver injury in various experimental systems ( 2 , 5 , 8 , 16 ). However, it is not clear whether its contribution is mediated by effects on the parenchyma, the liver leukocytes, or both. To test this we generated bone marrow chimeras where the bone marrow-derived cells were replaced with IFN?R deficient bone marrow. To ensure complete replacement of Kupffer cells, radiation chimeras were treated with clodronate-loaded liposomes 4 weeks after bone marrow transfer. Subsequent, secondary repopulation of the liver resulted in an animal with >99% of Kupffer cells derived from donor bone marrow as previously described ( 11 ). Day 3 analysis of such chimeric mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector, followed by OT-1 T-cells, showed significant reduction in serum ALT in mice that received IFN?R deficient bone marrow, compared to control mice that received WT bone marrow ( Fig 6A ). Quantitation of liver homogenate mRNA also showed a 10-fold reduction of TNF? gene expression in IFN?R?/??WT mice. These data support the hypothesis that CD8+ T-cell IFN? drives Kupffer cell TNF? production, and that this signaling event contributes to liver injury. In the reverse chimera experiment, in which WT bone marrow was transferred into IFN?R deficient mice, we also observed reduced liver injury ( Fig 6B ). However, unlike what was seen in Figure 6A , IFN?R deficiency in solid tissues had no effect on the level of TNF? message expression. Together these data demonstrate the presence of an indirect mechanism of injury that depends on Kupffer cell activation by IFN? as well as a direct injury pathway that is promoted by IFN? signaling on the liver parenchyma. It has been previously suggested that IFN? can be directly cytotoxic to the liver by inducing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress mediated apoptosis ( 17 ). Caspase-12 and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) have both been associated with ER stress induced apoptosis in hepatocytes ( 18 , 19 ). Thus, to test whether IFN? was inducing ER stress within the liver, we measured Caspase-12 and CHOP mRNA from liver homogenates. Caspase-12 transcript was induced in control WT?WT chimeras, consistent with a direct effect of IFN? on the hepatocytes ( Figure 7A ). The absence of the IFN?R from bone marrow-derived cells in IFN?R?/??WT chimeras did not compromise caspase-12 induction, compared to the effect in WT?WT controls ( Fig 7A ). This also was consistent with a direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. In the WT?IFN?R?/? chimeric mice we observed a modest (around 20%), yet statistically significant reduction in caspase-12 mRNA ( Fig 7B ). Therefore, although liver injury was causing the expression of caspase-12 and an element of this was dependent on the IFN?R on solid tissues, the majority of caspase-12 induction could not be attributed to the direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. Expression of CHOP was only weakly induced in this system, with an increase to approximately 20% above background, and the lack of IFN?R on either bone marrow derived cells ( Fig 7C ), or the liver parenchyma ( Fig 7D ), did not significantly change the level of CHOP transcript in antigen expressing mice. Taken together, the data suggest that if there is a direct effect of IFN? in promoting ER stress in hepatocytes, this is a very small effect. Most of the induction of both caspase-12 and CHOP message is clearly independent of an action of IFN? on hepatocytes. One common effect of IFN? is the up-regulation of MHC molecules. We therefore considered the hypothesis that the decreased liver injury seen in IFN?R deficient mice resulted from reduced antigen availability, due to the loss of IFN? mediated induction of the MHC class I antigen presentation pathway. To test this hypothesis, we measured MHC class I H2-Kb transcript levels in the livers of mice from the previous IFN?R chimeras. As shown in Figure 7F , antigen expressing WT?IFN?R?/? mice did not induce H2-Kb. Conversely, in IFN?R?/??WT mice the induction of H2-Kb was preserved ( Fig 7E ). These data suggest that H2-Kb induction is driven by IFN?, acting via IFN?R expressed on the liver parenchyma.  Cellular targets of IFN? signaling IFN? contributes to liver injury in various experimental systems ( 2 , 5 , 8 , 16 ). However, it is not clear whether its contribution is mediated by effects on the parenchyma, the liver leukocytes, or both. To test this we generated bone marrow chimeras where the bone marrow-derived cells were replaced with IFN?R deficient bone marrow. To ensure complete replacement of Kupffer cells, radiation chimeras were treated with clodronate-loaded liposomes 4 weeks after bone marrow transfer. Subsequent, secondary repopulation of the liver resulted in an animal with >99% of Kupffer cells derived from donor bone marrow as previously described ( 11 ). Day 3 analysis of such chimeric mice given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector, followed by OT-1 T-cells, showed significant reduction in serum ALT in mice that received IFN?R deficient bone marrow, compared to control mice that received WT bone marrow ( Fig 6A ). Quantitation of liver homogenate mRNA also showed a 10-fold reduction of TNF? gene expression in IFN?R?/??WT mice. These data support the hypothesis that CD8+ T-cell IFN? drives Kupffer cell TNF? production, and that this signaling event contributes to liver injury. In the reverse chimera experiment, in which WT bone marrow was transferred into IFN?R deficient mice, we also observed reduced liver injury ( Fig 6B ). However, unlike what was seen in Figure 6A , IFN?R deficiency in solid tissues had no effect on the level of TNF? message expression. Together these data demonstrate the presence of an indirect mechanism of injury that depends on Kupffer cell activation by IFN? as well as a direct injury pathway that is promoted by IFN? signaling on the liver parenchyma. It has been previously suggested that IFN? can be directly cytotoxic to the liver by inducing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress mediated apoptosis ( 17 ). Caspase-12 and the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) have both been associated with ER stress induced apoptosis in hepatocytes ( 18 , 19 ). Thus, to test whether IFN? was inducing ER stress within the liver, we measured Caspase-12 and CHOP mRNA from liver homogenates. Caspase-12 transcript was induced in control WT?WT chimeras, consistent with a direct effect of IFN? on the hepatocytes ( Figure 7A ). The absence of the IFN?R from bone marrow-derived cells in IFN?R?/??WT chimeras did not compromise caspase-12 induction, compared to the effect in WT?WT controls ( Fig 7A ). This also was consistent with a direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. In the WT?IFN?R?/? chimeric mice we observed a modest (around 20%), yet statistically significant reduction in caspase-12 mRNA ( Fig 7B ). Therefore, although liver injury was causing the expression of caspase-12 and an element of this was dependent on the IFN?R on solid tissues, the majority of caspase-12 induction could not be attributed to the direct action of IFN? on hepatocytes. Expression of CHOP was only weakly induced in this system, with an increase to approximately 20% above background, and the lack of IFN?R on either bone marrow derived cells ( Fig 7C ), or the liver parenchyma ( Fig 7D ), did not significantly change the level of CHOP transcript in antigen expressing mice. Taken together, the data suggest that if there is a direct effect of IFN? in promoting ER stress in hepatocytes, this is a very small effect. Most of the induction of both caspase-12 and CHOP message is clearly independent of an action of IFN? on hepatocytes. One common effect of IFN? is the up-regulation of MHC molecules. We therefore considered the hypothesis that the decreased liver injury seen in IFN?R deficient mice resulted from reduced antigen availability, due to the loss of IFN? mediated induction of the MHC class I antigen presentation pathway. To test this hypothesis, we measured MHC class I H2-Kb transcript levels in the livers of mice from the previous IFN?R chimeras. As shown in Figure 7F , antigen expressing WT?IFN?R?/? mice did not induce H2-Kb. Conversely, in IFN?R?/??WT mice the induction of H2-Kb was preserved ( Fig 7E ). These data suggest that H2-Kb induction is driven by IFN?, acting via IFN?R expressed on the liver parenchyma.  How does TNF? contribute to liver injury? The potential role of TNF? in liver injury is complex to dissect. The cytotoxic and anti-apoptotic functions of TNF? have been studied in various contexts ( 7 , 20 , 21 ). Data from experiments with TNFR1 deficient mice in Figure 4 showed that TNF? signaling was required for optimal TNF? expression and liver injury. Several reports show that autocrine TNF? signaling is required for complete IFN?-dependent macrophage activation ( 22 , 23 ). Therefore, TNF? signaling may be needed for Kupffer cell activation within the liver, and this activation could then contribute to liver injury. Conversely, TNF? signaling on the liver parenchyma might promote liver injury as demonstrated by experiments that couple TNF? with a transcription inhibitor ( 6 , 24 ). To test whether TNF? causes direct cytolytic damage to the liver parenchyma, we generated bone marrow chimeras using TNFR1 deficient mice as hosts, and gave them WT bone marrow followed by clodronate liposomes, rAAV2 vectors, and OT-1 T-cells as described for the experiments shown in Figure 6 . We found no significant difference in either serum ALT or TNF? message expression between WT?TNFR1 deficient mice and the WT?WT control chimeras ( Fig 8 ). These data suggest that TNF? does not directly act on hepatocytes, or on other radioresistant cells, to promote liver injury. While TRAIL expressing Kupffer cells have been shown to be cytotoxic ( 25 ) and TRAIL has been implicated in viral hepatitis ( 26 ), the expression of TRAIL was not altered by the lack of TNFR1 in either experiment ( S.Fig 2 ), making it an unlikely agent of liver injury.  How does TNF? contribute to liver injury? The potential role of TNF? in liver injury is complex to dissect. The cytotoxic and anti-apoptotic functions of TNF? have been studied in various contexts ( 7 , 20 , 21 ). Data from experiments with TNFR1 deficient mice in Figure 4 showed that TNF? signaling was required for optimal TNF? expression and liver injury. Several reports show that autocrine TNF? signaling is required for complete IFN?-dependent macrophage activation ( 22 , 23 ). Therefore, TNF? signaling may be needed for Kupffer cell activation within the liver, and this activation could then contribute to liver injury. Conversely, TNF? signaling on the liver parenchyma might promote liver injury as demonstrated by experiments that couple TNF? with a transcription inhibitor ( 6 , 24 ). To test whether TNF? causes direct cytolytic damage to the liver parenchyma, we generated bone marrow chimeras using TNFR1 deficient mice as hosts, and gave them WT bone marrow followed by clodronate liposomes, rAAV2 vectors, and OT-1 T-cells as described for the experiments shown in Figure 6 . We found no significant difference in either serum ALT or TNF? message expression between WT?TNFR1 deficient mice and the WT?WT control chimeras ( Fig 8 ). These data suggest that TNF? does not directly act on hepatocytes, or on other radioresistant cells, to promote liver injury. While TRAIL expressing Kupffer cells have been shown to be cytotoxic ( 25 ) and TRAIL has been implicated in viral hepatitis ( 26 ), the expression of TRAIL was not altered by the lack of TNFR1 in either experiment ( S.Fig 2 ), making it an unlikely agent of liver injury.  Discussion To investigate the roles of IFN? and TNF? in the context of CD8+ T cell-dependent liver injury, we used hepatic injections of an antigen encoding rAAV2 vector which transduces hepatocytes ( 9 ). Experiments comparing IFN?R or TNFR1 deficient mice with WT confirmed the importance of these cytokines as suggested by other reports ( 7 , 8 , 16 ). Intracellular cytokine staining of liver leukocytes showed that the F4/80+ population was the primary TNF? producer, which is consistent with reports of Kupffer cell TNF? expression in other liver injury models ( 7 , 13 ). Evaluation of intracellular IFN? staining showed that OT-1 cells were the major IFN? source while less than 2% of the other populations stained positive for IFN?. The reduction in serum ALT in radiation bone marrow chimeras, in which the IFN?R was absent from either hematopoietic tissues or parenchyma, revealed IFN? signaling to promote both direct and indirect forms of liver injury in parallel. With respect to direct IFN? signaling on hepatocytes, we evaluated the possibility that IFN? had a direct cytotoxic effect on the hepatocytes by promoting ER stress mediated cell death ( 17 ). However, the data showed minimal induction of CHOP and caspase-12 mRNA during liver injury. More significantly, the presence of the IFN?R on bone marrow cells was irrelevant, and its expression on the liver parenchyma did not strongly impact the expression of either CHOP or caspase-12. Overall, these data would suggest that a direct action of IFN? in inducing hepatocyte ER stress is, at most, a small contributor to liver injury. Alternatively, IFN? signaling on hepatocytes may promote apoptosis by increasing hepatocyte susceptibility to CTL mediated death mechanisms ( 5 , 8 , 27 , 28 ). While the investigation of Fas or perforin-mediated injury is beyond the scope of this study, up-regulation of liver H2-Kb expression was dependent on IFN?R expression on the radio-resistant host cells, and not on bone marrow-derived cells. This would suggest that MHC class I up-regulation may contribute to direct IFN? mediated liver injury, presumably by increasing the expression of target MHC-peptide complexes. In contrast, removal of IFN?R from bone marrow-derived cells reduced serum ALT and Kupffer cell TNF? expression; which was also evident in TNFR1-deficient mice. The lack of any significant difference between serum ALT or TNF? expression in TNFR1 chimeras when compared to control chimeras supports the idea of a TNF? dependent autocrine loop which facilitates optimal TNF? expression. This feedback loop is likely to be acting on the Kupffer cells themselves, since macrophage activation may be driven by TNFR1 autocrine signaling ( 22 , 23 ). Furthermore, these data demonstrate that TNF? does not have a direct cytotoxic effect on the hepatocytes. This stands in contrast to experiments conducted in an adenovirus model, in which the conclusion of a direct effect of TNF? was based on in vitro cytotoxicity data ( 27 ). While TRAIL expression was not affected by the loss of TNFR1 signaling, other Kupffer cell derived cytotoxic molecules, such as reactive oxygen species or nitric oxide ( 29 , 30 ), may be responsible for an indirect form of liver damage. The liver injury we had investigated depends entirely on the introduction of exogenous CD8+ T cells that recognize the AAV vector-encoded target antigen. In normal mice, AAV tranduction of hepatocytes normally results in long-lived vector expression, arguing that the endogenous T cell response is weak ( 31 , 32 ). However, the immunopathology we investigate here takes place in the context of an endogenous innate immune response, characterized by transient, local cytokine expression ( 33 ). In the future, it will be important to determine whether this innate response is important in the induction of CD8+ T cell-mediated immunopathology. In summary, we propose a model in which IFN? promotes liver injury by two parallel mechanisms, while TNF? is exclusively involved in Kupffer cell dependent damage. This mechanism begins with CD8+ T-cell production of IFN?, resulting in Kupffer cell TNF? expression and sensitization of hepatocytes to CTL by increasing antigen availability via the MHC class I pathway. While TNF? itself is not directly cytotoxic, we believe that its role lies in promoting Kupffer cell activation via an autocrine positive feedback loop that promotes optimal TNF? expression and subsequently results in liver damage. Further investigation is required to determine whether this TNF? dependent, Kupffer cell mediated injury acts via a collateral mechanism, or enhances direct liver injury driven by CTL recognition of transduced hepatocytes. In the context of a hepatic viral infection, interference with direct forms of CTL mediated liver injury may have the undesirable effect of inhibiting viral clearance. However, targeting collateral liver injury pathways may be beneficial to reduce liver damage while preserving, and perhaps enhancing, antiviral immunity. Further analysis of these mechanisms therefore holds therapeutic potential.  Discussion To investigate the roles of IFN? and TNF? in the context of CD8+ T cell-dependent liver injury, we used hepatic injections of an antigen encoding rAAV2 vector which transduces hepatocytes ( 9 ). Experiments comparing IFN?R or TNFR1 deficient mice with WT confirmed the importance of these cytokines as suggested by other reports ( 7 , 8 , 16 ). Intracellular cytokine staining of liver leukocytes showed that the F4/80+ population was the primary TNF? producer, which is consistent with reports of Kupffer cell TNF? expression in other liver injury models ( 7 , 13 ). Evaluation of intracellular IFN? staining showed that OT-1 cells were the major IFN? source while less than 2% of the other populations stained positive for IFN?. The reduction in serum ALT in radiation bone marrow chimeras, in which the IFN?R was absent from either hematopoietic tissues or parenchyma, revealed IFN? signaling to promote both direct and indirect forms of liver injury in parallel. With respect to direct IFN? signaling on hepatocytes, we evaluated the possibility that IFN? had a direct cytotoxic effect on the hepatocytes by promoting ER stress mediated cell death ( 17 ). However, the data showed minimal induction of CHOP and caspase-12 mRNA during liver injury. More significantly, the presence of the IFN?R on bone marrow cells was irrelevant, and its expression on the liver parenchyma did not strongly impact the expression of either CHOP or caspase-12. Overall, these data would suggest that a direct action of IFN? in inducing hepatocyte ER stress is, at most, a small contributor to liver injury. Alternatively, IFN? signaling on hepatocytes may promote apoptosis by increasing hepatocyte susceptibility to CTL mediated death mechanisms ( 5 , 8 , 27 , 28 ). While the investigation of Fas or perforin-mediated injury is beyond the scope of this study, up-regulation of liver H2-Kb expression was dependent on IFN?R expression on the radio-resistant host cells, and not on bone marrow-derived cells. This would suggest that MHC class I up-regulation may contribute to direct IFN? mediated liver injury, presumably by increasing the expression of target MHC-peptide complexes. In contrast, removal of IFN?R from bone marrow-derived cells reduced serum ALT and Kupffer cell TNF? expression; which was also evident in TNFR1-deficient mice. The lack of any significant difference between serum ALT or TNF? expression in TNFR1 chimeras when compared to control chimeras supports the idea of a TNF? dependent autocrine loop which facilitates optimal TNF? expression. This feedback loop is likely to be acting on the Kupffer cells themselves, since macrophage activation may be driven by TNFR1 autocrine signaling ( 22 , 23 ). Furthermore, these data demonstrate that TNF? does not have a direct cytotoxic effect on the hepatocytes. This stands in contrast to experiments conducted in an adenovirus model, in which the conclusion of a direct effect of TNF? was based on in vitro cytotoxicity data ( 27 ). While TRAIL expression was not affected by the loss of TNFR1 signaling, other Kupffer cell derived cytotoxic molecules, such as reactive oxygen species or nitric oxide ( 29 , 30 ), may be responsible for an indirect form of liver damage. The liver injury we had investigated depends entirely on the introduction of exogenous CD8+ T cells that recognize the AAV vector-encoded target antigen. In normal mice, AAV tranduction of hepatocytes normally results in long-lived vector expression, arguing that the endogenous T cell response is weak ( 31 , 32 ). However, the immunopathology we investigate here takes place in the context of an endogenous innate immune response, characterized by transient, local cytokine expression ( 33 ). In the future, it will be important to determine whether this innate response is important in the induction of CD8+ T cell-mediated immunopathology. In summary, we propose a model in which IFN? promotes liver injury by two parallel mechanisms, while TNF? is exclusively involved in Kupffer cell dependent damage. This mechanism begins with CD8+ T-cell production of IFN?, resulting in Kupffer cell TNF? expression and sensitization of hepatocytes to CTL by increasing antigen availability via the MHC class I pathway. While TNF? itself is not directly cytotoxic, we believe that its role lies in promoting Kupffer cell activation via an autocrine positive feedback loop that promotes optimal TNF? expression and subsequently results in liver damage. Further investigation is required to determine whether this TNF? dependent, Kupffer cell mediated injury acts via a collateral mechanism, or enhances direct liver injury driven by CTL recognition of transduced hepatocytes. In the context of a hepatic viral infection, interference with direct forms of CTL mediated liver injury may have the undesirable effect of inhibiting viral clearance. However, targeting collateral liver injury pathways may be beneficial to reduce liver damage while preserving, and perhaps enhancing, antiviral immunity. Further analysis of these mechanisms therefore holds therapeutic potential.  Supplementary Material S1 Supplementary Figure 1: GFP expression and liver injury are present throughout the liver (A) C57BL6 mice were given an intrahepatic injection of the rAAV2 GFP vector and > 3 weeks later liver tissue was harvested and sections were stained for GFP. (B) C57BL6 mice were given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector plus 5×106 OT-1 cells approximately 3 weeks later. Day 3 post OT-1 transfer, harvested liver sections were stained for CD3. S2 Supplementary Figure 2: TRAIL expression is not changed by loss of TNFR1 signaling Three days post OT-1 cell transfer TNFR1 ?/? (A), WT ? TNFR1 ?/? chimeras (B) and their WT controls had liver mRNA measured for TRAIL expression. N.S. not significant. Data are representative, or the sum, of two independent experiments.  Supplementary Material S1 Supplementary Figure 1: GFP expression and liver injury are present throughout the liver (A) C57BL6 mice were given an intrahepatic injection of the rAAV2 GFP vector and > 3 weeks later liver tissue was harvested and sections were stained for GFP. (B) C57BL6 mice were given the rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vector plus 5×106 OT-1 cells approximately 3 weeks later. Day 3 post OT-1 transfer, harvested liver sections were stained for CD3. S2 Supplementary Figure 2: TRAIL expression is not changed by loss of TNFR1 signaling Three days post OT-1 cell transfer TNFR1 ?/? (A), WT ? TNFR1 ?/? chimeras (B) and their WT controls had liver mRNA measured for TRAIL expression. N.S. not significant. Data are representative, or the sum, of two independent experiments.  Figures Figure 1 Histologic assessment of AAV-transduced livers C57BL6 mice were transduced with either rAAV2 GFP or rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vectors by direct intrahepatic injection. All mice received 5×106 OT-1 cells i.v. three weeks later. H&E-staining of the livers demonstrated the presence of numerous, discrete inflammatory foci in mice expressing the target antigen (A). The severity of liver injury was scored and plotted for 24-hr intervals post OT-1 transfer (B). Data points represent means ± range for n ? 3 animals per time point. ***, P < 0.0001; N.S, not significant. Data are the sum or representative of two independent experiments. Figure 2 Histological staining for CD3, F4/80 and Caspase 3 Liver sections from WT mice that had received rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL, or rAAV2 GFP, and OT-1 cells were stained for CD3 (A), F4/80 (B), or activated/cleaved Caspase 3 (C). Figure 3 Hepatitis in AAV-transduced Livers C57BL6 mice were injected with either rAAV2 GFP or rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vectors followed by OT-1 T-cells as described in Figure 1 . Serum was harvested and analyzed for ALT (A) at 24-hour intervals post OT-1 transfer. Genomic DNA from the liver was isolated and the OT-1 TCR? chain measured by qPCR. (B). Liver mRNA for IFN? (C) or TNF? (D) was measured by qRT-PCR. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 3 animals per time point. Data are the sum or representative of two independent experiments. Figure 4 Significance of IFN?R and TNFR1 in TNF? expression and liver injury Genetically deficient and control mice were treated with rAAV2 GFP or GFP-SIINFEKL vectors and given OT-1 cells as described in Figure 1 . Serum ALT and liver TNF? message expression were measured on day 3 post OT-1 transfer in WT versus IFN?R ?/? mice, (A) and WT versus TNFR1 ?/? mice (B). Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 2 in rAAV2 GFP controls and n ? 3 in rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL groups. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. n ? 3 Data are the sum or representative of two independent experiments. Figure 5 Cytoplasmic staining for IFN? and TNF? Liver lymphocytes isolated on day 3 from mice treated with rAAV2 vectors and OT-1 T-cells as described in Figure 1 , were restimulated in media with 70 U/ml IL-2, 10 µg/ml SIINFEKL peptide, and 1 µl/ml GolgiPlug-BD for 4–5 hours. Lymphocytes were stained for cell identification markers and TNF? (A) and IFN? (B). Cytokine expression in NK1.1+ TCR?? (C) or NK1.1+ TCR?+ cells (D). Data are representative of 3 separate experiments. Figure 6 Effect of IFN? on bone marrow-derived cells IFN?R?/? chimeric mice and their WT controls were treated with rAAV2 vectors as described in Figure 1 . Day 3 post OT-1 transfer, serum and liver mRNA were harvested and measured for ALT and TNF? expression in IFN?R ?/? ? WT chimera (A) and WT ? IFN?R ?/? chimera (B) experiments. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 5 in each group. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; N.S, not significant. Data are the sum of two independent experiments. Figure 7 IFN? mediated effects on MHC class I H2-K<sup>b</sup> induction and ER-stress IFN?R?/? chimeric mice and their WT controls were treated with rAAV2 vectors as described in Figure 1 . Day 3 post OT-1 transfer liver mRNA was harvested and measured for H2-Kb expression in WT ? IFN?R ?/? chimeras (A) and IFN?R ?/? ? WT chimeras (B). Markers of ER-stress, caspase-12 (C, D) and CHOP (E, F), were also measured in each chimera. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 2 in rAAV2 GFP controls and n ? 3 in rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL groups. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; N.S. not significant. Data are representative of two independent experiments. Figure 8 Does TNF? cause direct liver parenchyma cytotoxicity? WT ? TNFR1 ?/? chimeras and their WT controls were treated as described in Figure 1 . Day 3 post OT-1 cell transfer, ALT (A) and TNF? expression (B) were measured. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 5 per group. N.S, not significant. Data are the sum of two independent experiments.  Figures Figure 1 Histologic assessment of AAV-transduced livers C57BL6 mice were transduced with either rAAV2 GFP or rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vectors by direct intrahepatic injection. All mice received 5×106 OT-1 cells i.v. three weeks later. H&E-staining of the livers demonstrated the presence of numerous, discrete inflammatory foci in mice expressing the target antigen (A). The severity of liver injury was scored and plotted for 24-hr intervals post OT-1 transfer (B). Data points represent means ± range for n ? 3 animals per time point. ***, P < 0.0001; N.S, not significant. Data are the sum or representative of two independent experiments. Figure 2 Histological staining for CD3, F4/80 and Caspase 3 Liver sections from WT mice that had received rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL, or rAAV2 GFP, and OT-1 cells were stained for CD3 (A), F4/80 (B), or activated/cleaved Caspase 3 (C). Figure 3 Hepatitis in AAV-transduced Livers C57BL6 mice were injected with either rAAV2 GFP or rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL vectors followed by OT-1 T-cells as described in Figure 1 . Serum was harvested and analyzed for ALT (A) at 24-hour intervals post OT-1 transfer. Genomic DNA from the liver was isolated and the OT-1 TCR? chain measured by qPCR. (B). Liver mRNA for IFN? (C) or TNF? (D) was measured by qRT-PCR. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 3 animals per time point. Data are the sum or representative of two independent experiments. Figure 4 Significance of IFN?R and TNFR1 in TNF? expression and liver injury Genetically deficient and control mice were treated with rAAV2 GFP or GFP-SIINFEKL vectors and given OT-1 cells as described in Figure 1 . Serum ALT and liver TNF? message expression were measured on day 3 post OT-1 transfer in WT versus IFN?R ?/? mice, (A) and WT versus TNFR1 ?/? mice (B). Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 2 in rAAV2 GFP controls and n ? 3 in rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL groups. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. n ? 3 Data are the sum or representative of two independent experiments. Figure 5 Cytoplasmic staining for IFN? and TNF? Liver lymphocytes isolated on day 3 from mice treated with rAAV2 vectors and OT-1 T-cells as described in Figure 1 , were restimulated in media with 70 U/ml IL-2, 10 µg/ml SIINFEKL peptide, and 1 µl/ml GolgiPlug-BD for 4–5 hours. Lymphocytes were stained for cell identification markers and TNF? (A) and IFN? (B). Cytokine expression in NK1.1+ TCR?? (C) or NK1.1+ TCR?+ cells (D). Data are representative of 3 separate experiments. Figure 6 Effect of IFN? on bone marrow-derived cells IFN?R?/? chimeric mice and their WT controls were treated with rAAV2 vectors as described in Figure 1 . Day 3 post OT-1 transfer, serum and liver mRNA were harvested and measured for ALT and TNF? expression in IFN?R ?/? ? WT chimera (A) and WT ? IFN?R ?/? chimera (B) experiments. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 5 in each group. **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; N.S, not significant. Data are the sum of two independent experiments. Figure 7 IFN? mediated effects on MHC class I H2-K<sup>b</sup> induction and ER-stress IFN?R?/? chimeric mice and their WT controls were treated with rAAV2 vectors as described in Figure 1 . Day 3 post OT-1 transfer liver mRNA was harvested and measured for H2-Kb expression in WT ? IFN?R ?/? chimeras (A) and IFN?R ?/? ? WT chimeras (B). Markers of ER-stress, caspase-12 (C, D) and CHOP (E, F), were also measured in each chimera. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 2 in rAAV2 GFP controls and n ? 3 in rAAV2 GFP-SIINFEKL groups. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; N.S. not significant. Data are representative of two independent experiments. Figure 8 Does TNF? cause direct liver parenchyma cytotoxicity? WT ? TNFR1 ?/? chimeras and their WT controls were treated as described in Figure 1 . Day 3 post OT-1 cell transfer, ALT (A) and TNF? expression (B) were measured. Data points represent means ± SEM for n ? 5 per group. N.S, not significant. Data are the sum of two independent experiments. 