Extended IL10 haplotypes and their association with HIV progression to AIDS Interleukin-10 (IL-10) is a pleiotropic cytokine with both immunosuppressive and immunostimulatory functions. Its roles in infections and autoimmunity may have resulted in selective pressures on polymorphisms within the gene, leading to genomic coexistence of several semi-conserved haplotypes involved with diverse pathogen interactions during genomic evolution. Previous studies focused either exclusively on promoter haplotypes or on individual SNPs. We genotyped 21 single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human IL10 gene and examined this variation compared to other mammalian species sequences. Haplotype heterogeneity in human populations is centered around ‘classic’ ‘proximal’ promoter polymorphisms: –592, –819 and –1082. High-producing GCC haplotypes are by far the most numerous and diverse group, the intermediate IL-10 producing ACC-inclusive haplotypes seem to be related most closely to the ancestral haplotype, and the ATA-inclusive haplotypes cluster a separate branch with strong bootstrap support. We looked at associations of corresponding haplotypes with HIV progression. A haplotype trend regression confirmed that individuals carrying the low-producing ATA-inclusive haplotypes in European Americans progress to AIDS faster, and most likely explain the role of IL10. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that existing polymorphisms in this gene may reflect a balance of historic adaptive responses to autoimmune, infectious and other disease agents.  Materials and methods Study populations and outcomes The participants genotyped in this study consisted of HIV-1 sero-converters (SCs infected after study enrollment), sero-positives (SPs infected at study enrollment), and sero-negatives (SN remained HIV-sero-negative despite ongoing or prior risk activity) enrolled in three US-based natural history HIV/AIDS cohorts. This study included 649 European American and 310 African American sero-converters recruited from four AIDS cohorts: AIDS Link to the Intravenous Experience (ALIVE; n = 266, all African Americans), the Multicenter AIDS cohort study (MACS; n = 482, 438 were European Americans and 44 African Americans), and the Multi-center Hemophilia Cohort Study (MHCS; n = 211 all European Americans) 35 – 37 , 59 ( Supplementary Table S1 ). European American samples also included 519 sero-negatives (363 from MHCS and 156 from MACS) as well as 968 sero-prevalent individuals (307 from MHCS and 661 from MACS) ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Similarly, African-American samples also included 449 (444 from ALIVE and 5 from MACS) sero-negatives as well as 745 (663 from ALIVE and 82 from MACS) sero-prevalents. Similarly, due to the potential frailty bias (missing the most rapid progressors to AIDS and death) among SPs, only SCs from these three cohorts were used in the survival analysis to examine the differential time of HIV progression to AIDS. Sero-positives and sero-negatives were included for allele frequency estimation and haplotype inferences. The date of HIV-1 sero-conversion was estimated to be the mid-point between the last negative HIV-1 antibody test and the first documented positive HIV-1 test and time to end point was calculated from the sero-conversion date. All HIV sero-converters had less than 3 years between their last HIV-negative and first HIV-positive test. Three end points reflecting advancing AIDS morbidity were considered: (1) AIDS 1993: HIV-1 sero-positive individuals with AIDS-defining illness or a CD4+ T lymphocyte count less than 200 60 (2) AIDS 1987: HIV-1 sero-positive individuals with AIDS-defining illness, and (3) death from an AIDS-defining illness. 61 As antiretroviral treatment history was unavailable for a majority of subjects, participants were censored for highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), regardless of whether thereafter the patients reported that they were in HAART or not. The censoring date was the earlier of two dates: the last recorded follow-up visit or 31 December 1995, for the MACS and MHCS cohorts; and the last recorded visit or 31 July 1997, for the ALIVE cohort because of delayed uptake of HAART in this group (reference: PMID 11546947). DNAs used for genotyping was extracted from the immortal lymphoblastoid B cell lines established for each patient as described earlier. 62 This study was approved by the Committee on Human Research at the National Cancer Institute-Frederick and other participating institutions. Polymorphisms in the <italic>IL10</italic> gene and DNA genotyping Twenty-one SNPs ( Table 1 ) were selected from the IL10 promoter region ( n = 12), introns ( n = 5) and the 3? UTR ( n = 4). These SNPs (rs1800890, rs6703630, rs6693899, rs5743623, rs5743624, rs1800893, rs1800896, rs1800871, rs1800895, rs1800872, rs3024489, rs5743625, rs1518110, rs1554286, rs1878672, rs3024494, rs3024509, rs3024496, rs3024498, rs6697497, rs6687786) were genotyped using Applied Biosystem’s (Foster City, CA, USA) allelic discrimination TaqMan assays 63 or SNaPshot (Foster City, CA, USA) single-base extension assays, as described earlier. 34 <italic>IL10</italic> sequence phylogeny For the phylogenetic analysis, we used the publicly available chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) sequence (NC_006468), which was compared with the human IL10 genomic sequence to identify the nucleotides in the respective SNP positions. We also obtained sequences of rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ), dog ( Canis familiaris ), mouse ( Mus musculus ), rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) and opossum ( Monodelphis domestica ) from the UCSC Genome Browser ( http://www.ucsc.edu/ ) and used the Evolutionary Conserved Regions (ECR) Browser 32 to compare the genomic region of IL10 between these species and humans ( http://ecrbrowser.dcode.org/ ). Positions of SNPs genotyped superimposed on an IL10 gene map, relative to the locations of conserved elements across the mammalian species in the region, are shown in Figure 1 . Phylogenetic analyses of <italic>IL10</italic> haplotypes The MEGA 3.1 neighbor-joining tree building algorithm was used to examine the relationship between all uniquely identified haplotypes ( Table 1 ) using a Kimura 2-parameter model. 64 The model accounted for differences in transition and transversion substitution rates, and corrected for multiple hits while assuming that the four nucleotide frequencies are the same and constant rates of substitution. 65 An neighbor-joining tree of the IL10 gene haplotypes was built using the number of pairwise differences at the 21 examined SNPs ( Figure 2 ). We also included sequences of chimpanzee ( P. troglodytes ) and rhesus monkey ( M. mulatta ) to root the tree. Sequences that matched the IL10 region in these species were extracted and aligned to the human sequence using the Clustal algorithm implemented in MEGA 3.1. 64 The phylogenetic history of IL-10 haplotypes was also examined in a haplotype network built with Network 4.2 program 39 ( Figures 3a and b top). Network approaches have several advantages over traditional phylogenetic methods for representing genealogical relationships at a population level by account for the persistence of ancestral haplotypes, existence of multiple descendant haplotypes and low levels of sequence variation. 66 The network was developed by connecting haplotypes that differed by a single change first and then adding increasingly more distant haplotypes until either all were included or the maximum number of mutational steps was reached ( Figure 3 ). The resulting graphs also include the hazard ratios (the y axis) combined with the relative frequency of the haplotype in a population (circle areas are proportional to the haplotypic frequency they represent in Table 1 ). Black nodes represent ancestral haplotypes reconstructed using the information in the chimpanzee sequence. Statistical analyses Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium was examined for each SNP. Our previous analysis, 34 and the subsequent analysis with HaploView software 67 confirmed that all the SNPs examined in the IL10 gene region are in a single block of LD (data not shown). A haplotype trend regression approach was implemented as previously described. 5 , 68 Briefly, haplotype frequencies were estimated first, using an expectation–maximization algorithm; and then all possible haplotype pairs in each individual were weighted by their posterior probabilities. All rare haplotypes with frequencies <3% were collapsed into one haplotype group. The assigned haplotype estimations were used in the Kaplan–Meier analysis to assess the cumulative survival probabilities to two major end points mentioned earlier: AIDS–1993, AIDS–1987. Thus, each failure point in the survival distribution is accounted for by the probability of the haplotype, rather than an individual case. The differences in survival time were evaluated using the log-rank test, and the hazard ratios were calculated using the Cox-proportional hazard model. Data were analyzed separately for European Americans and African Americans. We chose the new cutoff point at 6 years after sero-conversion for the survival analysis based on the observed difference in crude Kaplan–Meier curves. Although we used similar approach as described in Shin et al ., 10 with additional samples the cutoff point was one year later. All statistical analyses were performed using SAS 9.1 and SAS Genetics. 69  Study populations and outcomes The participants genotyped in this study consisted of HIV-1 sero-converters (SCs infected after study enrollment), sero-positives (SPs infected at study enrollment), and sero-negatives (SN remained HIV-sero-negative despite ongoing or prior risk activity) enrolled in three US-based natural history HIV/AIDS cohorts. This study included 649 European American and 310 African American sero-converters recruited from four AIDS cohorts: AIDS Link to the Intravenous Experience (ALIVE; n = 266, all African Americans), the Multicenter AIDS cohort study (MACS; n = 482, 438 were European Americans and 44 African Americans), and the Multi-center Hemophilia Cohort Study (MHCS; n = 211 all European Americans) 35 – 37 , 59 ( Supplementary Table S1 ). European American samples also included 519 sero-negatives (363 from MHCS and 156 from MACS) as well as 968 sero-prevalent individuals (307 from MHCS and 661 from MACS) ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Similarly, African-American samples also included 449 (444 from ALIVE and 5 from MACS) sero-negatives as well as 745 (663 from ALIVE and 82 from MACS) sero-prevalents. Similarly, due to the potential frailty bias (missing the most rapid progressors to AIDS and death) among SPs, only SCs from these three cohorts were used in the survival analysis to examine the differential time of HIV progression to AIDS. Sero-positives and sero-negatives were included for allele frequency estimation and haplotype inferences. The date of HIV-1 sero-conversion was estimated to be the mid-point between the last negative HIV-1 antibody test and the first documented positive HIV-1 test and time to end point was calculated from the sero-conversion date. All HIV sero-converters had less than 3 years between their last HIV-negative and first HIV-positive test. Three end points reflecting advancing AIDS morbidity were considered: (1) AIDS 1993: HIV-1 sero-positive individuals with AIDS-defining illness or a CD4+ T lymphocyte count less than 200 60 (2) AIDS 1987: HIV-1 sero-positive individuals with AIDS-defining illness, and (3) death from an AIDS-defining illness. 61 As antiretroviral treatment history was unavailable for a majority of subjects, participants were censored for highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), regardless of whether thereafter the patients reported that they were in HAART or not. The censoring date was the earlier of two dates: the last recorded follow-up visit or 31 December 1995, for the MACS and MHCS cohorts; and the last recorded visit or 31 July 1997, for the ALIVE cohort because of delayed uptake of HAART in this group (reference: PMID 11546947). DNAs used for genotyping was extracted from the immortal lymphoblastoid B cell lines established for each patient as described earlier. 62 This study was approved by the Committee on Human Research at the National Cancer Institute-Frederick and other participating institutions.  Polymorphisms in the <italic>IL10</italic> gene and DNA genotyping Twenty-one SNPs ( Table 1 ) were selected from the IL10 promoter region ( n = 12), introns ( n = 5) and the 3? UTR ( n = 4). These SNPs (rs1800890, rs6703630, rs6693899, rs5743623, rs5743624, rs1800893, rs1800896, rs1800871, rs1800895, rs1800872, rs3024489, rs5743625, rs1518110, rs1554286, rs1878672, rs3024494, rs3024509, rs3024496, rs3024498, rs6697497, rs6687786) were genotyped using Applied Biosystem’s (Foster City, CA, USA) allelic discrimination TaqMan assays 63 or SNaPshot (Foster City, CA, USA) single-base extension assays, as described earlier. 34  <italic>IL10</italic> sequence phylogeny For the phylogenetic analysis, we used the publicly available chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) sequence (NC_006468), which was compared with the human IL10 genomic sequence to identify the nucleotides in the respective SNP positions. We also obtained sequences of rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ), dog ( Canis familiaris ), mouse ( Mus musculus ), rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) and opossum ( Monodelphis domestica ) from the UCSC Genome Browser ( http://www.ucsc.edu/ ) and used the Evolutionary Conserved Regions (ECR) Browser 32 to compare the genomic region of IL10 between these species and humans ( http://ecrbrowser.dcode.org/ ). Positions of SNPs genotyped superimposed on an IL10 gene map, relative to the locations of conserved elements across the mammalian species in the region, are shown in Figure 1 . Phylogenetic analyses of <italic>IL10</italic> haplotypes The MEGA 3.1 neighbor-joining tree building algorithm was used to examine the relationship between all uniquely identified haplotypes ( Table 1 ) using a Kimura 2-parameter model. 64 The model accounted for differences in transition and transversion substitution rates, and corrected for multiple hits while assuming that the four nucleotide frequencies are the same and constant rates of substitution. 65 An neighbor-joining tree of the IL10 gene haplotypes was built using the number of pairwise differences at the 21 examined SNPs ( Figure 2 ). We also included sequences of chimpanzee ( P. troglodytes ) and rhesus monkey ( M. mulatta ) to root the tree. Sequences that matched the IL10 region in these species were extracted and aligned to the human sequence using the Clustal algorithm implemented in MEGA 3.1. 64 The phylogenetic history of IL-10 haplotypes was also examined in a haplotype network built with Network 4.2 program 39 ( Figures 3a and b top). Network approaches have several advantages over traditional phylogenetic methods for representing genealogical relationships at a population level by account for the persistence of ancestral haplotypes, existence of multiple descendant haplotypes and low levels of sequence variation. 66 The network was developed by connecting haplotypes that differed by a single change first and then adding increasingly more distant haplotypes until either all were included or the maximum number of mutational steps was reached ( Figure 3 ). The resulting graphs also include the hazard ratios (the y axis) combined with the relative frequency of the haplotype in a population (circle areas are proportional to the haplotypic frequency they represent in Table 1 ). Black nodes represent ancestral haplotypes reconstructed using the information in the chimpanzee sequence.  Phylogenetic analyses of <italic>IL10</italic> haplotypes The MEGA 3.1 neighbor-joining tree building algorithm was used to examine the relationship between all uniquely identified haplotypes ( Table 1 ) using a Kimura 2-parameter model. 64 The model accounted for differences in transition and transversion substitution rates, and corrected for multiple hits while assuming that the four nucleotide frequencies are the same and constant rates of substitution. 65 An neighbor-joining tree of the IL10 gene haplotypes was built using the number of pairwise differences at the 21 examined SNPs ( Figure 2 ). We also included sequences of chimpanzee ( P. troglodytes ) and rhesus monkey ( M. mulatta ) to root the tree. Sequences that matched the IL10 region in these species were extracted and aligned to the human sequence using the Clustal algorithm implemented in MEGA 3.1. 64 The phylogenetic history of IL-10 haplotypes was also examined in a haplotype network built with Network 4.2 program 39 ( Figures 3a and b top). Network approaches have several advantages over traditional phylogenetic methods for representing genealogical relationships at a population level by account for the persistence of ancestral haplotypes, existence of multiple descendant haplotypes and low levels of sequence variation. 66 The network was developed by connecting haplotypes that differed by a single change first and then adding increasingly more distant haplotypes until either all were included or the maximum number of mutational steps was reached ( Figure 3 ). The resulting graphs also include the hazard ratios (the y axis) combined with the relative frequency of the haplotype in a population (circle areas are proportional to the haplotypic frequency they represent in Table 1 ). Black nodes represent ancestral haplotypes reconstructed using the information in the chimpanzee sequence.  Statistical analyses Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium was examined for each SNP. Our previous analysis, 34 and the subsequent analysis with HaploView software 67 confirmed that all the SNPs examined in the IL10 gene region are in a single block of LD (data not shown). A haplotype trend regression approach was implemented as previously described. 5 , 68 Briefly, haplotype frequencies were estimated first, using an expectation–maximization algorithm; and then all possible haplotype pairs in each individual were weighted by their posterior probabilities. All rare haplotypes with frequencies <3% were collapsed into one haplotype group. The assigned haplotype estimations were used in the Kaplan–Meier analysis to assess the cumulative survival probabilities to two major end points mentioned earlier: AIDS–1993, AIDS–1987. Thus, each failure point in the survival distribution is accounted for by the probability of the haplotype, rather than an individual case. The differences in survival time were evaluated using the log-rank test, and the hazard ratios were calculated using the Cox-proportional hazard model. Data were analyzed separately for European Americans and African Americans. We chose the new cutoff point at 6 years after sero-conversion for the survival analysis based on the observed difference in crude Kaplan–Meier curves. Although we used similar approach as described in Shin et al ., 10 with additional samples the cutoff point was one year later. All statistical analyses were performed using SAS 9.1 and SAS Genetics. 69  Supplementary Material Supplementary Figure Legends Supplementary Figures Supplementary Tables  Results SNP and haplotype distribution We analyzed 21 SNPs in and around the human IL10 gene ( Figure 1 ). Frequencies of all the SNPs examined in the IL10 region were consistent with our previous report among the European-American and African-American populations. 34 There were three SNPs (rs5743623, rs1800895 and rs57443625) that were not polymorphic in either population, another 5 (rs5743624, rs3024489, rs3024494, rs6697497 and rs6687786) were not variable in European Americans, and one (rs3024509) was not polymorphic in African Americans. The genotype frequencies for the remaining polymorphisms met Hardy–Weinberg expectations in both populations. There was also no difference in allele frequencies between HIV-infected individuals and a subgroup of HIV-negative individuals within the AIDS Link to the Intravenous Experience (ALIVE), Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) and Multicenter Hemophilia Cohort Study (MHCS) cohorts 35 – 37 ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Finally, there were no differences in allelic or haplotype frequencies between HIV? and HIV+ (sero-prevalent (SP) and sero-converted (SC)), there were no differences in allele distribution between SP vs SC, SP vs sero-negative (SN) or SC vs SN individuals (data not shown). There were seven haplotypes among the European Americans and 11 haplotypes among African Americans with frequencies >3%, of which only four haplotypes were common between the two populations ( Table 1 ). The analysis confirmed the diversity in haplotypes between the two ethnic groups that was expected based on our previous study. 34 Relative to the previously characterized ‘classical’ IL10 promoter haplotypes, there are one ATA, one ACC and five GCC-inclusive haplotypes among the European Americans, and two ATA, three ACC and six GCC encompassing ones among African Americans ( Table 1 and Figure 2 ). ACC1 was the most frequent haplotype in European Americans (30%), but relatively rare in African Americans (6.5%), whereas ATA1 was the most frequent haplotype in African Americans (35%) but less frequent in European Americans (21%). Haplotype conservation and phylogeny The cross species comparison using five mammalian species (rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ), dog ( Canis familiaris ), mouse ( Mus musculus ), rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) and opossum ( Monodelphis domestica )) confirms conservation of IL10 haplotypes, because defined Evolutionary Conserved Regions (ECR) 32 are present across the gene that overlaps with IL10 introns and several regulatory elements (including the classic promoter haplotypes) across this wide range of mammalian species ( Figure 1 ). Interestingly, it appears that one of the defining loci of the IL10 promoter, – 1082 , is located in a region conserved across the mammalian species, whereas –592 is in the region that shows a conserved pattern (>75%) in primates only (that is, between H. sapiens and M. mulatta, Figure 1 ; Supplementary Figure S1 ). Haplotypes were grouped according to the inclusion of ‘classic’ ‘proximal’ promoter elements: GCC, ATA and ACC. Both P. troglodytes and M. mulatta had ACC-inclusive haplotypes in their IL10 promoter region based on the two known sequences. Although it appears that ACC is likely to be the ancestral haplotype in the IL10 promoter region, a broader coverage of primate sequences is necessary to further place IL10 haplotypes in a phylogenetic context ( Figure 2 ). Four ACC-inclusive haplotypes were distributed at the base of the tree, separate from the very long ATA-inclusive clade (ATA1 and ATA2) with 99% bootstrap support ( Figure 2 ). ATA haplotypes are known to have lower transcriptional activity compared with the GCC haplotypes, and the ATA/ATA genotype produces lower amounts of IL-10 than either of the other genotypes. 33 , 38 The GCC-inclusive haplotypes formed a separate clade with moderate bootstrap support (57%), with the exception of GCC7, whose position on the tree is unresolved. On the other hand, ‘distal’ haplotypes 5 appear to be distributed equally between the branches of the haplotype tree. For example, the clade formed by the ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes includes haplotypes with TGC (GCC1 and GCC6), and A(G/A)A (GCC2, GCC4 and GCC8) and AAC (GCC3) ‘distal’ haplotype (see conversions in Supplementary Table S2 ). This distribution suggests the more recent and independent emergence of ‘distal’ haplotypes, but a clear picture may be obscured by possible recombination events (evidenced at least once by a ring structure in the haplotype network in Figure 3 ). Two reduced median networks were constructed: 39 the first includes European-American haplotypes ( Figure 3a top), and the second includes haplotypes from African Americans ( Figure 3b top). Each node represents a separate haplotype, and the number of allele changes between neighboring haplotypes is indicated by the number of tick marks on the branches that connect them. The network was rooted with an inferred ancestral haplotype (labeled ‘Ancestral’) derived from comparisons with the available P. troglodytes and M. mulatta sequences. The imputed ancestral haplotype was not present among human haplotypes observed in this study. The sizes of the circles below the nodes of the network are proportional to the haplotype frequency in each group studied. Colors organize IL-10 sequences into three distinct groups based on the inclusion of the ‘classic’ IL-10 promoter haplotypes: GCC (green), ACC (blue) and ATA (orange). As we did not observe any allele or haplotype frequency differences between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals either in European Americans or in African Americans, the general analysis of the IL10 variation should not be influenced by the selection of our samples. Haplotype association with progression to AIDS Using the Kaplan–Meier method, survival functions were first constructed for different groups classified by the individual haplotype dose in a log-additive model. The ATA1 haplotype was related to rapid progression to AIDS, compared to any other haplotypes for both survival end points, AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 ( Figures 4a and b ) among European Americans. Traditionally either most frequent or the ancestral haplotype is used as the reference. ACC1 meets both of these criteria ( Table 1 ; Figures 2 and 3 ). However, to eliminate any ambiguity and confirm that ATA1 was the haplotype associated with HIV progression, we used every haplotype as a reference in one analysis. Regardless of which haplotype was used as the reference in the Cox-proportional hazard model, the ATA1 haplotype always progressed rapidly (HR: 1.93–2.16) and the association was consistently statistically significant ( P = 0.003–0.0002) ( Table 2 ). Confidence intervals and relative hazards for each haplotype are shown as circles placed relative to each one’s position in the haplotype network with circle areas indicative of the respective population frequency ( Figure 3 ). Consistent with the earlier study, 10 we did not find any haplotype associations with HIV progression to AIDS among the African Americans ( Figures 3b , 4g and h ). A formal haplotype trend regression analysis using the log-additive model of haplotype dose ( Table 3 ) supported the previously reported relative hazards model partitioned into early progressors (<6 years after sero-conversion) and late/slow progressors (?6 years after sero-conversion). A portioned time interval approach for European Americans with combined and separated MACS and MHCS cohorts is also presented in Table 3 . Any of the seven common haplotypes could have explained the previously reported AIDS progression signal. 10 These analyses show that acceleration to AIDS associated with the ATA1 haplotype was more pronounced starting approximately 6 years after HIV-1 exposure, whereas it had no effect on AIDS progression in the initial 6 years after sero-conversion. Further categorization of the five GCC-inclusive haplotypes into one ‘classical’ ‘proximal’ haplotype ( Figures 4c and d ) showed that the ATA1 haplotype progressed to AIDS faster compared to the other two haplotypes (median survival: ATA = 8.5 years vs GCC = 11 years and ACC = 11 years) and that there was no difference in survival between the ACC and GCC-inclusive haplotypes. This also prompted us to examine the haplotype pairs and examine if the ATA haplotype carries most of the HIV progression signal. We examined six haplotype pairs, ATA/ATA, ATA/ACC, ATA/GCC, ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC ( Figures 4e and f ). For AIDS-1993 ( Figure 4e ) and AIDS-1987 ( Figure 4f ), the ATA-inclusive haplotype is driving the progression to AIDS indicated by rapid progression of ATA/ATA (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/ACC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/GCC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 9.5 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years) haplotype pairs compared with other pairs (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 11–13 years, AIDS-1993 = 7.5–9 years). On the other hand, there was no difference in the progression between the ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC inclusive haplotype pairs, suggesting that neither ACC nor GCC inclusive haplotypes were delaying the progression. Also, while there are only one ACC and one ATA haplotype in European Americans ( Figures 4a and c ), there are multiple ATA and ACC haplotypes in African Americans, thus the plot showing extended haplotypes appears to be more different from the plot showing the ‘classical’ haplotypes for African Americans ( Figures 4g and h ). There were no associations between extended or promoter-based haplotypes and HIV progression among African Americans neither for AIDS-1987 ( Figures 4g and h ), nor for AIDS-1993 (data not shown). We also defined the combined ‘distal’–‘proximal’ IL10 haplotypes as described in Gibson et al . 5 to those defined in Table 1 ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Their study observed nine different haplotypes of which two were absent in the European American and four in the African-American population represented here. However, there were three new haplotypes in the African-American population, not observed in European Americans ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Analyses of the combined ‘distal’ and ‘proximal’ IL10 promoter haplotypes for progression to clinical AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 are presented in Supplementary Figure S2 . ‘Distal’ haplotypes showed no association with the outcomes of HIV progression in either one of the two populations. Similar to Gibson et al ., 5 when we limited our analysis only to the high-producing ‘distal’ TGC containing haplotypes (TGC-GCC, TGC-ATA and TGC-ACC, Supplementary Figure S2a and b ) and used TGC-ACC as a reference, the result remained significant for TGC-ATA and showed a relatively rapid progression in European Americans (HR = 1.818, CL = 1.08–3.35) analogous to our previous result ( Table 2 ). In contrast, there were no significant associations with HIV progression when the analysis was limited only to the high-producing ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes in European Americans ( Supplementary Figure S2c and d ). No haplotype associations were observed for African Americans (data not shown).  Results SNP and haplotype distribution We analyzed 21 SNPs in and around the human IL10 gene ( Figure 1 ). Frequencies of all the SNPs examined in the IL10 region were consistent with our previous report among the European-American and African-American populations. 34 There were three SNPs (rs5743623, rs1800895 and rs57443625) that were not polymorphic in either population, another 5 (rs5743624, rs3024489, rs3024494, rs6697497 and rs6687786) were not variable in European Americans, and one (rs3024509) was not polymorphic in African Americans. The genotype frequencies for the remaining polymorphisms met Hardy–Weinberg expectations in both populations. There was also no difference in allele frequencies between HIV-infected individuals and a subgroup of HIV-negative individuals within the AIDS Link to the Intravenous Experience (ALIVE), Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) and Multicenter Hemophilia Cohort Study (MHCS) cohorts 35 – 37 ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Finally, there were no differences in allelic or haplotype frequencies between HIV? and HIV+ (sero-prevalent (SP) and sero-converted (SC)), there were no differences in allele distribution between SP vs SC, SP vs sero-negative (SN) or SC vs SN individuals (data not shown). There were seven haplotypes among the European Americans and 11 haplotypes among African Americans with frequencies >3%, of which only four haplotypes were common between the two populations ( Table 1 ). The analysis confirmed the diversity in haplotypes between the two ethnic groups that was expected based on our previous study. 34 Relative to the previously characterized ‘classical’ IL10 promoter haplotypes, there are one ATA, one ACC and five GCC-inclusive haplotypes among the European Americans, and two ATA, three ACC and six GCC encompassing ones among African Americans ( Table 1 and Figure 2 ). ACC1 was the most frequent haplotype in European Americans (30%), but relatively rare in African Americans (6.5%), whereas ATA1 was the most frequent haplotype in African Americans (35%) but less frequent in European Americans (21%). Haplotype conservation and phylogeny The cross species comparison using five mammalian species (rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ), dog ( Canis familiaris ), mouse ( Mus musculus ), rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) and opossum ( Monodelphis domestica )) confirms conservation of IL10 haplotypes, because defined Evolutionary Conserved Regions (ECR) 32 are present across the gene that overlaps with IL10 introns and several regulatory elements (including the classic promoter haplotypes) across this wide range of mammalian species ( Figure 1 ). Interestingly, it appears that one of the defining loci of the IL10 promoter, – 1082 , is located in a region conserved across the mammalian species, whereas –592 is in the region that shows a conserved pattern (>75%) in primates only (that is, between H. sapiens and M. mulatta, Figure 1 ; Supplementary Figure S1 ). Haplotypes were grouped according to the inclusion of ‘classic’ ‘proximal’ promoter elements: GCC, ATA and ACC. Both P. troglodytes and M. mulatta had ACC-inclusive haplotypes in their IL10 promoter region based on the two known sequences. Although it appears that ACC is likely to be the ancestral haplotype in the IL10 promoter region, a broader coverage of primate sequences is necessary to further place IL10 haplotypes in a phylogenetic context ( Figure 2 ). Four ACC-inclusive haplotypes were distributed at the base of the tree, separate from the very long ATA-inclusive clade (ATA1 and ATA2) with 99% bootstrap support ( Figure 2 ). ATA haplotypes are known to have lower transcriptional activity compared with the GCC haplotypes, and the ATA/ATA genotype produces lower amounts of IL-10 than either of the other genotypes. 33 , 38 The GCC-inclusive haplotypes formed a separate clade with moderate bootstrap support (57%), with the exception of GCC7, whose position on the tree is unresolved. On the other hand, ‘distal’ haplotypes 5 appear to be distributed equally between the branches of the haplotype tree. For example, the clade formed by the ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes includes haplotypes with TGC (GCC1 and GCC6), and A(G/A)A (GCC2, GCC4 and GCC8) and AAC (GCC3) ‘distal’ haplotype (see conversions in Supplementary Table S2 ). This distribution suggests the more recent and independent emergence of ‘distal’ haplotypes, but a clear picture may be obscured by possible recombination events (evidenced at least once by a ring structure in the haplotype network in Figure 3 ). Two reduced median networks were constructed: 39 the first includes European-American haplotypes ( Figure 3a top), and the second includes haplotypes from African Americans ( Figure 3b top). Each node represents a separate haplotype, and the number of allele changes between neighboring haplotypes is indicated by the number of tick marks on the branches that connect them. The network was rooted with an inferred ancestral haplotype (labeled ‘Ancestral’) derived from comparisons with the available P. troglodytes and M. mulatta sequences. The imputed ancestral haplotype was not present among human haplotypes observed in this study. The sizes of the circles below the nodes of the network are proportional to the haplotype frequency in each group studied. Colors organize IL-10 sequences into three distinct groups based on the inclusion of the ‘classic’ IL-10 promoter haplotypes: GCC (green), ACC (blue) and ATA (orange). As we did not observe any allele or haplotype frequency differences between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals either in European Americans or in African Americans, the general analysis of the IL10 variation should not be influenced by the selection of our samples. Haplotype association with progression to AIDS Using the Kaplan–Meier method, survival functions were first constructed for different groups classified by the individual haplotype dose in a log-additive model. The ATA1 haplotype was related to rapid progression to AIDS, compared to any other haplotypes for both survival end points, AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 ( Figures 4a and b ) among European Americans. Traditionally either most frequent or the ancestral haplotype is used as the reference. ACC1 meets both of these criteria ( Table 1 ; Figures 2 and 3 ). However, to eliminate any ambiguity and confirm that ATA1 was the haplotype associated with HIV progression, we used every haplotype as a reference in one analysis. Regardless of which haplotype was used as the reference in the Cox-proportional hazard model, the ATA1 haplotype always progressed rapidly (HR: 1.93–2.16) and the association was consistently statistically significant ( P = 0.003–0.0002) ( Table 2 ). Confidence intervals and relative hazards for each haplotype are shown as circles placed relative to each one’s position in the haplotype network with circle areas indicative of the respective population frequency ( Figure 3 ). Consistent with the earlier study, 10 we did not find any haplotype associations with HIV progression to AIDS among the African Americans ( Figures 3b , 4g and h ). A formal haplotype trend regression analysis using the log-additive model of haplotype dose ( Table 3 ) supported the previously reported relative hazards model partitioned into early progressors (<6 years after sero-conversion) and late/slow progressors (?6 years after sero-conversion). A portioned time interval approach for European Americans with combined and separated MACS and MHCS cohorts is also presented in Table 3 . Any of the seven common haplotypes could have explained the previously reported AIDS progression signal. 10 These analyses show that acceleration to AIDS associated with the ATA1 haplotype was more pronounced starting approximately 6 years after HIV-1 exposure, whereas it had no effect on AIDS progression in the initial 6 years after sero-conversion. Further categorization of the five GCC-inclusive haplotypes into one ‘classical’ ‘proximal’ haplotype ( Figures 4c and d ) showed that the ATA1 haplotype progressed to AIDS faster compared to the other two haplotypes (median survival: ATA = 8.5 years vs GCC = 11 years and ACC = 11 years) and that there was no difference in survival between the ACC and GCC-inclusive haplotypes. This also prompted us to examine the haplotype pairs and examine if the ATA haplotype carries most of the HIV progression signal. We examined six haplotype pairs, ATA/ATA, ATA/ACC, ATA/GCC, ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC ( Figures 4e and f ). For AIDS-1993 ( Figure 4e ) and AIDS-1987 ( Figure 4f ), the ATA-inclusive haplotype is driving the progression to AIDS indicated by rapid progression of ATA/ATA (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/ACC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/GCC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 9.5 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years) haplotype pairs compared with other pairs (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 11–13 years, AIDS-1993 = 7.5–9 years). On the other hand, there was no difference in the progression between the ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC inclusive haplotype pairs, suggesting that neither ACC nor GCC inclusive haplotypes were delaying the progression. Also, while there are only one ACC and one ATA haplotype in European Americans ( Figures 4a and c ), there are multiple ATA and ACC haplotypes in African Americans, thus the plot showing extended haplotypes appears to be more different from the plot showing the ‘classical’ haplotypes for African Americans ( Figures 4g and h ). There were no associations between extended or promoter-based haplotypes and HIV progression among African Americans neither for AIDS-1987 ( Figures 4g and h ), nor for AIDS-1993 (data not shown). We also defined the combined ‘distal’–‘proximal’ IL10 haplotypes as described in Gibson et al . 5 to those defined in Table 1 ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Their study observed nine different haplotypes of which two were absent in the European American and four in the African-American population represented here. However, there were three new haplotypes in the African-American population, not observed in European Americans ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Analyses of the combined ‘distal’ and ‘proximal’ IL10 promoter haplotypes for progression to clinical AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 are presented in Supplementary Figure S2 . ‘Distal’ haplotypes showed no association with the outcomes of HIV progression in either one of the two populations. Similar to Gibson et al ., 5 when we limited our analysis only to the high-producing ‘distal’ TGC containing haplotypes (TGC-GCC, TGC-ATA and TGC-ACC, Supplementary Figure S2a and b ) and used TGC-ACC as a reference, the result remained significant for TGC-ATA and showed a relatively rapid progression in European Americans (HR = 1.818, CL = 1.08–3.35) analogous to our previous result ( Table 2 ). In contrast, there were no significant associations with HIV progression when the analysis was limited only to the high-producing ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes in European Americans ( Supplementary Figure S2c and d ). No haplotype associations were observed for African Americans (data not shown).  SNP and haplotype distribution We analyzed 21 SNPs in and around the human IL10 gene ( Figure 1 ). Frequencies of all the SNPs examined in the IL10 region were consistent with our previous report among the European-American and African-American populations. 34 There were three SNPs (rs5743623, rs1800895 and rs57443625) that were not polymorphic in either population, another 5 (rs5743624, rs3024489, rs3024494, rs6697497 and rs6687786) were not variable in European Americans, and one (rs3024509) was not polymorphic in African Americans. The genotype frequencies for the remaining polymorphisms met Hardy–Weinberg expectations in both populations. There was also no difference in allele frequencies between HIV-infected individuals and a subgroup of HIV-negative individuals within the AIDS Link to the Intravenous Experience (ALIVE), Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) and Multicenter Hemophilia Cohort Study (MHCS) cohorts 35 – 37 ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Finally, there were no differences in allelic or haplotype frequencies between HIV? and HIV+ (sero-prevalent (SP) and sero-converted (SC)), there were no differences in allele distribution between SP vs SC, SP vs sero-negative (SN) or SC vs SN individuals (data not shown). There were seven haplotypes among the European Americans and 11 haplotypes among African Americans with frequencies >3%, of which only four haplotypes were common between the two populations ( Table 1 ). The analysis confirmed the diversity in haplotypes between the two ethnic groups that was expected based on our previous study. 34 Relative to the previously characterized ‘classical’ IL10 promoter haplotypes, there are one ATA, one ACC and five GCC-inclusive haplotypes among the European Americans, and two ATA, three ACC and six GCC encompassing ones among African Americans ( Table 1 and Figure 2 ). ACC1 was the most frequent haplotype in European Americans (30%), but relatively rare in African Americans (6.5%), whereas ATA1 was the most frequent haplotype in African Americans (35%) but less frequent in European Americans (21%).  SNP and haplotype distribution We analyzed 21 SNPs in and around the human IL10 gene ( Figure 1 ). Frequencies of all the SNPs examined in the IL10 region were consistent with our previous report among the European-American and African-American populations. 34 There were three SNPs (rs5743623, rs1800895 and rs57443625) that were not polymorphic in either population, another 5 (rs5743624, rs3024489, rs3024494, rs6697497 and rs6687786) were not variable in European Americans, and one (rs3024509) was not polymorphic in African Americans. The genotype frequencies for the remaining polymorphisms met Hardy–Weinberg expectations in both populations. There was also no difference in allele frequencies between HIV-infected individuals and a subgroup of HIV-negative individuals within the AIDS Link to the Intravenous Experience (ALIVE), Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS) and Multicenter Hemophilia Cohort Study (MHCS) cohorts 35 – 37 ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Finally, there were no differences in allelic or haplotype frequencies between HIV? and HIV+ (sero-prevalent (SP) and sero-converted (SC)), there were no differences in allele distribution between SP vs SC, SP vs sero-negative (SN) or SC vs SN individuals (data not shown). There were seven haplotypes among the European Americans and 11 haplotypes among African Americans with frequencies >3%, of which only four haplotypes were common between the two populations ( Table 1 ). The analysis confirmed the diversity in haplotypes between the two ethnic groups that was expected based on our previous study. 34 Relative to the previously characterized ‘classical’ IL10 promoter haplotypes, there are one ATA, one ACC and five GCC-inclusive haplotypes among the European Americans, and two ATA, three ACC and six GCC encompassing ones among African Americans ( Table 1 and Figure 2 ). ACC1 was the most frequent haplotype in European Americans (30%), but relatively rare in African Americans (6.5%), whereas ATA1 was the most frequent haplotype in African Americans (35%) but less frequent in European Americans (21%).  Haplotype conservation and phylogeny The cross species comparison using five mammalian species (rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ), dog ( Canis familiaris ), mouse ( Mus musculus ), rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) and opossum ( Monodelphis domestica )) confirms conservation of IL10 haplotypes, because defined Evolutionary Conserved Regions (ECR) 32 are present across the gene that overlaps with IL10 introns and several regulatory elements (including the classic promoter haplotypes) across this wide range of mammalian species ( Figure 1 ). Interestingly, it appears that one of the defining loci of the IL10 promoter, – 1082 , is located in a region conserved across the mammalian species, whereas –592 is in the region that shows a conserved pattern (>75%) in primates only (that is, between H. sapiens and M. mulatta, Figure 1 ; Supplementary Figure S1 ). Haplotypes were grouped according to the inclusion of ‘classic’ ‘proximal’ promoter elements: GCC, ATA and ACC. Both P. troglodytes and M. mulatta had ACC-inclusive haplotypes in their IL10 promoter region based on the two known sequences. Although it appears that ACC is likely to be the ancestral haplotype in the IL10 promoter region, a broader coverage of primate sequences is necessary to further place IL10 haplotypes in a phylogenetic context ( Figure 2 ). Four ACC-inclusive haplotypes were distributed at the base of the tree, separate from the very long ATA-inclusive clade (ATA1 and ATA2) with 99% bootstrap support ( Figure 2 ). ATA haplotypes are known to have lower transcriptional activity compared with the GCC haplotypes, and the ATA/ATA genotype produces lower amounts of IL-10 than either of the other genotypes. 33 , 38 The GCC-inclusive haplotypes formed a separate clade with moderate bootstrap support (57%), with the exception of GCC7, whose position on the tree is unresolved. On the other hand, ‘distal’ haplotypes 5 appear to be distributed equally between the branches of the haplotype tree. For example, the clade formed by the ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes includes haplotypes with TGC (GCC1 and GCC6), and A(G/A)A (GCC2, GCC4 and GCC8) and AAC (GCC3) ‘distal’ haplotype (see conversions in Supplementary Table S2 ). This distribution suggests the more recent and independent emergence of ‘distal’ haplotypes, but a clear picture may be obscured by possible recombination events (evidenced at least once by a ring structure in the haplotype network in Figure 3 ). Two reduced median networks were constructed: 39 the first includes European-American haplotypes ( Figure 3a top), and the second includes haplotypes from African Americans ( Figure 3b top). Each node represents a separate haplotype, and the number of allele changes between neighboring haplotypes is indicated by the number of tick marks on the branches that connect them. The network was rooted with an inferred ancestral haplotype (labeled ‘Ancestral’) derived from comparisons with the available P. troglodytes and M. mulatta sequences. The imputed ancestral haplotype was not present among human haplotypes observed in this study. The sizes of the circles below the nodes of the network are proportional to the haplotype frequency in each group studied. Colors organize IL-10 sequences into three distinct groups based on the inclusion of the ‘classic’ IL-10 promoter haplotypes: GCC (green), ACC (blue) and ATA (orange). As we did not observe any allele or haplotype frequency differences between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals either in European Americans or in African Americans, the general analysis of the IL10 variation should not be influenced by the selection of our samples.  Haplotype conservation and phylogeny The cross species comparison using five mammalian species (rhesus monkey ( Macaca mulatta ), dog ( Canis familiaris ), mouse ( Mus musculus ), rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) and opossum ( Monodelphis domestica )) confirms conservation of IL10 haplotypes, because defined Evolutionary Conserved Regions (ECR) 32 are present across the gene that overlaps with IL10 introns and several regulatory elements (including the classic promoter haplotypes) across this wide range of mammalian species ( Figure 1 ). Interestingly, it appears that one of the defining loci of the IL10 promoter, – 1082 , is located in a region conserved across the mammalian species, whereas –592 is in the region that shows a conserved pattern (>75%) in primates only (that is, between H. sapiens and M. mulatta, Figure 1 ; Supplementary Figure S1 ). Haplotypes were grouped according to the inclusion of ‘classic’ ‘proximal’ promoter elements: GCC, ATA and ACC. Both P. troglodytes and M. mulatta had ACC-inclusive haplotypes in their IL10 promoter region based on the two known sequences. Although it appears that ACC is likely to be the ancestral haplotype in the IL10 promoter region, a broader coverage of primate sequences is necessary to further place IL10 haplotypes in a phylogenetic context ( Figure 2 ). Four ACC-inclusive haplotypes were distributed at the base of the tree, separate from the very long ATA-inclusive clade (ATA1 and ATA2) with 99% bootstrap support ( Figure 2 ). ATA haplotypes are known to have lower transcriptional activity compared with the GCC haplotypes, and the ATA/ATA genotype produces lower amounts of IL-10 than either of the other genotypes. 33 , 38 The GCC-inclusive haplotypes formed a separate clade with moderate bootstrap support (57%), with the exception of GCC7, whose position on the tree is unresolved. On the other hand, ‘distal’ haplotypes 5 appear to be distributed equally between the branches of the haplotype tree. For example, the clade formed by the ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes includes haplotypes with TGC (GCC1 and GCC6), and A(G/A)A (GCC2, GCC4 and GCC8) and AAC (GCC3) ‘distal’ haplotype (see conversions in Supplementary Table S2 ). This distribution suggests the more recent and independent emergence of ‘distal’ haplotypes, but a clear picture may be obscured by possible recombination events (evidenced at least once by a ring structure in the haplotype network in Figure 3 ). Two reduced median networks were constructed: 39 the first includes European-American haplotypes ( Figure 3a top), and the second includes haplotypes from African Americans ( Figure 3b top). Each node represents a separate haplotype, and the number of allele changes between neighboring haplotypes is indicated by the number of tick marks on the branches that connect them. The network was rooted with an inferred ancestral haplotype (labeled ‘Ancestral’) derived from comparisons with the available P. troglodytes and M. mulatta sequences. The imputed ancestral haplotype was not present among human haplotypes observed in this study. The sizes of the circles below the nodes of the network are proportional to the haplotype frequency in each group studied. Colors organize IL-10 sequences into three distinct groups based on the inclusion of the ‘classic’ IL-10 promoter haplotypes: GCC (green), ACC (blue) and ATA (orange). As we did not observe any allele or haplotype frequency differences between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals either in European Americans or in African Americans, the general analysis of the IL10 variation should not be influenced by the selection of our samples.  Haplotype association with progression to AIDS Using the Kaplan–Meier method, survival functions were first constructed for different groups classified by the individual haplotype dose in a log-additive model. The ATA1 haplotype was related to rapid progression to AIDS, compared to any other haplotypes for both survival end points, AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 ( Figures 4a and b ) among European Americans. Traditionally either most frequent or the ancestral haplotype is used as the reference. ACC1 meets both of these criteria ( Table 1 ; Figures 2 and 3 ). However, to eliminate any ambiguity and confirm that ATA1 was the haplotype associated with HIV progression, we used every haplotype as a reference in one analysis. Regardless of which haplotype was used as the reference in the Cox-proportional hazard model, the ATA1 haplotype always progressed rapidly (HR: 1.93–2.16) and the association was consistently statistically significant ( P = 0.003–0.0002) ( Table 2 ). Confidence intervals and relative hazards for each haplotype are shown as circles placed relative to each one’s position in the haplotype network with circle areas indicative of the respective population frequency ( Figure 3 ). Consistent with the earlier study, 10 we did not find any haplotype associations with HIV progression to AIDS among the African Americans ( Figures 3b , 4g and h ). A formal haplotype trend regression analysis using the log-additive model of haplotype dose ( Table 3 ) supported the previously reported relative hazards model partitioned into early progressors (<6 years after sero-conversion) and late/slow progressors (?6 years after sero-conversion). A portioned time interval approach for European Americans with combined and separated MACS and MHCS cohorts is also presented in Table 3 . Any of the seven common haplotypes could have explained the previously reported AIDS progression signal. 10 These analyses show that acceleration to AIDS associated with the ATA1 haplotype was more pronounced starting approximately 6 years after HIV-1 exposure, whereas it had no effect on AIDS progression in the initial 6 years after sero-conversion. Further categorization of the five GCC-inclusive haplotypes into one ‘classical’ ‘proximal’ haplotype ( Figures 4c and d ) showed that the ATA1 haplotype progressed to AIDS faster compared to the other two haplotypes (median survival: ATA = 8.5 years vs GCC = 11 years and ACC = 11 years) and that there was no difference in survival between the ACC and GCC-inclusive haplotypes. This also prompted us to examine the haplotype pairs and examine if the ATA haplotype carries most of the HIV progression signal. We examined six haplotype pairs, ATA/ATA, ATA/ACC, ATA/GCC, ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC ( Figures 4e and f ). For AIDS-1993 ( Figure 4e ) and AIDS-1987 ( Figure 4f ), the ATA-inclusive haplotype is driving the progression to AIDS indicated by rapid progression of ATA/ATA (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/ACC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/GCC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 9.5 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years) haplotype pairs compared with other pairs (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 11–13 years, AIDS-1993 = 7.5–9 years). On the other hand, there was no difference in the progression between the ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC inclusive haplotype pairs, suggesting that neither ACC nor GCC inclusive haplotypes were delaying the progression. Also, while there are only one ACC and one ATA haplotype in European Americans ( Figures 4a and c ), there are multiple ATA and ACC haplotypes in African Americans, thus the plot showing extended haplotypes appears to be more different from the plot showing the ‘classical’ haplotypes for African Americans ( Figures 4g and h ). There were no associations between extended or promoter-based haplotypes and HIV progression among African Americans neither for AIDS-1987 ( Figures 4g and h ), nor for AIDS-1993 (data not shown). We also defined the combined ‘distal’–‘proximal’ IL10 haplotypes as described in Gibson et al . 5 to those defined in Table 1 ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Their study observed nine different haplotypes of which two were absent in the European American and four in the African-American population represented here. However, there were three new haplotypes in the African-American population, not observed in European Americans ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Analyses of the combined ‘distal’ and ‘proximal’ IL10 promoter haplotypes for progression to clinical AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 are presented in Supplementary Figure S2 . ‘Distal’ haplotypes showed no association with the outcomes of HIV progression in either one of the two populations. Similar to Gibson et al ., 5 when we limited our analysis only to the high-producing ‘distal’ TGC containing haplotypes (TGC-GCC, TGC-ATA and TGC-ACC, Supplementary Figure S2a and b ) and used TGC-ACC as a reference, the result remained significant for TGC-ATA and showed a relatively rapid progression in European Americans (HR = 1.818, CL = 1.08–3.35) analogous to our previous result ( Table 2 ). In contrast, there were no significant associations with HIV progression when the analysis was limited only to the high-producing ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes in European Americans ( Supplementary Figure S2c and d ). No haplotype associations were observed for African Americans (data not shown).  Haplotype association with progression to AIDS Using the Kaplan–Meier method, survival functions were first constructed for different groups classified by the individual haplotype dose in a log-additive model. The ATA1 haplotype was related to rapid progression to AIDS, compared to any other haplotypes for both survival end points, AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 ( Figures 4a and b ) among European Americans. Traditionally either most frequent or the ancestral haplotype is used as the reference. ACC1 meets both of these criteria ( Table 1 ; Figures 2 and 3 ). However, to eliminate any ambiguity and confirm that ATA1 was the haplotype associated with HIV progression, we used every haplotype as a reference in one analysis. Regardless of which haplotype was used as the reference in the Cox-proportional hazard model, the ATA1 haplotype always progressed rapidly (HR: 1.93–2.16) and the association was consistently statistically significant ( P = 0.003–0.0002) ( Table 2 ). Confidence intervals and relative hazards for each haplotype are shown as circles placed relative to each one’s position in the haplotype network with circle areas indicative of the respective population frequency ( Figure 3 ). Consistent with the earlier study, 10 we did not find any haplotype associations with HIV progression to AIDS among the African Americans ( Figures 3b , 4g and h ). A formal haplotype trend regression analysis using the log-additive model of haplotype dose ( Table 3 ) supported the previously reported relative hazards model partitioned into early progressors (<6 years after sero-conversion) and late/slow progressors (?6 years after sero-conversion). A portioned time interval approach for European Americans with combined and separated MACS and MHCS cohorts is also presented in Table 3 . Any of the seven common haplotypes could have explained the previously reported AIDS progression signal. 10 These analyses show that acceleration to AIDS associated with the ATA1 haplotype was more pronounced starting approximately 6 years after HIV-1 exposure, whereas it had no effect on AIDS progression in the initial 6 years after sero-conversion. Further categorization of the five GCC-inclusive haplotypes into one ‘classical’ ‘proximal’ haplotype ( Figures 4c and d ) showed that the ATA1 haplotype progressed to AIDS faster compared to the other two haplotypes (median survival: ATA = 8.5 years vs GCC = 11 years and ACC = 11 years) and that there was no difference in survival between the ACC and GCC-inclusive haplotypes. This also prompted us to examine the haplotype pairs and examine if the ATA haplotype carries most of the HIV progression signal. We examined six haplotype pairs, ATA/ATA, ATA/ACC, ATA/GCC, ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC ( Figures 4e and f ). For AIDS-1993 ( Figure 4e ) and AIDS-1987 ( Figure 4f ), the ATA-inclusive haplotype is driving the progression to AIDS indicated by rapid progression of ATA/ATA (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/ACC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 8.25 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years), ATA/GCC (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 9.5 years, AIDS-1993 = 6.5 years) haplotype pairs compared with other pairs (median survival time: AIDS-1987 = 11–13 years, AIDS-1993 = 7.5–9 years). On the other hand, there was no difference in the progression between the ACC/GCC, ACC/ACC and GCC/GCC inclusive haplotype pairs, suggesting that neither ACC nor GCC inclusive haplotypes were delaying the progression. Also, while there are only one ACC and one ATA haplotype in European Americans ( Figures 4a and c ), there are multiple ATA and ACC haplotypes in African Americans, thus the plot showing extended haplotypes appears to be more different from the plot showing the ‘classical’ haplotypes for African Americans ( Figures 4g and h ). There were no associations between extended or promoter-based haplotypes and HIV progression among African Americans neither for AIDS-1987 ( Figures 4g and h ), nor for AIDS-1993 (data not shown). We also defined the combined ‘distal’–‘proximal’ IL10 haplotypes as described in Gibson et al . 5 to those defined in Table 1 ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Their study observed nine different haplotypes of which two were absent in the European American and four in the African-American population represented here. However, there were three new haplotypes in the African-American population, not observed in European Americans ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Analyses of the combined ‘distal’ and ‘proximal’ IL10 promoter haplotypes for progression to clinical AIDS-1987 and AIDS-1993 are presented in Supplementary Figure S2 . ‘Distal’ haplotypes showed no association with the outcomes of HIV progression in either one of the two populations. Similar to Gibson et al ., 5 when we limited our analysis only to the high-producing ‘distal’ TGC containing haplotypes (TGC-GCC, TGC-ATA and TGC-ACC, Supplementary Figure S2a and b ) and used TGC-ACC as a reference, the result remained significant for TGC-ATA and showed a relatively rapid progression in European Americans (HR = 1.818, CL = 1.08–3.35) analogous to our previous result ( Table 2 ). In contrast, there were no significant associations with HIV progression when the analysis was limited only to the high-producing ‘proximal’ GCC haplotypes in European Americans ( Supplementary Figure S2c and d ). No haplotype associations were observed for African Americans (data not shown).  Discussion Role of different <italic>IL10</italic> haplotypes in HIV progression to AIDS Significant IL10 genotype associations were identified for HIV-1 infection and progression to AIDS in an earlier study 10 with individuals carrying –592A promoter allele having an increased risk for HIV-1 infection and a faster progression to AIDS once infected. In this study, we demonstrated that extended IL-10 haplotype variation can still be generalized using the three main promoter haplotypes centered on ‘classic’ promoter polymorphisms: –592, –819 and –1082 ( Figure 1 , Supplementary Figure S1 and Table 2 ). Although there were diverse haplotype structures based on the 21 SNPs that we studied, extensive haplotypic analysis demonstrated that the most likely explanation of IL10 variants in accelerating AIDS progression in European Americans are the low-producing proximal ATA-inclusive haplotypes. Further, the ‘distal’ promoter haplotypes based on the three SNPs rs1800890, rs6703630 and rs6693899 positioned –3575 [T/A], –2849 [G/A] and –2763 [C/A] relative to the transcription start site did not show any significant associations although previous studies have indicated the distal haplotype to play a role in differential IL-10 expression. 30 By presenting a comprehensive coverage of the genomic region with 21 SNPs in our analysis, we offer a comprehensive haplotype pattern that further divided both the known proximal and distal promoter haplotypes into subgroups for detailed analyses. Our current findings refine the role of IL10 in the progression to AIDS among European Americans 10 and suggest the importance of the low-producing ATA haplotype in this process. Although earlier publications were focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms and promoter haplotypes, we took a more comprehensive approach, examining 21 single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human IL10 gene that were reported at the time, and for which essays have been validated and brought the haplotype variation within the context of mammalian phylogeny. European Americans infected with HIV that carry the ATA haplotype progress faster than European American individuals carrying the ACC-inclusive haplotypes regardless of whether they are analyzed as ‘classical’ haplotypes ( Figures 4c and d ), extended haplotypes ( Figures 4a and b ) or haplotypic genotypes ( Figures 4e and f ). Although there are several GCC haplotypes found in European Americans ( Figure 2 , Tables 1 and 2 ), comparison based on each of them always points to the ATA haplotype as the one with the most significant effect with progression to AIDS-defining illness ( Figure 3 , Table 2 ). This haplotype, however, was not highly associated with AIDS-1993, also defined by the CD4+ component, rather than by AIDS-defining illnesses alone, as for AIDS-1987, suggesting that the effect of IL-10 on disease progression may not be driven by CD4+ but rather impact the immunity of these individuals making them more susceptible to AIDS-defining illnesses through different pathways that requires further investigation. The difference in the strength of association between the MACS and MHCS are likely attributable to the twofold difference in the sample size between the two cohorts ( Table 3 ). It is not clear if the different result for European Americans and African Americans is due to the genetic difference in the two ethnic groups, the difference in sample sizes or the mode of infection. The effect might also be driven by a complex IL-10-family pathway, for instance by its paralogs ( IL19 , IL20 , IL22 , IL24 and IL26 ) and their respective receptors ( IL10RA , IL10RB , IL20RA , IL20RB and IL22R ) rather than by a single gene. Overall, there were approximately 30% less African Americans than European Americans in the study, and 52% less sero-converters ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Finally, the cohort differences could have also contributed to the discordance of the results; the majority of African Americans in this study were from the ALIVE cohort where the HIV transmission was primarily through the injection drug use. Variation in <italic>IL10</italic> haplotypes and their evolutionary importance The cross-species comparison of five species indicated that the variable promoter SNPs examined in this study are in the regions that don’t seem to be conserved across mammals, and –1082 is located in an evolutionarily conserved region identified only in primates (between humans and rhesus monkeys, Figure 1 ). This suggests a relatively recent evolutionary signature, perhaps specific to the primate lineage, or even confined exclusively to our own species. Furthermore, from the phylogenetic analysis of all the available haplotypes (including the ones found only in African Americans), it appears that the intermediate-producing, ACC-inclusive haplotypes may be more closely related to the ancestral haplotype than the others, and the GCC and ATA haplotypes have been evolutionarily separated for some time ( Figure 2 ); a conclusion evidenced by at least three nodes with bootstrap support over 60% ( Figure 2 ). The ancestral status of the ACC haplotype is also supported by the fact that it was present in the reference Chimpanzee sequence (CmzR) included in the comparison ( Table 1 ). It is possible that the ATA and GCC haplotype families may have arisen as adaptations to different selective pressures only recently, and their present frequencies are a result of shifting the response to varying environmental conditions in the evolution of the human species. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that existing polymorphisms in the IL10 gene may reflect a balance of adaptive responses to auto-immune, infectious and other disease agents. 18 The low-producing ATA haplotype may have evolved from the ancestral ACC haplotype as a response to the viral populations exploiting the immunomodulatory activity of IL-10, 25 – 27 whereas several of the high producing GCC haplotypes remained under other selective constraints as evidenced by their crucial role in other human diseases. 24 Overall as a group, high-production GCC haplotypes are not associated with the progression ( Table 2 ), and include sub-types with potentially conflicting effects ( Figure 4 , green-shaded areas). Such different evolutionary trajectories may reflect the dual function of the human IL10 gene in confronting disease. IL-10, a critical inflammation cytokine, is mainly produced by the TH2 cells, a subset of the CD4 + helper cells, but also by some activated B cells, some TH1 cells, activated macrophages and some non-hematopoietic sources (for example, keratinocytes, colon carcinoma and melanoma cells). It enhances humoral immunity by promoting proliferation of B and T cells, whereas at the same time suppressing the cell-mediated immune response. 18 Regulation of the immune response is important to prevent reactivity to self-antigens or over-inflammatory reactions. IL-10 also downregulates expression of MHC class I and class II molecules, and increased IL-10 production may also decrease CD4+-regulated immunity. 40 , 41 It has also been suggested that IL-10 downregulates cyclin T1 expression through the induction of proteasome-mediated proteolysis in human macrophages. 42 For example, IL-10 can inhibit the production of many cytokines as well as the granulocyte–monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and has thus been called the ‘macrophage deactivation factor’. IL-10’s critical role is also evident during HIV infection. HIV infection causes the immune system to respond by producing IL-10. 43 – 45 Both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells have been shown to express high IL-10 levels in HIV infection, 46 , 47 and there is an indication that IL-10-positive CD8+ T cells may have an important regulatory role in the immune dysfunction accompanying HIV infection. 48 Levels of IL-10 are greater in HIV-positive people with declining CD4 cell counts and high viral loads than in newly infected individuals. 49 On the other hand, long-term non-progressors had the lowest levels of IL-10 similar to HIV-negative individuals. In some HIV-infected individuals, the balance that IL-10 helps to set between resisting an infection and suppressing immune responses against it is lost, resulting in a weakening of the immune response. Clearly, IL-10 plays an intimate and crucial role during HIV infection. On the other hand, an overexpression of IL-10 also has negative consequences. The protein has stimulatory actions on B cells and may function as a switching factor for the production of IgG4 in humans. 50 Recently, two research groups have concluded that increased IL-10 production causes the immuno-suppression that allows viruses to persist unchecked by the immune system, and by administering a therapeutic antibody to block IL-10 action, the ability of the immune system to clear persistent viruses can be restored. 51 There is also evidence that these effects were not human-specific, because in mice, IL-10 overexpression allows infections such as tuberculosis to persist. 59 Overall, IL-10 provides a case of delicate biological balance in the immune system, acting beneficially in certain contexts and harmfully in others. The importance of IL10 is not limited to the mediation and regulation of inflammatory response. High IL-10 production also influences human survival. Higher levels of IL-10 production in the mother has been associated with a successful pregnancy, 52 whereas reproductive success has also been associated with the individual IL10 haplotypes. The probability of normal fecundity increased more than 10 times when the innate cytokine profile of the women was characterized by high IL-10 and low TNF-? responsiveness, whereas the cytokine profile of women with impaired fertility was characterized by the direct opposite trend. 53 There is another downside to IL-10’s wide biological importance. Over the long evolutionary history, the gene and its product have been exploited by many extra-cellular pathogens as a means by which to attack the human host. 54 In fact, many bacteria, viruses and pathogens are able to stimulate production of IL-10 by host cells or producing their own IL-10-like homolog to suppress the host immune response. 25 , 26 It has been suggested that in certain instances, viral versions of the IL-10 molecule may act as a molecular decoy to inhibit an innate and adaptive immune response, creating a favorable environment for the pathogens. 54 Recent findings suggest that highly conserved non-coding elements often play important roles, such as regulating the expression of nearby developmental transcription factors. 55 In our study, the ATA haplotypes span the entire unbroken chromosomal region, and exist at a relatively high frequency (21% in European Americans and 44% in African Americans). On the other hand, four out of five extended GCC haplotypes (except for GCC1) exist at lower frequencies in both study populations compared with the ATA-extended haplotypes, probably due to the effects of the recombination process over time. This may reflect the past action of positive selection on ‘proximal’ ATA. Unfortunately, the nature of the data available did not allow us to apply a formal test for selection. A recent selection for the low-producing ATA genotype may help explain the presence of the long ATA-inclusive branch ( Figure 2 ), but some points remain unclear. For example, historic selective factors that have led to the establishment of the ATA haplotypes that influence HIV progression among European Americans but not in African Americans. Although for the most part ‘proximal’ ATA haplotypes are assumed to be associated with the lowest production of IL-10, 1 , 2 it is still possible that AIDS progression is not connected to the low producing qualities of ATA. Both ‘proximal’ ATA haplotypes in this study (ATA1 and ATA2) are tagged with the high-producing TGC ‘distal’ haplotype reported in Gibson et al . 5 ( Supplementary Table S2 ) who reported no difference between haplotypes of high and low producers when TGC ‘distal’ haplotype was held constant. 5 Sorting haplotypes according to the ‘distal’ promoter SNPs does not result in a pattern described for the ‘proximal’ haplotypes above ( Figure 2 ), and TGC haplotypes reported as high producing 5 (that is, haplotypes ATA1, ATA2, ACC1, ACC3, GCC1 and GCC6) can be found on every major branch of the tree ( Table 1 , Figure 2 ). It is possible that these haplotypes are more recent, and/or at least some of them arose by recombination. However, there are two notable exceptions: the low-producing ‘proximal’ ATA haplotype is always associated with the high-producing ‘distal’ TGC haplotype, whereas the low-producing ‘distal’ AAA haplotype is also always associated with the high-producing ‘proximal’ GCC haplotype. These associations may indicate a compensatory effect between the different parts of the IL10 promoter region. A further experimental effort is needed to evaluate different extended haplotypes and IL-10 production. Alternatively, this may imply that the association reported in our study could be explained by other factors such as unknown functional SNPs that might be in LD or by interaction with a different gene not included in this study. Although increased production of IL-10 favors protection against inflammatory disease, low production promotes elimination of foreign pathogens by the host. With these contrasting roles, it is not surprising that IL10 has been reported to contain a signature of balancing selection. 28 Being such an integral part of the immune system, the gene has presumably undergone constantly shifting selection pressures as humans encountered new epidemics of infectious diseases. Throughout evolutionary history, the IL10 gene must have been influenced by selection both for the mediation of inflammatory responses and promotion of postnatal survival. 24 This gene played an important role in controlling infection, but has been exploited by viruses as an important entry strategy. 54 The ability to produce either more or less of IL-10 might have been advantageous in some environmental conditions and with some infectious diseases, but not in others. 38 Consequently, several different selective forces play and balancing selection must be the most probable mode of evolution at this locus. 28 Finally, a formal test for selection could not be performed with the current sample. Elucidating origins, evolution and functions of the extended haplotypes is a challenge for future studies. Conclusions HIV infection remains a devastating epidemic that must be addressed through many approaches. Novel genetic approaches such as looking at the evolutionary histories of disease-associated haplotypes can further our understanding of the HIV progression and outcome. Other approaches possible in the wake of the whole-genome studies, such as mapping by admixture linkage disequilibrium, 56 copy number polymorphisms 8 , 57 and whole-genome associations, 58 hold promise. In this sense, discovery of new factors associated with HIV progression is a crucial step that can result in novel strategies for patient treatment and recovery. Further research into the role of host genetics that influence HIV infection and pathogenesis will provide new opportunities for disease prevention and treatment. The identification of one haplotype at IL10 as mediating progression effects has implications for identifying the mechanisms of AIDS progression and may help make new therapy decisions.  Role of different <italic>IL10</italic> haplotypes in HIV progression to AIDS Significant IL10 genotype associations were identified for HIV-1 infection and progression to AIDS in an earlier study 10 with individuals carrying –592A promoter allele having an increased risk for HIV-1 infection and a faster progression to AIDS once infected. In this study, we demonstrated that extended IL-10 haplotype variation can still be generalized using the three main promoter haplotypes centered on ‘classic’ promoter polymorphisms: –592, –819 and –1082 ( Figure 1 , Supplementary Figure S1 and Table 2 ). Although there were diverse haplotype structures based on the 21 SNPs that we studied, extensive haplotypic analysis demonstrated that the most likely explanation of IL10 variants in accelerating AIDS progression in European Americans are the low-producing proximal ATA-inclusive haplotypes. Further, the ‘distal’ promoter haplotypes based on the three SNPs rs1800890, rs6703630 and rs6693899 positioned –3575 [T/A], –2849 [G/A] and –2763 [C/A] relative to the transcription start site did not show any significant associations although previous studies have indicated the distal haplotype to play a role in differential IL-10 expression. 30 By presenting a comprehensive coverage of the genomic region with 21 SNPs in our analysis, we offer a comprehensive haplotype pattern that further divided both the known proximal and distal promoter haplotypes into subgroups for detailed analyses. Our current findings refine the role of IL10 in the progression to AIDS among European Americans 10 and suggest the importance of the low-producing ATA haplotype in this process. Although earlier publications were focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms and promoter haplotypes, we took a more comprehensive approach, examining 21 single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human IL10 gene that were reported at the time, and for which essays have been validated and brought the haplotype variation within the context of mammalian phylogeny. European Americans infected with HIV that carry the ATA haplotype progress faster than European American individuals carrying the ACC-inclusive haplotypes regardless of whether they are analyzed as ‘classical’ haplotypes ( Figures 4c and d ), extended haplotypes ( Figures 4a and b ) or haplotypic genotypes ( Figures 4e and f ). Although there are several GCC haplotypes found in European Americans ( Figure 2 , Tables 1 and 2 ), comparison based on each of them always points to the ATA haplotype as the one with the most significant effect with progression to AIDS-defining illness ( Figure 3 , Table 2 ). This haplotype, however, was not highly associated with AIDS-1993, also defined by the CD4+ component, rather than by AIDS-defining illnesses alone, as for AIDS-1987, suggesting that the effect of IL-10 on disease progression may not be driven by CD4+ but rather impact the immunity of these individuals making them more susceptible to AIDS-defining illnesses through different pathways that requires further investigation. The difference in the strength of association between the MACS and MHCS are likely attributable to the twofold difference in the sample size between the two cohorts ( Table 3 ). It is not clear if the different result for European Americans and African Americans is due to the genetic difference in the two ethnic groups, the difference in sample sizes or the mode of infection. The effect might also be driven by a complex IL-10-family pathway, for instance by its paralogs ( IL19 , IL20 , IL22 , IL24 and IL26 ) and their respective receptors ( IL10RA , IL10RB , IL20RA , IL20RB and IL22R ) rather than by a single gene. Overall, there were approximately 30% less African Americans than European Americans in the study, and 52% less sero-converters ( Supplementary Table S1 ). Finally, the cohort differences could have also contributed to the discordance of the results; the majority of African Americans in this study were from the ALIVE cohort where the HIV transmission was primarily through the injection drug use.  Variation in <italic>IL10</italic> haplotypes and their evolutionary importance The cross-species comparison of five species indicated that the variable promoter SNPs examined in this study are in the regions that don’t seem to be conserved across mammals, and –1082 is located in an evolutionarily conserved region identified only in primates (between humans and rhesus monkeys, Figure 1 ). This suggests a relatively recent evolutionary signature, perhaps specific to the primate lineage, or even confined exclusively to our own species. Furthermore, from the phylogenetic analysis of all the available haplotypes (including the ones found only in African Americans), it appears that the intermediate-producing, ACC-inclusive haplotypes may be more closely related to the ancestral haplotype than the others, and the GCC and ATA haplotypes have been evolutionarily separated for some time ( Figure 2 ); a conclusion evidenced by at least three nodes with bootstrap support over 60% ( Figure 2 ). The ancestral status of the ACC haplotype is also supported by the fact that it was present in the reference Chimpanzee sequence (CmzR) included in the comparison ( Table 1 ). It is possible that the ATA and GCC haplotype families may have arisen as adaptations to different selective pressures only recently, and their present frequencies are a result of shifting the response to varying environmental conditions in the evolution of the human species. Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that existing polymorphisms in the IL10 gene may reflect a balance of adaptive responses to auto-immune, infectious and other disease agents. 18 The low-producing ATA haplotype may have evolved from the ancestral ACC haplotype as a response to the viral populations exploiting the immunomodulatory activity of IL-10, 25 – 27 whereas several of the high producing GCC haplotypes remained under other selective constraints as evidenced by their crucial role in other human diseases. 24 Overall as a group, high-production GCC haplotypes are not associated with the progression ( Table 2 ), and include sub-types with potentially conflicting effects ( Figure 4 , green-shaded areas). Such different evolutionary trajectories may reflect the dual function of the human IL10 gene in confronting disease. IL-10, a critical inflammation cytokine, is mainly produced by the TH2 cells, a subset of the CD4 + helper cells, but also by some activated B cells, some TH1 cells, activated macrophages and some non-hematopoietic sources (for example, keratinocytes, colon carcinoma and melanoma cells). It enhances humoral immunity by promoting proliferation of B and T cells, whereas at the same time suppressing the cell-mediated immune response. 18 Regulation of the immune response is important to prevent reactivity to self-antigens or over-inflammatory reactions. IL-10 also downregulates expression of MHC class I and class II molecules, and increased IL-10 production may also decrease CD4+-regulated immunity. 40 , 41 It has also been suggested that IL-10 downregulates cyclin T1 expression through the induction of proteasome-mediated proteolysis in human macrophages. 42 For example, IL-10 can inhibit the production of many cytokines as well as the granulocyte–monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and has thus been called the ‘macrophage deactivation factor’. IL-10’s critical role is also evident during HIV infection. HIV infection causes the immune system to respond by producing IL-10. 43 – 45 Both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells have been shown to express high IL-10 levels in HIV infection, 46 , 47 and there is an indication that IL-10-positive CD8+ T cells may have an important regulatory role in the immune dysfunction accompanying HIV infection. 48 Levels of IL-10 are greater in HIV-positive people with declining CD4 cell counts and high viral loads than in newly infected individuals. 49 On the other hand, long-term non-progressors had the lowest levels of IL-10 similar to HIV-negative individuals. In some HIV-infected individuals, the balance that IL-10 helps to set between resisting an infection and suppressing immune responses against it is lost, resulting in a weakening of the immune response. Clearly, IL-10 plays an intimate and crucial role during HIV infection. On the other hand, an overexpression of IL-10 also has negative consequences. The protein has stimulatory actions on B cells and may function as a switching factor for the production of IgG4 in humans. 50 Recently, two research groups have concluded that increased IL-10 production causes the immuno-suppression that allows viruses to persist unchecked by the immune system, and by administering a therapeutic antibody to block IL-10 action, the ability of the immune system to clear persistent viruses can be restored. 51 There is also evidence that these effects were not human-specific, because in mice, IL-10 overexpression allows infections such as tuberculosis to persist. 59 Overall, IL-10 provides a case of delicate biological balance in the immune system, acting beneficially in certain contexts and harmfully in others. The importance of IL10 is not limited to the mediation and regulation of inflammatory response. High IL-10 production also influences human survival. Higher levels of IL-10 production in the mother has been associated with a successful pregnancy, 52 whereas reproductive success has also been associated with the individual IL10 haplotypes. The probability of normal fecundity increased more than 10 times when the innate cytokine profile of the women was characterized by high IL-10 and low TNF-? responsiveness, whereas the cytokine profile of women with impaired fertility was characterized by the direct opposite trend. 53 There is another downside to IL-10’s wide biological importance. Over the long evolutionary history, the gene and its product have been exploited by many extra-cellular pathogens as a means by which to attack the human host. 54 In fact, many bacteria, viruses and pathogens are able to stimulate production of IL-10 by host cells or producing their own IL-10-like homolog to suppress the host immune response. 25 , 26 It has been suggested that in certain instances, viral versions of the IL-10 molecule may act as a molecular decoy to inhibit an innate and adaptive immune response, creating a favorable environment for the pathogens. 54 Recent findings suggest that highly conserved non-coding elements often play important roles, such as regulating the expression of nearby developmental transcription factors. 55 In our study, the ATA haplotypes span the entire unbroken chromosomal region, and exist at a relatively high frequency (21% in European Americans and 44% in African Americans). On the other hand, four out of five extended GCC haplotypes (except for GCC1) exist at lower frequencies in both study populations compared with the ATA-extended haplotypes, probably due to the effects of the recombination process over time. This may reflect the past action of positive selection on ‘proximal’ ATA. Unfortunately, the nature of the data available did not allow us to apply a formal test for selection. A recent selection for the low-producing ATA genotype may help explain the presence of the long ATA-inclusive branch ( Figure 2 ), but some points remain unclear. For example, historic selective factors that have led to the establishment of the ATA haplotypes that influence HIV progression among European Americans but not in African Americans. Although for the most part ‘proximal’ ATA haplotypes are assumed to be associated with the lowest production of IL-10, 1 , 2 it is still possible that AIDS progression is not connected to the low producing qualities of ATA. Both ‘proximal’ ATA haplotypes in this study (ATA1 and ATA2) are tagged with the high-producing TGC ‘distal’ haplotype reported in Gibson et al . 5 ( Supplementary Table S2 ) who reported no difference between haplotypes of high and low producers when TGC ‘distal’ haplotype was held constant. 5 Sorting haplotypes according to the ‘distal’ promoter SNPs does not result in a pattern described for the ‘proximal’ haplotypes above ( Figure 2 ), and TGC haplotypes reported as high producing 5 (that is, haplotypes ATA1, ATA2, ACC1, ACC3, GCC1 and GCC6) can be found on every major branch of the tree ( Table 1 , Figure 2 ). It is possible that these haplotypes are more recent, and/or at least some of them arose by recombination. However, there are two notable exceptions: the low-producing ‘proximal’ ATA haplotype is always associated with the high-producing ‘distal’ TGC haplotype, whereas the low-producing ‘distal’ AAA haplotype is also always associated with the high-producing ‘proximal’ GCC haplotype. These associations may indicate a compensatory effect between the different parts of the IL10 promoter region. A further experimental effort is needed to evaluate different extended haplotypes and IL-10 production. Alternatively, this may imply that the association reported in our study could be explained by other factors such as unknown functional SNPs that might be in LD or by interaction with a different gene not included in this study. Although increased production of IL-10 favors protection against inflammatory disease, low production promotes elimination of foreign pathogens by the host. With these contrasting roles, it is not surprising that IL10 has been reported to contain a signature of balancing selection. 28 Being such an integral part of the immune system, the gene has presumably undergone constantly shifting selection pressures as humans encountered new epidemics of infectious diseases. Throughout evolutionary history, the IL10 gene must have been influenced by selection both for the mediation of inflammatory responses and promotion of postnatal survival. 24 This gene played an important role in controlling infection, but has been exploited by viruses as an important entry strategy. 54 The ability to produce either more or less of IL-10 might have been advantageous in some environmental conditions and with some infectious diseases, but not in others. 38 Consequently, several different selective forces play and balancing selection must be the most probable mode of evolution at this locus. 28 Finally, a formal test for selection could not be performed with the current sample. Elucidating origins, evolution and functions of the extended haplotypes is a challenge for future studies.  Conclusions HIV infection remains a devastating epidemic that must be addressed through many approaches. Novel genetic approaches such as looking at the evolutionary histories of disease-associated haplotypes can further our understanding of the HIV progression and outcome. Other approaches possible in the wake of the whole-genome studies, such as mapping by admixture linkage disequilibrium, 56 copy number polymorphisms 8 , 57 and whole-genome associations, 58 hold promise. In this sense, discovery of new factors associated with HIV progression is a crucial step that can result in novel strategies for patient treatment and recovery. Further research into the role of host genetics that influence HIV infection and pathogenesis will provide new opportunities for disease prevention and treatment. The identification of one haplotype at IL10 as mediating progression effects has implications for identifying the mechanisms of AIDS progression and may help make new therapy decisions. 