How Disturbed Sleep May Be a Risk Factor for Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes A Hypothesis Adverse pregnancy outcomes associated with significant maternal and infant morbidity are on the rise in Western society despite advances of medical technology. Current risk factors are insufficient to identify women at greatest risk of developing an adverse outcome. An attempt to identify novel contributors to increased risk is warranted. Sleep disturbances are frequent during pregnancy, yet are often dismissed as irrelevant. Emerging evidence indicates that sleep disturbances are associated with poor health outcomes, including cardiovascular disease. Disturbed sleep is also linked with an increased inflammatory response. Increased inflammation is proposed as a key biological pathway through which chronic disease and adverse pregnancy outcomes develop. In this paper, we propose a model and a testable hypothesis of how disturbed sleep in the first 20 weeks of pregnancy could contribute to adverse pregnancy outcomes such as preeclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, and preterm birth via increased inflammation. Target Audience Obstetricians & Gynecologists, Family Physicians Leaning Objectives After completion of this article, the reader should be able to outline data linking sleep disturbances with an increased risk of some systemic disorders, recall characteristics of pregnancy complications which support the hypothesis that sleep disturbances may be related to these pregnancy outcomes, and summarize the likelihood and types of sleep disturbances that are common in pregnant women.  Summary and Conclusion Disturbed sleep, although very common in pregnancy, has not been examined as a factor contributing to risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes. We propose a model linking sleep disturbances in early gestation to adverse pregnancy outcomes via increased inflammation. Specifically, we propose a feed forward loop between sleep disruption and inflammation during a critical period of early pregnancy when inflammation can act to inhibit the trophoblast invasion and associated remodeling of maternal blood vessels that perfuse the placenta. Assessing sleep disturbances as a risk factor for adverse outcomes could provide a target for intervention especially since sleep problems are amenable to treatment.  Figure Fig. 1 We propose that the major effects of disturbed sleep occur in the first 20 weeks of pregnancy. During this time many important physiological events take place. One of these, the profound remodeling of maternal vessels perfusing the placenta to increase placental blood flow, does not occur normally with preeclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, and preterm birth. In vitro studies indicate that excessive inflammation inhibits trophoblastic invasion that is necessary to stimulate normal vascular remodeling (dashed solid arrows). Disturbed sleep outside of pregnancy is associated with increased inflammation. Persistent and chronic sleep disturbance early in gestation may contribute to increased inflammation. The augmented inflammatory response may be magnified via a feed forward process because animal evidence suggests that increased inflammatory cytokines disrupt sleep. Poor health behaviors, such as smoking, alcohol consumption and obesity, and neuroendocrine alterations (dotted arrows), may also contribute to sleep disruption and/or increased inflammation. Poor health behaviors are known independent moderators of sleep and inflammation. In this setting, also, there is the likelihood of a feed forward process since disturbed sleep can contribute to poor health behaviors. We posit that disturbed sleep acting through increased inflammation and poor health behaviors increase adverse pregnancy outcomes primarily by interfering with normal placental bed vascular remodeling. 