Granulomatous Periorificial Dermatitis: A Variant of Granulomatous Rosacea in Children? Background We report a case of granulomatous periorificial dermatitis (GPD). A 13-year-old Jamaican boy presented with pink to flesh-colored perioral and periocular papules that erupted during a summer visit to Jamaica. The child was initially diagnosed with sarcoidosis and treated with oral steroids, but the eruption recurred 2 years later. He was referred to Dermatology. Biopsy of one of the facial papules revealed a dense granulomatous infiltrate with surrounding prominent lymphocytes. A diagnosis of GPD was made. Objective and Conclusion Also known as facial Afro-Caribbean childhood eruption (FACE), GPD occurs in prepubertal children. It can be confused with sarcoidosis, infection, and granulomatous rosacea but contains lymphocytes around the granulomas and lacks the systemic involvement seen in sarcoidosis. Cultures are invariably negative. The histologic features of GPD and granulomatous rosacea can be identical, and certain treatments may exacerbate the condition, highlighting the importance of clinical correlation. The correct diagnosis is important to minimize treatment as GPD is ultimately self-limited.  Discussion The histology of GPD closely resembles and can be identical to that seen in granulomatous rosacea. Both show noncaseating granulomas with a lymphohistiocytic infiltrate and a prominent perifollicular component. In fact, some authors view GPDs and granulomatous rosacea as variants of the same disease in different age and ethnic groups. It has been suggested that some cases of GPD are early rosacea, and the patient later goes on to develop more classic characteristics of rosacea. 2 However, the clinical picture suggests otherwise. The majority of cases of GPD have been self-limited, with no sequelae. Additionally, granulomatous rosacea is rarely seen in childhood. Telangiectasias, pustules, and flushing clinically, as well as ectatic vessels and pustules histologically, are not seen. Thus, the few cases of GPD reported to progress to rosacea may have been misdiagnosed, actually representing early granulomatous rosacea. The differential diagnosis and distinguishing features are listed in Table 1 and were reviewed by Ahmed. 14 Contact dermatitis can be evaluated with patch testing. 15 Sarcoidosis differs clinically and histologically. Clinically, a limited perioral distribution and absence of other findings for sarcoidosis (abnormal laboratory tests or chest radiograph) would be unusual in sarcoidosis. Histologically, sarcoidosis is characterized by “naked granulomas,” without the inflammatory cells around and within the granulomas noted in this case. Infection (lupus vulgaris and tinea incognito) can be ruled out with histology and appropriate cultures. Lastly, the history is critical to determining an etiology; for example, children using inhalers can develop a rosacea-like facial dermatitis because of chronic exposure to corticosteroids. 16 GPD may be on the spectrum of granulomatous rosacea, but based on the clinical behavior, it appears to be a distinct entity. The close resemblance to granulomatous rosacea, exacerbation by topical steroids, and self-limited course illustrate the importance of clinical correlation of granulomatous eruptions in children. Some authors have suggested that the granulomas may be reactive to the lymphocytic infiltrate disrupting the hair follicles, similar to acne rosacea. 5 , 7 , 8 This hypothesis is based on the observation that no granulomas were seen in some specimens. Otherwise, the pathophysiology is unknown. The treatments of GPD and granulomatous rosacea are similar. Although the eruption is usually self-limited, treatment with tetracyclines, metronidazole, and erythromycin seems to be the most effective. 4 , 17 , 18 Topical corticosteroid use is contraindicated as it may exacerbate both GPD and rosacea. The use of potent fluorinated topical steroids is thought by some to be an etiologic factor for the development of GPD. 12 However, in most reports, GPD actually develops prior to the use of potent topical steroids. Topical tacrolimus is effective, as demonstrated in this case. 19 The etiology of GPD is not known, and it is unclear why the eruption typically occurs in children of Afro-Caribbean descent. GPD has been associated with essential oils in bubble gum, antiseptic solution, formaldehyde, and black synthetic mesh. In our case, the patient did chew gum sold in Jamaica but not in the United States. The eruption occurred both summers in Jamaica, supporting a potential etiologic role for environmental factors. In summary, a history of exposures and topical corticosteroid use, ethnic background, and negative studies for infection and systemic disease such as sarcoidosis are helpful in the diagnosis of this rare disorder in children.  Discussion The histology of GPD closely resembles and can be identical to that seen in granulomatous rosacea. Both show noncaseating granulomas with a lymphohistiocytic infiltrate and a prominent perifollicular component. In fact, some authors view GPDs and granulomatous rosacea as variants of the same disease in different age and ethnic groups. It has been suggested that some cases of GPD are early rosacea, and the patient later goes on to develop more classic characteristics of rosacea. 2 However, the clinical picture suggests otherwise. The majority of cases of GPD have been self-limited, with no sequelae. Additionally, granulomatous rosacea is rarely seen in childhood. Telangiectasias, pustules, and flushing clinically, as well as ectatic vessels and pustules histologically, are not seen. Thus, the few cases of GPD reported to progress to rosacea may have been misdiagnosed, actually representing early granulomatous rosacea. The differential diagnosis and distinguishing features are listed in Table 1 and were reviewed by Ahmed. 14 Contact dermatitis can be evaluated with patch testing. 15 Sarcoidosis differs clinically and histologically. Clinically, a limited perioral distribution and absence of other findings for sarcoidosis (abnormal laboratory tests or chest radiograph) would be unusual in sarcoidosis. Histologically, sarcoidosis is characterized by “naked granulomas,” without the inflammatory cells around and within the granulomas noted in this case. Infection (lupus vulgaris and tinea incognito) can be ruled out with histology and appropriate cultures. Lastly, the history is critical to determining an etiology; for example, children using inhalers can develop a rosacea-like facial dermatitis because of chronic exposure to corticosteroids. 16 GPD may be on the spectrum of granulomatous rosacea, but based on the clinical behavior, it appears to be a distinct entity. The close resemblance to granulomatous rosacea, exacerbation by topical steroids, and self-limited course illustrate the importance of clinical correlation of granulomatous eruptions in children. Some authors have suggested that the granulomas may be reactive to the lymphocytic infiltrate disrupting the hair follicles, similar to acne rosacea. 5 , 7 , 8 This hypothesis is based on the observation that no granulomas were seen in some specimens. Otherwise, the pathophysiology is unknown. The treatments of GPD and granulomatous rosacea are similar. Although the eruption is usually self-limited, treatment with tetracyclines, metronidazole, and erythromycin seems to be the most effective. 4 , 17 , 18 Topical corticosteroid use is contraindicated as it may exacerbate both GPD and rosacea. The use of potent fluorinated topical steroids is thought by some to be an etiologic factor for the development of GPD. 12 However, in most reports, GPD actually develops prior to the use of potent topical steroids. Topical tacrolimus is effective, as demonstrated in this case. 19 The etiology of GPD is not known, and it is unclear why the eruption typically occurs in children of Afro-Caribbean descent. GPD has been associated with essential oils in bubble gum, antiseptic solution, formaldehyde, and black synthetic mesh. In our case, the patient did chew gum sold in Jamaica but not in the United States. The eruption occurred both summers in Jamaica, supporting a potential etiologic role for environmental factors. In summary, a history of exposures and topical corticosteroid use, ethnic background, and negative studies for infection and systemic disease such as sarcoidosis are helpful in the diagnosis of this rare disorder in children. 