Continuation-Phase Cognitive Therapy’s Effects on Remission and Recovery from Depression We tested continuation-phase cognitive therapy’s (C-CT) effects on remission and recovery from recurrent major depressive disorder (MDD), defined as 6 weeks and 8 months, respectively, of continuously absent or minimal symptoms. Responders to acute-phase cognitive therapy were randomized to 8 months of C-CT ( n = 41) or assessment control ( n = 43), and followed 16 additional months ( Jarrett, Kraft, Doyle, et al., 2001 ). Relative to controls, a few more patients in C-CT remitted (88% vs. 97%) and significantly more recovered (62% vs. 84%). All patients without remission and recovery relapsed, but most patients who remitted (60%) and who recovered (75%) did not later relapse or recur. We discuss the importance of defining efficacious treatment as producing remission and recovery.  Method Participants Participants were adult outpatients presenting with DSM-IV nonpsychotic, recurrent MDD with clear inter-episode recovery (?2 months of at least nearly normal functioning; American Psychiatric Association, 1994 ) and scoring ?16 on the 17-item HRSD. Diagnoses were made by a doctoral-level clinician using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (outpatient version; Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & First, 1989 ), with supplemental interview questions to assess DSM-IV disorders and subtypes. Eligible patients consenting to the experiment (C-CT vs. control; N = 84) had a mean age of 42.7 years ( SD = 10.4) and education level of 15.4 years ( SD = 2.7); 72.6% were women; and 3.6% were African American, 3.6% Hispanic, 2.4% Native American, and 90.5% Caucasian. Comorbid Axis I disorders at intake included social phobia (17.9%), specific phobias (10.7%), panic disorder without (9.5%) and with (1.2%) agoraphobia, posttraumatic stress disorder (8.3%), dysthymic disorder (4.8%), obsessive-compulsive disorder (1.2%), agoraphobia without a history of panic disorder (1.2%), and hypochondriasis (1.2%). Procedure Patients received 20 individual sessions (50-60 minutes each) of A-CT ( Beck et al., 1979 ) in a 12-14 week protocol. A-CT is designed to reduce depressive symptoms by eliciting thoughts associated with negative affect, teaching patients to evaluate the validity of such thoughts through logical and empirical methods, and generating more realistic alternatives when negative thoughts are not supported. Consenting responders to A-CT (completed the A-CT protocol and had no MDD and HRSD ? 9 by an independent evaluator; 3 responders did not consent) were randomized to C-CT ( Jarrett, 1989 ; Jarrett, Vittengl, & Clark, 2008 ; n = 41) or assessment control ( n = 43). The C-CT protocol consisted of 10 sessions (60-90 minutes each) over 8 months provided by the patient’s A-CT therapist. C-CT is designed to prevent relapse and recurrence of depression through maintenance and generalization of skills learned in A-CT, reduction of residual depressive symptoms, preparation for current or anticipated vulnerabilities, and enhancement of strengths. In C-CT, patients are taught to use emotional distress and symptoms as cues to implement skills learned in A-CT. The control condition consisted of 10 evaluation visits on the same schedule as C-CT. Evaluators of control patients had not provided A-CT and were prohibited from using psychosocial interventions. In both conditions, patients who relapsed were asked to complete all sessions and were referred for extra-protocol treatment if not receiving C-CT. The follow-up phase consisted of 10 assessments scheduled over 16 months (ending 24 months post A-CT). Pharmacotherapy was not provided in any study phase. Therapists Five doctoral-level therapists (PhD in clinical psychology or MD with training in psychiatry) completed ? 1 years of CT training and achieved competency scores ? 40 on the Cognitive Therapy Scale (CTS; Young & Beck, 1980 ) before treating study patients. During A-and C-CT, therapists received weekly group supervision, plus additional supervision as requested, from a PhD clinical psychologist with extensive experience in supervising CT. During both A- and C-CT, an offsite consultant (a PhD clinical psychologist with extensive experience evaluating CT) reviewed videotapes of the fourth and an additional randomly selected session using the CTS. Therapists received written feedback to facilitate competence and adherence with treatment manuals. All therapists achieved mean CTS scores > 40 during both A- and C-CT. Measures Longitudinal Interval Follow-Up Evaluation (LIFE) The LIFE ( Keller et al., 1987 ) is a semi-structured interview assessing DSM-IV Axis I psychopathology and extra-protocol treatment retrospectively. Independent evaluators completed the LIFE 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 months post-A-CT (each assessment covered the preceding 4 months), at study exit, and when patients, therapists, or follow-up evaluators suspected major depressive relapse or recurrence. Independent evaluators were highly experienced clinicians trained in the application of DSM-IV criteria, depressive symptom measures, and the LIFE, and did not provide A- or C-CT in this study. Independent evaluators were blind to group assignment at all LIFE assessments except months 16 and 20, due to the high cost of blind evaluations. As defined a priori by Jarrett et al. (2001) , weekly psychiatric status ratings (PSR) of DSM-IV MDD (on a 1-6 scale) defined remission and recovery, respectively, as ? 6 and ? 35 continuous weeks of PSR of 1 (no symptoms) or 2 (one or two mild symptoms); and relapse and recurrence as ? 2 weeks of PSR of 5 (meets MDD criteria) or 6 (meets MDD criteria with severe impairment and/or psychosis) before and after, respectively, meeting criteria for recovery. Other researchers have also used these PSR cutoffs (e.g., Shea et al., 1992 ). Patients who relapsed before remission or recovery were coded as not achieving remission or recovery, respectively. Assessments were scheduled to maximize protocol data collection, and the same or different evaluators (39% and 61% of pairs of assessments, respectively) coded adjacent weeks’ PSR at separate 4-month administrations of the LIFE (i.e., weeks 18-19, 35-36, 52-53, 69-70, and 86-87). We corrected the median intraclass correlation for different evaluators (.73) by dividing it by the square root of the median retest r for same evaluators (.83) to estimate the interrater reliability of the PSR as .80. Extra-Protocol Treatment Participants agreed to postpone or to report (via the LIFE) all extra-protocol psychiatric and psychosocial treatment during the study. Before they remitted, a control patient received 2 weeks of pharmacotherapy (zolpidem), and a C-CT patient received 1 week of pharmacotherapy (chlorazepate). Five patients received extra-protocol treatment before they recovered. In the control group, one patient received 2 weeks of pharmacotherapy (codimal), and a second received 9 marital-therapy sessions. In the C-CT group, one patient received 9 weeks of pharmacotherapy (methylphenidate), a second received 1 week of pharmacotherapy (melatonin), and a third received 3 weeks of pharmacotherapy (chlorazepate 1 week and Darvocet 2 weeks) plus four psychosocial treatment sessions for weight loss. The small amount of extra-protocol pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treatment received before remission or recovery did not differ significantly between the control and C-CT groups (Wilcoxon test p s > .28, two-tailed).  Participants Participants were adult outpatients presenting with DSM-IV nonpsychotic, recurrent MDD with clear inter-episode recovery (?2 months of at least nearly normal functioning; American Psychiatric Association, 1994 ) and scoring ?16 on the 17-item HRSD. Diagnoses were made by a doctoral-level clinician using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (outpatient version; Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & First, 1989 ), with supplemental interview questions to assess DSM-IV disorders and subtypes. Eligible patients consenting to the experiment (C-CT vs. control; N = 84) had a mean age of 42.7 years ( SD = 10.4) and education level of 15.4 years ( SD = 2.7); 72.6% were women; and 3.6% were African American, 3.6% Hispanic, 2.4% Native American, and 90.5% Caucasian. Comorbid Axis I disorders at intake included social phobia (17.9%), specific phobias (10.7%), panic disorder without (9.5%) and with (1.2%) agoraphobia, posttraumatic stress disorder (8.3%), dysthymic disorder (4.8%), obsessive-compulsive disorder (1.2%), agoraphobia without a history of panic disorder (1.2%), and hypochondriasis (1.2%).  Procedure Patients received 20 individual sessions (50-60 minutes each) of A-CT ( Beck et al., 1979 ) in a 12-14 week protocol. A-CT is designed to reduce depressive symptoms by eliciting thoughts associated with negative affect, teaching patients to evaluate the validity of such thoughts through logical and empirical methods, and generating more realistic alternatives when negative thoughts are not supported. Consenting responders to A-CT (completed the A-CT protocol and had no MDD and HRSD ? 9 by an independent evaluator; 3 responders did not consent) were randomized to C-CT ( Jarrett, 1989 ; Jarrett, Vittengl, & Clark, 2008 ; n = 41) or assessment control ( n = 43). The C-CT protocol consisted of 10 sessions (60-90 minutes each) over 8 months provided by the patient’s A-CT therapist. C-CT is designed to prevent relapse and recurrence of depression through maintenance and generalization of skills learned in A-CT, reduction of residual depressive symptoms, preparation for current or anticipated vulnerabilities, and enhancement of strengths. In C-CT, patients are taught to use emotional distress and symptoms as cues to implement skills learned in A-CT. The control condition consisted of 10 evaluation visits on the same schedule as C-CT. Evaluators of control patients had not provided A-CT and were prohibited from using psychosocial interventions. In both conditions, patients who relapsed were asked to complete all sessions and were referred for extra-protocol treatment if not receiving C-CT. The follow-up phase consisted of 10 assessments scheduled over 16 months (ending 24 months post A-CT). Pharmacotherapy was not provided in any study phase.  Therapists Five doctoral-level therapists (PhD in clinical psychology or MD with training in psychiatry) completed ? 1 years of CT training and achieved competency scores ? 40 on the Cognitive Therapy Scale (CTS; Young & Beck, 1980 ) before treating study patients. During A-and C-CT, therapists received weekly group supervision, plus additional supervision as requested, from a PhD clinical psychologist with extensive experience in supervising CT. During both A- and C-CT, an offsite consultant (a PhD clinical psychologist with extensive experience evaluating CT) reviewed videotapes of the fourth and an additional randomly selected session using the CTS. Therapists received written feedback to facilitate competence and adherence with treatment manuals. All therapists achieved mean CTS scores > 40 during both A- and C-CT.  Measures Longitudinal Interval Follow-Up Evaluation (LIFE) The LIFE ( Keller et al., 1987 ) is a semi-structured interview assessing DSM-IV Axis I psychopathology and extra-protocol treatment retrospectively. Independent evaluators completed the LIFE 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 months post-A-CT (each assessment covered the preceding 4 months), at study exit, and when patients, therapists, or follow-up evaluators suspected major depressive relapse or recurrence. Independent evaluators were highly experienced clinicians trained in the application of DSM-IV criteria, depressive symptom measures, and the LIFE, and did not provide A- or C-CT in this study. Independent evaluators were blind to group assignment at all LIFE assessments except months 16 and 20, due to the high cost of blind evaluations. As defined a priori by Jarrett et al. (2001) , weekly psychiatric status ratings (PSR) of DSM-IV MDD (on a 1-6 scale) defined remission and recovery, respectively, as ? 6 and ? 35 continuous weeks of PSR of 1 (no symptoms) or 2 (one or two mild symptoms); and relapse and recurrence as ? 2 weeks of PSR of 5 (meets MDD criteria) or 6 (meets MDD criteria with severe impairment and/or psychosis) before and after, respectively, meeting criteria for recovery. Other researchers have also used these PSR cutoffs (e.g., Shea et al., 1992 ). Patients who relapsed before remission or recovery were coded as not achieving remission or recovery, respectively. Assessments were scheduled to maximize protocol data collection, and the same or different evaluators (39% and 61% of pairs of assessments, respectively) coded adjacent weeks’ PSR at separate 4-month administrations of the LIFE (i.e., weeks 18-19, 35-36, 52-53, 69-70, and 86-87). We corrected the median intraclass correlation for different evaluators (.73) by dividing it by the square root of the median retest r for same evaluators (.83) to estimate the interrater reliability of the PSR as .80.  Longitudinal Interval Follow-Up Evaluation (LIFE) The LIFE ( Keller et al., 1987 ) is a semi-structured interview assessing DSM-IV Axis I psychopathology and extra-protocol treatment retrospectively. Independent evaluators completed the LIFE 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 months post-A-CT (each assessment covered the preceding 4 months), at study exit, and when patients, therapists, or follow-up evaluators suspected major depressive relapse or recurrence. Independent evaluators were highly experienced clinicians trained in the application of DSM-IV criteria, depressive symptom measures, and the LIFE, and did not provide A- or C-CT in this study. Independent evaluators were blind to group assignment at all LIFE assessments except months 16 and 20, due to the high cost of blind evaluations. As defined a priori by Jarrett et al. (2001) , weekly psychiatric status ratings (PSR) of DSM-IV MDD (on a 1-6 scale) defined remission and recovery, respectively, as ? 6 and ? 35 continuous weeks of PSR of 1 (no symptoms) or 2 (one or two mild symptoms); and relapse and recurrence as ? 2 weeks of PSR of 5 (meets MDD criteria) or 6 (meets MDD criteria with severe impairment and/or psychosis) before and after, respectively, meeting criteria for recovery. Other researchers have also used these PSR cutoffs (e.g., Shea et al., 1992 ). Patients who relapsed before remission or recovery were coded as not achieving remission or recovery, respectively. Assessments were scheduled to maximize protocol data collection, and the same or different evaluators (39% and 61% of pairs of assessments, respectively) coded adjacent weeks’ PSR at separate 4-month administrations of the LIFE (i.e., weeks 18-19, 35-36, 52-53, 69-70, and 86-87). We corrected the median intraclass correlation for different evaluators (.73) by dividing it by the square root of the median retest r for same evaluators (.83) to estimate the interrater reliability of the PSR as .80.  Extra-Protocol Treatment Participants agreed to postpone or to report (via the LIFE) all extra-protocol psychiatric and psychosocial treatment during the study. Before they remitted, a control patient received 2 weeks of pharmacotherapy (zolpidem), and a C-CT patient received 1 week of pharmacotherapy (chlorazepate). Five patients received extra-protocol treatment before they recovered. In the control group, one patient received 2 weeks of pharmacotherapy (codimal), and a second received 9 marital-therapy sessions. In the C-CT group, one patient received 9 weeks of pharmacotherapy (methylphenidate), a second received 1 week of pharmacotherapy (melatonin), and a third received 3 weeks of pharmacotherapy (chlorazepate 1 week and Darvocet 2 weeks) plus four psychosocial treatment sessions for weight loss. The small amount of extra-protocol pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treatment received before remission or recovery did not differ significantly between the control and C-CT groups (Wilcoxon test p s > .28, two-tailed).  Results Product-limit survival analyses indicated that 92% of A-CT responders remitted (i.e., achieved 6 continuous weeks of minimal or absent depressive symptoms) between weeks 6-16, and 73% recovered (i.e., achieved 35 continuous weeks of minimal or absent depressive symptoms) between weeks 35-70, post-A-CT. Analyses excluding patients who received extra-protocol treatment produced similar estimates of remission (92%) and recovery (71%). Remission and recovery were partly distinct from the absence of relapse and recurrence (see Figure 1 ). Between the extremes of MDD (relapse and recurrence) and minimal or absent symptoms (remission and recovery), patients could have maintained moderate symptoms below the MDD diagnostic threshold. None did so in the current dataset. Except for patients who attrited (5 before relapse or remission, 10 before relapse or recovery), all patients who failed to achieve remission (6/6) and recovery (19/19) relapsed. Further, 40% (27/68) of patients who remitted later relapsed or recurred, and 25% (14/55) of patients who recovered later recurred. The overall correlations of remission ( r = -.34, p < .01, n = 79) and recovery ( r = -.66, p < .01, n = 74) with a negative outcome (relapse or recurrence) were moderate. Attrition from C-CT and assessment control was similar before remission (2 and 3 patients, respectively; exact p = 1.0) and recovery (4 and 6 patients, respectively; exact p = .74). Figure 2 shows from product-limit survival analyses that a numerically larger proportion of patients in C-CT vs. control achieved remission (97% vs. 88%), but the effect was not significant, log-rank ? 2 (1) = 2.52, p = .11, r = .17. However, C-CT produced significantly more recovery than control (84% vs. 62%), log-rank ? 2 (1) = 4.20, p = .04, r = .22. When controlling the presence vs. absence of extra-protocol treatment in stratified analyses, the effects of C-CT on remission, log-rank ? 2 (1) = 2.52, p = .11, r = .17, and recovery, log-rank ? 2 (1) = 4.72, p = .03, r = .24, were similar.  Results Product-limit survival analyses indicated that 92% of A-CT responders remitted (i.e., achieved 6 continuous weeks of minimal or absent depressive symptoms) between weeks 6-16, and 73% recovered (i.e., achieved 35 continuous weeks of minimal or absent depressive symptoms) between weeks 35-70, post-A-CT. Analyses excluding patients who received extra-protocol treatment produced similar estimates of remission (92%) and recovery (71%). Remission and recovery were partly distinct from the absence of relapse and recurrence (see Figure 1 ). Between the extremes of MDD (relapse and recurrence) and minimal or absent symptoms (remission and recovery), patients could have maintained moderate symptoms below the MDD diagnostic threshold. None did so in the current dataset. Except for patients who attrited (5 before relapse or remission, 10 before relapse or recovery), all patients who failed to achieve remission (6/6) and recovery (19/19) relapsed. Further, 40% (27/68) of patients who remitted later relapsed or recurred, and 25% (14/55) of patients who recovered later recurred. The overall correlations of remission ( r = -.34, p < .01, n = 79) and recovery ( r = -.66, p < .01, n = 74) with a negative outcome (relapse or recurrence) were moderate. Attrition from C-CT and assessment control was similar before remission (2 and 3 patients, respectively; exact p = 1.0) and recovery (4 and 6 patients, respectively; exact p = .74). Figure 2 shows from product-limit survival analyses that a numerically larger proportion of patients in C-CT vs. control achieved remission (97% vs. 88%), but the effect was not significant, log-rank ? 2 (1) = 2.52, p = .11, r = .17. However, C-CT produced significantly more recovery than control (84% vs. 62%), log-rank ? 2 (1) = 4.20, p = .04, r = .22. When controlling the presence vs. absence of extra-protocol treatment in stratified analyses, the effects of C-CT on remission, log-rank ? 2 (1) = 2.52, p = .11, r = .17, and recovery, log-rank ? 2 (1) = 4.72, p = .03, r = .24, were similar.  Discussion Previous research indicates that A-CT reduces depressive symptoms ( Butler et al., 2006 ; Craighead et al., 2007 ) and C-CT reduces relapse and recurrence among A-CT responders ( Vittengl et al., 2007 ). We expanded the CT evidence base by examining remission and recovery, defined as relatively long periods of minimal or absent symptoms. Many recurrent-MDD patients who respond to A-CT and then discontinue A-CT will remit (88%) and recover (62%), with these outcomes defined rigorously as 6 and 35 continuous weeks, respectively, of minimal or absent symptoms. Further, patients treated with C-CT have a modestly better chance of remitting (97%) and a significantly better chance of recovering (84%) relative to stopping A-CT. At the same time, our analyses reveal limitations of A-CT and C-CT in producing and protecting health. Some patients who remitted and recovered experienced a major depressive episode later in the study (40% and 25%, respectively). Response to A-CT, even when followed by remission and recovery, clearly does not guarantee freedom from MDD among patients with a history of recurrent illness. Perhaps more importantly, 100% of patients who failed to achieve remission and recovery later relapsed. In this sample, being “less depressed” was not a state that our patients with recurrent MDD could sustain (cf. Fava et al., 2002 ). Important limitations include reduced statistical power to detect effects on remission due to its high base rate (92%). In addition, results from our patient sample with carefully diagnosed recurrent MDD, rigorously defined remission and recovery, and highly experienced cognitive therapists may not generalize to other populations, settings, and outcome definitions. Whereas many have used less rigorous definitions, some advise that recovery include positive markers of well-being (e.g., autonomy, mastery, self-acceptance), not just low symptoms ( Fava et al., 2007 ). Our results clarify the importance of treating patients through to remission and recovery and discovering how long to treat with which treatments. Although many A-CT responders will remit and recover, the addition of C-CT increases the chance of recovery. Our data suggest that absence of remission and recovery portend relapse among recurrent-MDD patients and reinforce calls for persistence and flexibility in treatment to achieve sustained absent or low depressive symptoms ( Rush, Trivedi, Wisniewski, et al., 2006 ). Because A-CT’s power to reduce symptoms and C-CT’s ability to prevent relapse for many patients are well-established, research emphasizing extended wellness is now more viable and urgent. Our field has not identified a “cure” for depression, but our goal should be no less.  Discussion Previous research indicates that A-CT reduces depressive symptoms ( Butler et al., 2006 ; Craighead et al., 2007 ) and C-CT reduces relapse and recurrence among A-CT responders ( Vittengl et al., 2007 ). We expanded the CT evidence base by examining remission and recovery, defined as relatively long periods of minimal or absent symptoms. Many recurrent-MDD patients who respond to A-CT and then discontinue A-CT will remit (88%) and recover (62%), with these outcomes defined rigorously as 6 and 35 continuous weeks, respectively, of minimal or absent symptoms. Further, patients treated with C-CT have a modestly better chance of remitting (97%) and a significantly better chance of recovering (84%) relative to stopping A-CT. At the same time, our analyses reveal limitations of A-CT and C-CT in producing and protecting health. Some patients who remitted and recovered experienced a major depressive episode later in the study (40% and 25%, respectively). Response to A-CT, even when followed by remission and recovery, clearly does not guarantee freedom from MDD among patients with a history of recurrent illness. Perhaps more importantly, 100% of patients who failed to achieve remission and recovery later relapsed. In this sample, being “less depressed” was not a state that our patients with recurrent MDD could sustain (cf. Fava et al., 2002 ). Important limitations include reduced statistical power to detect effects on remission due to its high base rate (92%). In addition, results from our patient sample with carefully diagnosed recurrent MDD, rigorously defined remission and recovery, and highly experienced cognitive therapists may not generalize to other populations, settings, and outcome definitions. Whereas many have used less rigorous definitions, some advise that recovery include positive markers of well-being (e.g., autonomy, mastery, self-acceptance), not just low symptoms ( Fava et al., 2007 ). Our results clarify the importance of treating patients through to remission and recovery and discovering how long to treat with which treatments. Although many A-CT responders will remit and recover, the addition of C-CT increases the chance of recovery. Our data suggest that absence of remission and recovery portend relapse among recurrent-MDD patients and reinforce calls for persistence and flexibility in treatment to achieve sustained absent or low depressive symptoms ( Rush, Trivedi, Wisniewski, et al., 2006 ). Because A-CT’s power to reduce symptoms and C-CT’s ability to prevent relapse for many patients are well-established, research emphasizing extended wellness is now more viable and urgent. Our field has not identified a “cure” for depression, but our goal should be no less. 