Hybrids of aneuploid human cancer cells permit complementation of simple and complex cancer defects Causes for the complex phenotypes of cancers, such as altered differentiation, invasion, and metastasis, are not known, and multigenic defects are likely. In contrast, well-defined deficiencies, such as those affecting DNA-repair mechanisms and enzymatic pathways, are simple, typically caused by one or a few gene mutations. Complementation by introducing defined genetic elements is used to study simple cancer phenotypes, while complementation by the fusion of whole cells is employed occasionally for complex ones. Hybrids formed solely from the common lines (aneuploid due to chromosomal instability, CIN) are rarely reported. We created stable hybrids of two CIN lines, producing a nearly complete genetic sum of the parental karyotypes. Complementation of a simple cancer phenotype, a Fanconi anemia pathway defective in both parental lines, occurred in all hybrids, restoring the normal drug-resistance phenotype. The grossly defective mitotic spindle checkpoint present in both parental lines was partially corrected in some hybrids, supporting a multigenic origin rather than a single gene defect. Using Affymetrix 100K SNP chips, we mapped chromosomal loci differing among the phenotypically distinct hybrid clones. Fusing CIN cell lines to form mapped hybrids offers new tools for positional cloning or classification of simple and complex cancer phenotypes, including mechanical defects and altered drug responses.  Introduction Cancer is a constellation of phenotypic changes. Simple phenotypic changes can be caused by the mutation of a gene or a few genes in a simple pathway. A typical example is the deficiency for the Fanconi anemia DNA repair mechanism ( 1 ), or coexisting mutations of the activin and TGF-? receptor type II genes as a cause of SMAD pathway defects in cancers having microsatellite instability ( 2 ). Some cancer phenotypes are more complex, such as altered differentiation, invasion, metastasis, resistance to drugs, and genetic instability. One would presume that these complex phenotypic changes are brought about by serial changes that evolve and undergo selection during tumorigenesis. Complex cancer phenotypes have been resistant to study, due to their multigenic causes, epigenetic influences, quantitative rather than qualitative features, etc. In the case of the defects in the mitotic checkpoints of aneuploid cancers, for example, it has been proposed that single dominant mutations may be sufficient in some cancers ( 3 ), but examples have been few. Indeed, it is often unclear whether a defect is simple or complex until a cause can be assigned. The variation in sensitivities to anti-cancer drugs is an economically and medically important example. It would be useful to have a positional genetic approach that could be used to evaluate both possibilities simultaneously, and most useful if the method could be used with CIN cancers, the most common type in human solid tumors. Here, we explored whether whole cell fusion and complementation offered such a capability for CIN cells. To complement single chromosomes or parts of chromosomes, rather than entire genomes, non-mammalian artificial chromosomes of yeast, bacterial or phage origin are used. Microcell-mediated chromosome transfer can introduce a single chromosome or a part thereof into a cell ( 4 ). Single genes are introduced into cells by transient or stable transfection. Genes of the Fanconi anemia pathway, for example, were found by complementation ( 5 ). There is a long trend in complementation studies to move away from whole genome complementation towards using chromosomes, parts of chromosomes and distinct genes. This helps to positionally narrow the chromosomal region of interest, which is appropriate for phenotypes of single gene mutations. This approach, however, has very limited use for studying phenotypes determined by multiple changes, or when a single causative gene cannot be assumed. A unique value of whole-cell fusion for the study of complex phenotypes is in the simultaneous complementation of multiple gene defects and/or epigenetic changes. Somatic cell hybridization studies were used to study cancer since the early 1960’s. Barski and Cornefert found that hybrids of mouse cancer cells of high and low malignant potential displayed the highly malignant phenotype ( 6 ). In the 1960s and 1970s, Harris pioneered the functional modeling of tumor suppression with experiments employing virus-induced cell fusion ( 7 ). The early cell fusion experiments were used mainly to study the complex phenotype of tumorigenesis, defined as the ability of cells to form tumors when injected into mice. Nonetheless, complementing a whole cancer genome has disadvantages. It is difficult to identify the part of the two parental genomes responsible for the phenotypic change in the hybrid. It is illustrative, if not frankly entertaining, to note that Harris and Barski both studied the same phenotypes in hybrids, but arrived at opposite interpretations. Early whole human cell-fusion experiments involved hybrids of malignant with normal cell lines ( 8 ). In theory, however, such an approach poses an interpretative problem. The observation of either of the parental phenotypes in such a hybrid could simply be viewed as the retention of the phenotype of one parental cell line, unchanged by the fusion. That is, the observation of a normal phenotype in a hybrid of a normal and a malignant cell does not imply complementation. True complementation of a cancer phenotype can only follow from emergence of a new phenotype in the hybrid that is not observed in either parent. This means that whole cell fusion can only be used for complementation studies of complex cancer phenotypes if cancer cells are fused with cancer cells. In the same study ( 8 ), Stanbridge reported fusion between different HeLa strains. The hybrids had twice the “same” genome. Little or no opportunity for complementation exists in such “homo-hybrids”, since both parents essentially share the changes that caused their cancer phenotype. Other researchers created “hetero-hybrids” of different murine cancer cells ( 7 ). Murine cancers differ from adult-onset human cancers in that they arise after a shorter period of tumorigenesis and are genetically less complex. Mouse cells also transform spontaneously in culture, whereas human cells do not. Hetero-hybrids of different human cancer cells have not been used widely, but could be useful for complementation studies. There are rare reports of such hybrids ( 9 – 11 ). Aneuploidy, and the chromosomal instability (CIN) closely associated with it, characterize the vast majority of human cancers. CIN is a motor of tumor evolution and tumorigenesis ( 12 ). The precise relationship between aneuploidy and CIN in cancer is not understood. CIN affecting a euploid cell may cause aneuploidy, but it is also conceivable that an aneuploid state itself promotes CIN in advanced neoplasms. It would be very useful experimentally to manipulate the degree of CIN in the face of persistent aneuploidy. To date, few attempts to study the CIN phenotype by whole cell fusion are reported. Lengauer et al fused CIN cell lines with MSI cell lines. This resulted in chromosomally stable hybrids ( 13 ). Hybrids of CIN cell lines with other CIN cell lines were reported by Casares et al. and by Weissman and Stanbridge ( 9 , 11 ). Casares et al reported the creation of a CIN × CIN hybrid, but did not report having used this hybrid in their experiments. Weissman and Stanbridge studied differences in the tumorigenicity of a number of hybrids, including three CIN × CIN hybrids. Their genetic analysis of the hybrids was limited to karyotyping. Hybrids resulting from fusion of two different CIN cell lines involve special difficulties. The CIN parents may have experienced chromosomal losses and gains prior to fusion. Increased chromosomal instability after fusion has been reported ( 14 ). This disadvantage may, however, be taken to advantage. The segregation of recessive phenotypes in some, but not all, of a number of hybrids derived from the same CIN parents could give additional insight into complex phenotypes. To date, this variability still poses a major obstacle for an accurate genomic analysis of these hybrids. Phenotypic differences between sister hybrids could be explained by changes too small to be detected by traditional analysis, such as karyotyping. The use of CIN × CIN hybrids thus requires a method of high-resolution, genome-wide analysis to determine small chromosomal regions responsible for phenotypic differences, with the ability to determine the paternity of these regions. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) provide a tool to identify such regions, for more than two million SNPs have been identified in the human genome ( 15 – 17 ). Most SNPs have only two alleles and individually are therefore less informative for allelotyping than microsatellite markers, however, the scoring of large numbers of SNPs can be an effective method for genome-wide allelotyping and copy number analysis ( 18 , 19 ). Recently developed array-based methods based on allele-specific hybridization allow large-scale genotyping of SNPs ( 20 ).  Methods Cell lines Pancreatic cell lines PL-11 (a kind gift from Dr. Elizabeth Jaffee) and Hs766T (purchased from ATCC, Manassas, Va.) were grown in RPMI 1640 medium, supplemented with 10% FBS at 37°C in an atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Resistance to selective agents was conferred by Lipofectamine-mediated stable transfection of empty vector pUb6/V5/HisA (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif.) or infection with a retroviral Moloney murine leukemia virus/vesicular stomatitis virus-G protein vector containing the puromycin resistance gene. Blasticidin S (Invitrogen) or puromycin (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo.) was added to the medium 24 hours after transduction. Cells were grown in selective medium for two weeks, allowing isolation of resistant cells. Cell Fusion Cells transduced with antibiotic resistance genes as described above were grown in culture flasks. Cells in log phase were harvested by trypsinization and washed in Hank’s balanced salt solution. Each parental line (0.75·106 cells) was resuspended in a pH-neutral solution of 250 mM D-sorbitol, 100 ?M calcium acetate, 500 ?M magnesium acetate and 0.1% BSA. The suspension was transferred to a cuvette. Cells were aligned by dielectrophoresis and electrofused using an Electro Cell Manipulator 200, Optimizor 500, electrode isolator and electrode P/N 470 (BTX, Holliston, Mass.). The suspension was transferred to a 75 cm2 culture flask containing unmodified medium and allowed to adhere. 24 hours later the cells were trypsinized, resuspended in medium containing puromycin and blasticidin S·HCl, and plated in 96-well plates. Cells underwent selection for two weeks. Clones were expanded and maintained as described for the parental lines. Karyotyping Preparation of metaphase spreads and G-banding were carried out following standard procedures by the Molecular Pathology Cytogentics Laboratory of the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. Microsatellite analysis The paternity of both parental lines was confirmed in the hybrid lines by analyzing nine microsatellite loci and the amelogenin locus using the AmpF/STR® Profiler Plus® PCR Amplification Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Drug sensitivity assay Parent and hybrid cells were plated in 96-well plates and allowed to adhere. Mitomycin C or 5-FU (both Sigma) were added to the medium in a range of concentrations. The cells were treated for six days. After treatment the cells were rinsed with PBS and lysed with dH2O. Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Reagent (Molecular Probes - Invitrogen) was then added. Fluorescence was measured by a fluorometer. Cell Cycle analysis Cells were grown in 25cm2 flasks. When the cells were 30% confluent and growing logarithmically, fresh growth medium containing 15nM mitomycin C or fresh medium alone was added. Forty-eight hours later, cells were harvested and frozen in a citrate buffer containing 5% dimethylsulfoxide. On the day of analysis cells were prepared and stained with propidium iodide as previously described ( 21 ). Fluorescence was measured by flow cytometry. Fluorescence data were interpreted using CellQuest (BD Biosciences) and ModFit LT (Verity Software House, Topsham, Me.). FANCD2 mono-ubiquitination assay Detection of FANCD2 mono-ubiquitination in response to treatment with crosslinking agents was performed as previously reported ( 22 , 23 ), FANCD2 monoubiquitination being assessed by immunoblot using an antibody against the FANCD2 protein. Mitotic index assay Cells were grown in 25cm2 culture flasks. When the cells reached 50% confluency, the medium was replaced with fresh medium containing 0.1?M demecolcine. For every six hours over the next 30 hours, a flask was harvested, such that all cells, including dislodged cells, were collected and fixed in a phosphate-buffered salt solution containing 5.5% NP-40 and 3.7% formaldehyde. Twenty-four hours later, Hoechst 33258 (Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 0.01g/l. Cells were allowed to incubate at least two hours. The mitotic index was then determined using fluorescence microscopy. At least 200 cells were counted for each time point. SNP array analysis The genotypes of 58,962 SNPs were analyzed using the Affymetrix CentXBA oligonucleotide array hybridized to reduced-complexity genomic DNA as described ( 20 ). Briefly, 250 ng of genomic DNA was digested with XbaI, adapters were ligated to the digested DNA, and PCR was performed to preferentially amplify fragments 250–2000 bp in length. Samples were then fragmented, fluorescently labeled, and hybridized to the arrays according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Genotypes were called by the GeneChip® DNA Analysis Software Tool (GDAST, version 3.0) using a 0.05% error setting. Four potential genotype calls were made: AA, BB, AB and No Call. Probes for SNPs whose positions were not known or not annotated by GeneChipR DNA Analysis Software Tool were excluded. Loci homozygous for one allele in one parent and for the other allele in the other parent, e.g. AA in one parent and BB in the other, were further analyzed for inheritance patterns. This was the case in 6,864 of 58,962 loci. These loci were considered by us to be “informative” in the hybrids. The average distance between informative markers was 392 kilobases and the median distance was 95 kilobases. A homozygous genotype of such a locus in a hybrid, i.e. AA or BB at the locus, was interpreted as indicating that that locus potentially derived preferentially from one parental line, pending classification and confirmation (see Results). (Note: in CIN cell lines, more than two gene copies are common at a given locus.) A heterozygous call, AB, was interpreted as indicating that genetic material from both parents was present at the locus. Sequencing Primers for PCR and sequencing in two directions of SNP loci rs724326, rs2957384, rs9303347, rs9293494, rs956274 were purchased from IDT DNA (Coralville, Iowa). Purified PCR products were run on a 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.). Sequence data was analyzed using Sequencher DNA sequence analysis software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, Mich.).  Cell lines Pancreatic cell lines PL-11 (a kind gift from Dr. Elizabeth Jaffee) and Hs766T (purchased from ATCC, Manassas, Va.) were grown in RPMI 1640 medium, supplemented with 10% FBS at 37°C in an atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Resistance to selective agents was conferred by Lipofectamine-mediated stable transfection of empty vector pUb6/V5/HisA (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif.) or infection with a retroviral Moloney murine leukemia virus/vesicular stomatitis virus-G protein vector containing the puromycin resistance gene. Blasticidin S (Invitrogen) or puromycin (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo.) was added to the medium 24 hours after transduction. Cells were grown in selective medium for two weeks, allowing isolation of resistant cells.  Cell Fusion Cells transduced with antibiotic resistance genes as described above were grown in culture flasks. Cells in log phase were harvested by trypsinization and washed in Hank’s balanced salt solution. Each parental line (0.75·106 cells) was resuspended in a pH-neutral solution of 250 mM D-sorbitol, 100 ?M calcium acetate, 500 ?M magnesium acetate and 0.1% BSA. The suspension was transferred to a cuvette. Cells were aligned by dielectrophoresis and electrofused using an Electro Cell Manipulator 200, Optimizor 500, electrode isolator and electrode P/N 470 (BTX, Holliston, Mass.). The suspension was transferred to a 75 cm2 culture flask containing unmodified medium and allowed to adhere. 24 hours later the cells were trypsinized, resuspended in medium containing puromycin and blasticidin S·HCl, and plated in 96-well plates. Cells underwent selection for two weeks. Clones were expanded and maintained as described for the parental lines.  Karyotyping Preparation of metaphase spreads and G-banding were carried out following standard procedures by the Molecular Pathology Cytogentics Laboratory of the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions.  Microsatellite analysis The paternity of both parental lines was confirmed in the hybrid lines by analyzing nine microsatellite loci and the amelogenin locus using the AmpF/STR® Profiler Plus® PCR Amplification Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Drug sensitivity assay Parent and hybrid cells were plated in 96-well plates and allowed to adhere. Mitomycin C or 5-FU (both Sigma) were added to the medium in a range of concentrations. The cells were treated for six days. After treatment the cells were rinsed with PBS and lysed with dH2O. Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA Reagent (Molecular Probes - Invitrogen) was then added. Fluorescence was measured by a fluorometer.  Cell Cycle analysis Cells were grown in 25cm2 flasks. When the cells were 30% confluent and growing logarithmically, fresh growth medium containing 15nM mitomycin C or fresh medium alone was added. Forty-eight hours later, cells were harvested and frozen in a citrate buffer containing 5% dimethylsulfoxide. On the day of analysis cells were prepared and stained with propidium iodide as previously described ( 21 ). Fluorescence was measured by flow cytometry. Fluorescence data were interpreted using CellQuest (BD Biosciences) and ModFit LT (Verity Software House, Topsham, Me.).  FANCD2 mono-ubiquitination assay Detection of FANCD2 mono-ubiquitination in response to treatment with crosslinking agents was performed as previously reported ( 22 , 23 ), FANCD2 monoubiquitination being assessed by immunoblot using an antibody against the FANCD2 protein.  Mitotic index assay Cells were grown in 25cm2 culture flasks. When the cells reached 50% confluency, the medium was replaced with fresh medium containing 0.1?M demecolcine. For every six hours over the next 30 hours, a flask was harvested, such that all cells, including dislodged cells, were collected and fixed in a phosphate-buffered salt solution containing 5.5% NP-40 and 3.7% formaldehyde. Twenty-four hours later, Hoechst 33258 (Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 0.01g/l. Cells were allowed to incubate at least two hours. The mitotic index was then determined using fluorescence microscopy. At least 200 cells were counted for each time point.  SNP array analysis The genotypes of 58,962 SNPs were analyzed using the Affymetrix CentXBA oligonucleotide array hybridized to reduced-complexity genomic DNA as described ( 20 ). Briefly, 250 ng of genomic DNA was digested with XbaI, adapters were ligated to the digested DNA, and PCR was performed to preferentially amplify fragments 250–2000 bp in length. Samples were then fragmented, fluorescently labeled, and hybridized to the arrays according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Genotypes were called by the GeneChip® DNA Analysis Software Tool (GDAST, version 3.0) using a 0.05% error setting. Four potential genotype calls were made: AA, BB, AB and No Call. Probes for SNPs whose positions were not known or not annotated by GeneChipR DNA Analysis Software Tool were excluded. Loci homozygous for one allele in one parent and for the other allele in the other parent, e.g. AA in one parent and BB in the other, were further analyzed for inheritance patterns. This was the case in 6,864 of 58,962 loci. These loci were considered by us to be “informative” in the hybrids. The average distance between informative markers was 392 kilobases and the median distance was 95 kilobases. A homozygous genotype of such a locus in a hybrid, i.e. AA or BB at the locus, was interpreted as indicating that that locus potentially derived preferentially from one parental line, pending classification and confirmation (see Results). (Note: in CIN cell lines, more than two gene copies are common at a given locus.) A heterozygous call, AB, was interpreted as indicating that genetic material from both parents was present at the locus.  Sequencing Primers for PCR and sequencing in two directions of SNP loci rs724326, rs2957384, rs9303347, rs9293494, rs956274 were purchased from IDT DNA (Coralville, Iowa). Purified PCR products were run on a 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, Calif.). Sequence data was analyzed using Sequencher DNA sequence analysis software (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, Mich.).  Results Hybrid clones contain a nearly complete complement of the genomes of the parental cell lines Electrofusion of cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T and subsequent double selection produced twenty-four lines. Paternity from both parental lines was confirmed by microsatellite analysis and by PCR of known mutations in one of the parentals. STR analysis showed that alleles from both parental lines were present in the hybrids. Karyotyping revealed a nearly complete complement of both parental genomes ( figure 1 ). Complementation of the mitomycin C hypersensitivity phenotype Cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T are hypersensitive to DNA crosslinking agents ( 23 ). To determine whether this phenotype was complemented in the hybrids, we compared survival after treatment with mitomycin C in a range of concentrations. Hybrid clones 1.A16 and 2.B2 survived markedly higher doses than the parental lines ( figure 2 ). In contrast, no difference in survival was found between parental lines and hybrids after treatment with 5-FU (not shown). Cell cycle analysis showed that the hybrids did not arrest in G2 after treatment with moderate concentrations of mitomycin C ( figure 3 ). Complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway Following treatment with the DNA-crosslinking agent mitomycin C, immunoblotting showed FANCD2 monoubiquitination in all hybrids, but not in parental lines, demonstrating a complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway by whole-cell fusion ( figure 4 ). Partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect Mitotic indices were determined at six-hour intervals after demecolcine on twenty-four hybrid lines and both parental lines, defined as the number of cells in mitosis as a fraction of the total number of cells. Mitotic index reached a peak 18h after start of treatment with demecolcine. Of twenty-four hybrid lines, two had a peak mitotic index higher than that of the parental lines ( figure 5 ). We interpret these two hybrids as representing a partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect. Seventeen hybrid lines obtained from homo-fusion of cell line PL-11 with itself did not have a mitotic index greater than PL-11 (not shown). Common regions of allelic changes in hybrids sharing the same phenotype We used genome-wide SNP array analysis to compare the two hybrids 2.B2 and 1.A16, having partial complementation of the defective spindle checkpoint, with two of the twenty-two hybrids that did not complement the checkpoint. Initially, we looked for regions that were uniparental in both deficient hybrids and diparental in the two proficient hybrids, or vice versa, to identify chromosomal regions involved in complementation. Prior studies of the 100K SNP array technology in CIN cancer lines indicated that software “calls” of “homozygosity” can include instances of allelic imbalance at heterozygous loci having copy number increases ( 18 ). This is due to errors as the software, designed to interpret diploid cells, attempts to interpret the unbalanced signals of aneuploid genomes. Examining informative loci revealed ten chromosomal regions with high numbers of homozygous calls. We distinguished regions having contiguous uniparental calls from regions having scattered uniparental calls interspersed with “no calls” and diparental calls ( table ). The latter regions were interpreted by us as being diparental with allelic imbalance. The three instances of regions having contiguous homozygous calls were interpreted as having uniparental inheritance. To confirm this interpretation of the zygosity calls we selected markers inside and outside a region of interest on chromosome 5q for sequencing. This 127 Mbp region was covered by 440 informative markers. It had a pattern of uniparental inheritance in hybrid 2.B2, allelic imbalance in 1.A16, and heterozygosity in hybrids 1.A18 and 1.B6. Markers rs9293494 and rs956274 are inside this region on chromosome 5q. For the parental lines and clone 2.B2 all homozygous software calls represented pure single allelic forms upon sequencing. Markers rs10512754 and rs10512762 are outside this region and had heterozygous software calls in all hybrids. Sequencing confirmed that heterozygous software calls represented biallelic loci. Thus, we concluded that a segmental deletion, with or without other copy number changes, had rendered hybrid 2.B2 as uniparental in this 127 Mbp region. In hybrid 1.A16, the same region was characterized by heterozygous calls interspersed with homozygous calls and a large fraction of “no calls” (237 of 440 markers, compared with 41 of 440 for hybrid 1.A18 and 33 of 440 for hybrid 1.B6; 9 of 116 informative markers spanning the remaining part of chromosome 5 were “no calls” in 1.A16). We expected the homozygous calls and the lower statistical confidence values to represent heterozygosity with allelic imbalance. However, this could not be confirmed reliably by assessing the peak heights on the sequence chromatograms. In addition, we sequenced markers rs724326, rs2957384 and rs9303347, mapped to regions of chromosomes 2 and 17 that had the same pattern of mixed homozygous and heterozygous calls, with an overall decrease of statistical confidence for the zygosity calls, represented by an increased number of “no calls.” Peak heights for the different alleles in the chromatograms did not correspond significantly with the pattern of SNP chip calls. Thus, the regions defined by interspersed calls of different types could not yet be assigned to a structural feature, although more advanced calling algorithms or more sophisticated techniques, such as a quantitative allele-specific assay, might have uncovered subtle regional changes in allelic ratios.  Results Hybrid clones contain a nearly complete complement of the genomes of the parental cell lines Electrofusion of cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T and subsequent double selection produced twenty-four lines. Paternity from both parental lines was confirmed by microsatellite analysis and by PCR of known mutations in one of the parentals. STR analysis showed that alleles from both parental lines were present in the hybrids. Karyotyping revealed a nearly complete complement of both parental genomes ( figure 1 ). Complementation of the mitomycin C hypersensitivity phenotype Cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T are hypersensitive to DNA crosslinking agents ( 23 ). To determine whether this phenotype was complemented in the hybrids, we compared survival after treatment with mitomycin C in a range of concentrations. Hybrid clones 1.A16 and 2.B2 survived markedly higher doses than the parental lines ( figure 2 ). In contrast, no difference in survival was found between parental lines and hybrids after treatment with 5-FU (not shown). Cell cycle analysis showed that the hybrids did not arrest in G2 after treatment with moderate concentrations of mitomycin C ( figure 3 ). Complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway Following treatment with the DNA-crosslinking agent mitomycin C, immunoblotting showed FANCD2 monoubiquitination in all hybrids, but not in parental lines, demonstrating a complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway by whole-cell fusion ( figure 4 ). Partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect Mitotic indices were determined at six-hour intervals after demecolcine on twenty-four hybrid lines and both parental lines, defined as the number of cells in mitosis as a fraction of the total number of cells. Mitotic index reached a peak 18h after start of treatment with demecolcine. Of twenty-four hybrid lines, two had a peak mitotic index higher than that of the parental lines ( figure 5 ). We interpret these two hybrids as representing a partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect. Seventeen hybrid lines obtained from homo-fusion of cell line PL-11 with itself did not have a mitotic index greater than PL-11 (not shown). Common regions of allelic changes in hybrids sharing the same phenotype We used genome-wide SNP array analysis to compare the two hybrids 2.B2 and 1.A16, having partial complementation of the defective spindle checkpoint, with two of the twenty-two hybrids that did not complement the checkpoint. Initially, we looked for regions that were uniparental in both deficient hybrids and diparental in the two proficient hybrids, or vice versa, to identify chromosomal regions involved in complementation. Prior studies of the 100K SNP array technology in CIN cancer lines indicated that software “calls” of “homozygosity” can include instances of allelic imbalance at heterozygous loci having copy number increases ( 18 ). This is due to errors as the software, designed to interpret diploid cells, attempts to interpret the unbalanced signals of aneuploid genomes. Examining informative loci revealed ten chromosomal regions with high numbers of homozygous calls. We distinguished regions having contiguous uniparental calls from regions having scattered uniparental calls interspersed with “no calls” and diparental calls ( table ). The latter regions were interpreted by us as being diparental with allelic imbalance. The three instances of regions having contiguous homozygous calls were interpreted as having uniparental inheritance. To confirm this interpretation of the zygosity calls we selected markers inside and outside a region of interest on chromosome 5q for sequencing. This 127 Mbp region was covered by 440 informative markers. It had a pattern of uniparental inheritance in hybrid 2.B2, allelic imbalance in 1.A16, and heterozygosity in hybrids 1.A18 and 1.B6. Markers rs9293494 and rs956274 are inside this region on chromosome 5q. For the parental lines and clone 2.B2 all homozygous software calls represented pure single allelic forms upon sequencing. Markers rs10512754 and rs10512762 are outside this region and had heterozygous software calls in all hybrids. Sequencing confirmed that heterozygous software calls represented biallelic loci. Thus, we concluded that a segmental deletion, with or without other copy number changes, had rendered hybrid 2.B2 as uniparental in this 127 Mbp region. In hybrid 1.A16, the same region was characterized by heterozygous calls interspersed with homozygous calls and a large fraction of “no calls” (237 of 440 markers, compared with 41 of 440 for hybrid 1.A18 and 33 of 440 for hybrid 1.B6; 9 of 116 informative markers spanning the remaining part of chromosome 5 were “no calls” in 1.A16). We expected the homozygous calls and the lower statistical confidence values to represent heterozygosity with allelic imbalance. However, this could not be confirmed reliably by assessing the peak heights on the sequence chromatograms. In addition, we sequenced markers rs724326, rs2957384 and rs9303347, mapped to regions of chromosomes 2 and 17 that had the same pattern of mixed homozygous and heterozygous calls, with an overall decrease of statistical confidence for the zygosity calls, represented by an increased number of “no calls.” Peak heights for the different alleles in the chromatograms did not correspond significantly with the pattern of SNP chip calls. Thus, the regions defined by interspersed calls of different types could not yet be assigned to a structural feature, although more advanced calling algorithms or more sophisticated techniques, such as a quantitative allele-specific assay, might have uncovered subtle regional changes in allelic ratios.  Hybrid clones contain a nearly complete complement of the genomes of the parental cell lines Electrofusion of cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T and subsequent double selection produced twenty-four lines. Paternity from both parental lines was confirmed by microsatellite analysis and by PCR of known mutations in one of the parentals. STR analysis showed that alleles from both parental lines were present in the hybrids. Karyotyping revealed a nearly complete complement of both parental genomes ( figure 1 ).  Hybrid clones contain a nearly complete complement of the genomes of the parental cell lines Electrofusion of cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T and subsequent double selection produced twenty-four lines. Paternity from both parental lines was confirmed by microsatellite analysis and by PCR of known mutations in one of the parentals. STR analysis showed that alleles from both parental lines were present in the hybrids. Karyotyping revealed a nearly complete complement of both parental genomes ( figure 1 ).  Complementation of the mitomycin C hypersensitivity phenotype Cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T are hypersensitive to DNA crosslinking agents ( 23 ). To determine whether this phenotype was complemented in the hybrids, we compared survival after treatment with mitomycin C in a range of concentrations. Hybrid clones 1.A16 and 2.B2 survived markedly higher doses than the parental lines ( figure 2 ). In contrast, no difference in survival was found between parental lines and hybrids after treatment with 5-FU (not shown). Cell cycle analysis showed that the hybrids did not arrest in G2 after treatment with moderate concentrations of mitomycin C ( figure 3 ).  Complementation of the mitomycin C hypersensitivity phenotype Cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T are hypersensitive to DNA crosslinking agents ( 23 ). To determine whether this phenotype was complemented in the hybrids, we compared survival after treatment with mitomycin C in a range of concentrations. Hybrid clones 1.A16 and 2.B2 survived markedly higher doses than the parental lines ( figure 2 ). In contrast, no difference in survival was found between parental lines and hybrids after treatment with 5-FU (not shown). Cell cycle analysis showed that the hybrids did not arrest in G2 after treatment with moderate concentrations of mitomycin C ( figure 3 ).  Complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway Following treatment with the DNA-crosslinking agent mitomycin C, immunoblotting showed FANCD2 monoubiquitination in all hybrids, but not in parental lines, demonstrating a complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway by whole-cell fusion ( figure 4 ).  Complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway Following treatment with the DNA-crosslinking agent mitomycin C, immunoblotting showed FANCD2 monoubiquitination in all hybrids, but not in parental lines, demonstrating a complementation of the Fanconi anemia pathway by whole-cell fusion ( figure 4 ).  Partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect Mitotic indices were determined at six-hour intervals after demecolcine on twenty-four hybrid lines and both parental lines, defined as the number of cells in mitosis as a fraction of the total number of cells. Mitotic index reached a peak 18h after start of treatment with demecolcine. Of twenty-four hybrid lines, two had a peak mitotic index higher than that of the parental lines ( figure 5 ). We interpret these two hybrids as representing a partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect. Seventeen hybrid lines obtained from homo-fusion of cell line PL-11 with itself did not have a mitotic index greater than PL-11 (not shown).  Partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect Mitotic indices were determined at six-hour intervals after demecolcine on twenty-four hybrid lines and both parental lines, defined as the number of cells in mitosis as a fraction of the total number of cells. Mitotic index reached a peak 18h after start of treatment with demecolcine. Of twenty-four hybrid lines, two had a peak mitotic index higher than that of the parental lines ( figure 5 ). We interpret these two hybrids as representing a partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint defect. Seventeen hybrid lines obtained from homo-fusion of cell line PL-11 with itself did not have a mitotic index greater than PL-11 (not shown).  Common regions of allelic changes in hybrids sharing the same phenotype We used genome-wide SNP array analysis to compare the two hybrids 2.B2 and 1.A16, having partial complementation of the defective spindle checkpoint, with two of the twenty-two hybrids that did not complement the checkpoint. Initially, we looked for regions that were uniparental in both deficient hybrids and diparental in the two proficient hybrids, or vice versa, to identify chromosomal regions involved in complementation. Prior studies of the 100K SNP array technology in CIN cancer lines indicated that software “calls” of “homozygosity” can include instances of allelic imbalance at heterozygous loci having copy number increases ( 18 ). This is due to errors as the software, designed to interpret diploid cells, attempts to interpret the unbalanced signals of aneuploid genomes. Examining informative loci revealed ten chromosomal regions with high numbers of homozygous calls. We distinguished regions having contiguous uniparental calls from regions having scattered uniparental calls interspersed with “no calls” and diparental calls ( table ). The latter regions were interpreted by us as being diparental with allelic imbalance. The three instances of regions having contiguous homozygous calls were interpreted as having uniparental inheritance. To confirm this interpretation of the zygosity calls we selected markers inside and outside a region of interest on chromosome 5q for sequencing. This 127 Mbp region was covered by 440 informative markers. It had a pattern of uniparental inheritance in hybrid 2.B2, allelic imbalance in 1.A16, and heterozygosity in hybrids 1.A18 and 1.B6. Markers rs9293494 and rs956274 are inside this region on chromosome 5q. For the parental lines and clone 2.B2 all homozygous software calls represented pure single allelic forms upon sequencing. Markers rs10512754 and rs10512762 are outside this region and had heterozygous software calls in all hybrids. Sequencing confirmed that heterozygous software calls represented biallelic loci. Thus, we concluded that a segmental deletion, with or without other copy number changes, had rendered hybrid 2.B2 as uniparental in this 127 Mbp region. In hybrid 1.A16, the same region was characterized by heterozygous calls interspersed with homozygous calls and a large fraction of “no calls” (237 of 440 markers, compared with 41 of 440 for hybrid 1.A18 and 33 of 440 for hybrid 1.B6; 9 of 116 informative markers spanning the remaining part of chromosome 5 were “no calls” in 1.A16). We expected the homozygous calls and the lower statistical confidence values to represent heterozygosity with allelic imbalance. However, this could not be confirmed reliably by assessing the peak heights on the sequence chromatograms. In addition, we sequenced markers rs724326, rs2957384 and rs9303347, mapped to regions of chromosomes 2 and 17 that had the same pattern of mixed homozygous and heterozygous calls, with an overall decrease of statistical confidence for the zygosity calls, represented by an increased number of “no calls.” Peak heights for the different alleles in the chromatograms did not correspond significantly with the pattern of SNP chip calls. Thus, the regions defined by interspersed calls of different types could not yet be assigned to a structural feature, although more advanced calling algorithms or more sophisticated techniques, such as a quantitative allele-specific assay, might have uncovered subtle regional changes in allelic ratios.  Common regions of allelic changes in hybrids sharing the same phenotype We used genome-wide SNP array analysis to compare the two hybrids 2.B2 and 1.A16, having partial complementation of the defective spindle checkpoint, with two of the twenty-two hybrids that did not complement the checkpoint. Initially, we looked for regions that were uniparental in both deficient hybrids and diparental in the two proficient hybrids, or vice versa, to identify chromosomal regions involved in complementation. Prior studies of the 100K SNP array technology in CIN cancer lines indicated that software “calls” of “homozygosity” can include instances of allelic imbalance at heterozygous loci having copy number increases ( 18 ). This is due to errors as the software, designed to interpret diploid cells, attempts to interpret the unbalanced signals of aneuploid genomes. Examining informative loci revealed ten chromosomal regions with high numbers of homozygous calls. We distinguished regions having contiguous uniparental calls from regions having scattered uniparental calls interspersed with “no calls” and diparental calls ( table ). The latter regions were interpreted by us as being diparental with allelic imbalance. The three instances of regions having contiguous homozygous calls were interpreted as having uniparental inheritance. To confirm this interpretation of the zygosity calls we selected markers inside and outside a region of interest on chromosome 5q for sequencing. This 127 Mbp region was covered by 440 informative markers. It had a pattern of uniparental inheritance in hybrid 2.B2, allelic imbalance in 1.A16, and heterozygosity in hybrids 1.A18 and 1.B6. Markers rs9293494 and rs956274 are inside this region on chromosome 5q. For the parental lines and clone 2.B2 all homozygous software calls represented pure single allelic forms upon sequencing. Markers rs10512754 and rs10512762 are outside this region and had heterozygous software calls in all hybrids. Sequencing confirmed that heterozygous software calls represented biallelic loci. Thus, we concluded that a segmental deletion, with or without other copy number changes, had rendered hybrid 2.B2 as uniparental in this 127 Mbp region. In hybrid 1.A16, the same region was characterized by heterozygous calls interspersed with homozygous calls and a large fraction of “no calls” (237 of 440 markers, compared with 41 of 440 for hybrid 1.A18 and 33 of 440 for hybrid 1.B6; 9 of 116 informative markers spanning the remaining part of chromosome 5 were “no calls” in 1.A16). We expected the homozygous calls and the lower statistical confidence values to represent heterozygosity with allelic imbalance. However, this could not be confirmed reliably by assessing the peak heights on the sequence chromatograms. In addition, we sequenced markers rs724326, rs2957384 and rs9303347, mapped to regions of chromosomes 2 and 17 that had the same pattern of mixed homozygous and heterozygous calls, with an overall decrease of statistical confidence for the zygosity calls, represented by an increased number of “no calls.” Peak heights for the different alleles in the chromatograms did not correspond significantly with the pattern of SNP chip calls. Thus, the regions defined by interspersed calls of different types could not yet be assigned to a structural feature, although more advanced calling algorithms or more sophisticated techniques, such as a quantitative allele-specific assay, might have uncovered subtle regional changes in allelic ratios.  Discussion Cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T have a phenotype of hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents such as mitomycin C, characterized by cell cycle arrest in G2 and a marked decrease in survival after treatment with mitomycin C as compared to other cell lines. Mutations in genes of the Fanconi anemia pathway were found responsible for this hypersensitivity phenotype ( 1 , 23 ). Exons 7 – 14 of the FANCC gene are homozygously deleted in PL-11. Cell line Hs766T has a homozygous nonsense mutation in the FANCG gene. Conversely, PL-11 contains wildtype FANCG and Hs766T has wildtype FANCC. Fusion of PL-11 and Hs766T resulted in full complementation of the hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinkers in all hybrids by complementing the defective Fanconi anemia pathway. This region was also diparental in the SNP data. Complementation of simple genetic defects was thus achieved in CIN × CIN hybrids. The mitotic spindle checkpoint prevents the onset of anaphase when not all sister chromatids are attached to the mitotic spindle and under tension. This ensures that cell division produces daughter cells receiving a complete set of chromosomes. Failure of the spindle checkpoint results in chromosome mis-segregation and aneuploidy. Although a rough understanding of the molecular function of the signaling pathway underlying the spindle checkpoint has emerged in the decade and a half since the first spindle checkpoint genes were described ( 24 – 26 ), the existing knowledge of the signaling pathway is far from complete. Little is known about the molecular background of the functional defects in the spindle checkpoint that are so consistently associated with CIN ( 3 ). Very few spindle checkpoint gene mutations have been found in cancer. Here we demonstrate partial restoration of the spindle checkpoint in a subset of the hybrids (two of 24) created by fusing two different CIN lines. To exclude the possibility that the increased response to colcemid we observed in the hybrids was caused by fusion itself, and therefore not by complementation, we fused each parental line with itself. We succeeded in obtaining homo-hybrids of PL-11, but none had an improved spindle checkpoint response. Two PL-11 × Hs766T hybrids were more proficient in mitotic arrest than their parents. Interestingly, restoration of the spindle checkpoint was not complete. In our experiments the peak mitotic index never reached the high level of near-diploid cancer cells displaying microsatellite instability (MSI). Our results support the possibility that this elusive complex phenotype is, at least in part, caused by genetic changes that can be complemented. The genomic variability, existing between sister hybrids derived from the same parental pair, has in the past presented great obstacles for analysis. A phenotype observed in a CIN × CIN hybrid can be caused by complementation in the classic sense, i.e. reversion of a recessive to a dominant phenotype, but it can also be caused by regression to a recessive phenotype due to allelic loss after fusion. To overcome this difficulty, we used high-density genome-wide genotyping by SNP-array to distinguish paternity for small chromosomal regions. We identified chromosomal differences by examining hybrids with and without partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint. We found candidate regions having differences in the allelic content inherited from the parental cells, among which a region of uniparental derivation was confirmed. These uniparental regions represent candidate sites of a dominant mutation for genetic instability. Although the current work thus is a demonstration of a novel investigative principle, further work would be needed to confirm and develop such a positional approach to identifying candidate loci. We expect that further improvements in SNP analysis methods for determining copy number changes in aneuploid cells will be useful when applied to the analysis of CIN hybrids ( 27 , 28 ). Regional genome sequencing and subchromosomal transfer methods could be applied to small candidate regions, identified in this manner, that harbor dominant or recessive mutations potentially affecting the spindle checkpoint. Other difficulties remain to be addressed further. We examined limited numbers of parental pairings; such pairs could, however, be expanded to include other CIN lines. Our simple phenotype was fully complemented in all hybrids, but our complex phenotype was partially complemented only in a subset having genetic variation; the possibility of combined dominant and recessive mutations, and of gene dosage effects affecting the spindle checkpoint defect must be considered as alternative mechanisms. Our hybrid genetic variation appeared quite low; to achieve a positional narrowing of putative functional mutations, radiation breakage and other means to increase variation in the parental complements could be superimposed on our technique. It may also be possible to serially complement, that is, to use the hybrids as a parental line to progressively and incrementally complement a complex phenotype deficit using both whole cell and subgenomic complementation techniques. When determining the genetic cause of a complex cancer phenotype should prove difficult, fully and partially complemented hybrid CIN cells offer a new reagent for functional dissection of the components of a complex phenotype.  Discussion Cell lines PL-11 and Hs766T have a phenotype of hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents such as mitomycin C, characterized by cell cycle arrest in G2 and a marked decrease in survival after treatment with mitomycin C as compared to other cell lines. Mutations in genes of the Fanconi anemia pathway were found responsible for this hypersensitivity phenotype ( 1 , 23 ). Exons 7 – 14 of the FANCC gene are homozygously deleted in PL-11. Cell line Hs766T has a homozygous nonsense mutation in the FANCG gene. Conversely, PL-11 contains wildtype FANCG and Hs766T has wildtype FANCC. Fusion of PL-11 and Hs766T resulted in full complementation of the hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinkers in all hybrids by complementing the defective Fanconi anemia pathway. This region was also diparental in the SNP data. Complementation of simple genetic defects was thus achieved in CIN × CIN hybrids. The mitotic spindle checkpoint prevents the onset of anaphase when not all sister chromatids are attached to the mitotic spindle and under tension. This ensures that cell division produces daughter cells receiving a complete set of chromosomes. Failure of the spindle checkpoint results in chromosome mis-segregation and aneuploidy. Although a rough understanding of the molecular function of the signaling pathway underlying the spindle checkpoint has emerged in the decade and a half since the first spindle checkpoint genes were described ( 24 – 26 ), the existing knowledge of the signaling pathway is far from complete. Little is known about the molecular background of the functional defects in the spindle checkpoint that are so consistently associated with CIN ( 3 ). Very few spindle checkpoint gene mutations have been found in cancer. Here we demonstrate partial restoration of the spindle checkpoint in a subset of the hybrids (two of 24) created by fusing two different CIN lines. To exclude the possibility that the increased response to colcemid we observed in the hybrids was caused by fusion itself, and therefore not by complementation, we fused each parental line with itself. We succeeded in obtaining homo-hybrids of PL-11, but none had an improved spindle checkpoint response. Two PL-11 × Hs766T hybrids were more proficient in mitotic arrest than their parents. Interestingly, restoration of the spindle checkpoint was not complete. In our experiments the peak mitotic index never reached the high level of near-diploid cancer cells displaying microsatellite instability (MSI). Our results support the possibility that this elusive complex phenotype is, at least in part, caused by genetic changes that can be complemented. The genomic variability, existing between sister hybrids derived from the same parental pair, has in the past presented great obstacles for analysis. A phenotype observed in a CIN × CIN hybrid can be caused by complementation in the classic sense, i.e. reversion of a recessive to a dominant phenotype, but it can also be caused by regression to a recessive phenotype due to allelic loss after fusion. To overcome this difficulty, we used high-density genome-wide genotyping by SNP-array to distinguish paternity for small chromosomal regions. We identified chromosomal differences by examining hybrids with and without partial complementation of the spindle checkpoint. We found candidate regions having differences in the allelic content inherited from the parental cells, among which a region of uniparental derivation was confirmed. These uniparental regions represent candidate sites of a dominant mutation for genetic instability. Although the current work thus is a demonstration of a novel investigative principle, further work would be needed to confirm and develop such a positional approach to identifying candidate loci. We expect that further improvements in SNP analysis methods for determining copy number changes in aneuploid cells will be useful when applied to the analysis of CIN hybrids ( 27 , 28 ). Regional genome sequencing and subchromosomal transfer methods could be applied to small candidate regions, identified in this manner, that harbor dominant or recessive mutations potentially affecting the spindle checkpoint. Other difficulties remain to be addressed further. We examined limited numbers of parental pairings; such pairs could, however, be expanded to include other CIN lines. Our simple phenotype was fully complemented in all hybrids, but our complex phenotype was partially complemented only in a subset having genetic variation; the possibility of combined dominant and recessive mutations, and of gene dosage effects affecting the spindle checkpoint defect must be considered as alternative mechanisms. Our hybrid genetic variation appeared quite low; to achieve a positional narrowing of putative functional mutations, radiation breakage and other means to increase variation in the parental complements could be superimposed on our technique. It may also be possible to serially complement, that is, to use the hybrids as a parental line to progressively and incrementally complement a complex phenotype deficit using both whole cell and subgenomic complementation techniques. When determining the genetic cause of a complex cancer phenotype should prove difficult, fully and partially complemented hybrid CIN cells offer a new reagent for functional dissection of the components of a complex phenotype.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Metaphase spreads of parental line PL-11 (A), parental line Hs766T (B), hybrid clone 1.A21 (C). Modal number in the hybrid was around 120. Modal number of the parental lines PL-11 and Hs766T was around 70 and around 50, respectively. Marker chromosomes from both parents could be identified in hybrid clones. Black arrows, from PL-11, white arrows, from Hs766T. Figure 2 Survival curves after treatment with varying concentrations of mitomycin C. Equal numbers of cells were plated in 96-well plates and treated. Five days later, surviving cells were quantitated using PicoGreen. Survival was plotted relative to the number of cells in the wells that had received no treatment. Parental lines PL-11 (diamonds) and Hs766T (squares) were hypersensitive to mitomycin C. Hybrids 1.A16 (triangles) and 2.B2 (crosses) were resistant to mitomycin C in concentrations up to 10nM. Error bars: SE, n=6 of a representative experiment. Figure 3 Cell cycle profiles 48h after treatment with 15nM mitomycin C. DNA content was analyzed by flow cytometry. Parental lines PL-11 and Hs766T were known to readily arrest at G2/M content following treatment with mitomycin C ( 22 ). Hybrid clones 1.A16 and 2.B2 did not arrest as readily. Representation of DNA content was standardized, with peaks representing chromosomal content of 2N and 4N appearing at the same respective points along the horizontal axes. Experiments were done in duplicate; representative results are shown. Figure 4 FANCD2 monoubiquitination assay by FANCD2 immunoblot. Cells were treated with mitomycin C for 24h. Lack of an upper band indicated the absence of FANCD2 monoubiquitination due to a defect in the upstream Fanconi anemia pathway. An upper band was present in all hybrid clones. Figure 5 Upon treatment with demecolcine, hybrid clones 2.B2 (X’s) and 1.A16 (triangles) had a higher peak mitotic index than parental cell lines PL-11 (circles), Hs766T (squares), and all other hybrids (not shown). None of the homo-hybrid clones derived from fusing one parental cell line with itself had an increased mitotic index after treatment with demecolcine, as compared to the parental cell line. The mitotic index reflected the number of cells in metaphase as a proportion of total cells. At 42% and 28%, the peak mitotic indices of two hybrid clones were higher than those of the parental lines, but were still lower than the peak mitotic indices typically seen in near-diploid MSI cancer lines having a fully intact spindle checkpoint. Depicted is a representative experiment in which mitotic counts were performed on 200 cells at each time point. In a separate experiment, MSI line HCT116 had a peak mitotic index near 80% (not shown). Table 1 Continguous loci having diparental homozygosity along chromosome 3 1 40 40 40 40 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 963 964 971 973 000 011 014 015 016 021 076 077 078 079 096 135 136 147 Parent PL11 AA AA AA AA BB BB BB AA BB BB AA BB BB BB BB AA AA BB Parent Hs766T BB BB BB BB AA AA AA BB AA AA BB AA AA AA AA BB BB AA Hybrid 2B2 2 AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AA BB BB BB BB AA AA BB Hybrid is: ? diparental uniparental from PL11 ? 1 At most loci across the genome, the parents shared one or two alleles of each SNP. After filtering to hide these sites, the remaining map contained only sites in which both parents were homozygous and differed, that is, a map of loci in which the parentage was informative. This new map permitted one to determine the parental origin of all copies of the chromosome in a hybrid cell. Proximal to (to the left of) locus 41076, the hybrid line has at least one allele from both parents. Starting at locus 41076, a large segment of chromosome 3 in the hybrid is derived solely from one parent. Note that when referring to aneuploid lines, the diallelic terms such as “AA” from the SNP chip do not imply two copies, but simply imply homozygosity. 2 Hybrid 2B2 has partially complemented the mitotic checkpoint defect present in the parents ( Fig. 2 ). The confidence values for the allelic calls (the software assumes disomy, which is often incorrect in aneuploidy), were below 0.05 for all data in this region.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Metaphase spreads of parental line PL-11 (A), parental line Hs766T (B), hybrid clone 1.A21 (C). Modal number in the hybrid was around 120. Modal number of the parental lines PL-11 and Hs766T was around 70 and around 50, respectively. Marker chromosomes from both parents could be identified in hybrid clones. Black arrows, from PL-11, white arrows, from Hs766T. Figure 2 Survival curves after treatment with varying concentrations of mitomycin C. Equal numbers of cells were plated in 96-well plates and treated. Five days later, surviving cells were quantitated using PicoGreen. Survival was plotted relative to the number of cells in the wells that had received no treatment. Parental lines PL-11 (diamonds) and Hs766T (squares) were hypersensitive to mitomycin C. Hybrids 1.A16 (triangles) and 2.B2 (crosses) were resistant to mitomycin C in concentrations up to 10nM. Error bars: SE, n=6 of a representative experiment. Figure 3 Cell cycle profiles 48h after treatment with 15nM mitomycin C. DNA content was analyzed by flow cytometry. Parental lines PL-11 and Hs766T were known to readily arrest at G2/M content following treatment with mitomycin C ( 22 ). Hybrid clones 1.A16 and 2.B2 did not arrest as readily. Representation of DNA content was standardized, with peaks representing chromosomal content of 2N and 4N appearing at the same respective points along the horizontal axes. Experiments were done in duplicate; representative results are shown. Figure 4 FANCD2 monoubiquitination assay by FANCD2 immunoblot. Cells were treated with mitomycin C for 24h. Lack of an upper band indicated the absence of FANCD2 monoubiquitination due to a defect in the upstream Fanconi anemia pathway. An upper band was present in all hybrid clones. Figure 5 Upon treatment with demecolcine, hybrid clones 2.B2 (X’s) and 1.A16 (triangles) had a higher peak mitotic index than parental cell lines PL-11 (circles), Hs766T (squares), and all other hybrids (not shown). None of the homo-hybrid clones derived from fusing one parental cell line with itself had an increased mitotic index after treatment with demecolcine, as compared to the parental cell line. The mitotic index reflected the number of cells in metaphase as a proportion of total cells. At 42% and 28%, the peak mitotic indices of two hybrid clones were higher than those of the parental lines, but were still lower than the peak mitotic indices typically seen in near-diploid MSI cancer lines having a fully intact spindle checkpoint. Depicted is a representative experiment in which mitotic counts were performed on 200 cells at each time point. In a separate experiment, MSI line HCT116 had a peak mitotic index near 80% (not shown). Table 1 Continguous loci having diparental homozygosity along chromosome 3 1 40 40 40 40 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 41 963 964 971 973 000 011 014 015 016 021 076 077 078 079 096 135 136 147 Parent PL11 AA AA AA AA BB BB BB AA BB BB AA BB BB BB BB AA AA BB Parent Hs766T BB BB BB BB AA AA AA BB AA AA BB AA AA AA AA BB BB AA Hybrid 2B2 2 AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AB AA BB BB BB BB AA AA BB Hybrid is: ? diparental uniparental from PL11 ? 1 At most loci across the genome, the parents shared one or two alleles of each SNP. After filtering to hide these sites, the remaining map contained only sites in which both parents were homozygous and differed, that is, a map of loci in which the parentage was informative. This new map permitted one to determine the parental origin of all copies of the chromosome in a hybrid cell. Proximal to (to the left of) locus 41076, the hybrid line has at least one allele from both parents. Starting at locus 41076, a large segment of chromosome 3 in the hybrid is derived solely from one parent. Note that when referring to aneuploid lines, the diallelic terms such as “AA” from the SNP chip do not imply two copies, but simply imply homozygosity. 2 Hybrid 2B2 has partially complemented the mitotic checkpoint defect present in the parents ( Fig. 2 ). The confidence values for the allelic calls (the software assumes disomy, which is often incorrect in aneuploidy), were below 0.05 for all data in this region. 