Maternal Smoking, Alcohol, and Coffee Use during Pregnancy and Son's Risk of Testicular Cancer It has been suggested that increased risk for testicular cancer occurring worldwide may be due to exposures during fetal development. Lifestyle or environmental exposures may be the most important predictors of risk. However, few studies have directly examined these exposures prospectively. The Child Health and Development Studies is a 40-year follow-up of 20,530 pregnancies occurring between 1959 and 1967. There were 20 cases of testicular cancer diagnosed through 2003 among sons with a maternal interview in early pregnancy. Cases were matched to three controls on birth year and race. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated with exact conditional logistic regression. Compared to controls, mothers of testicular cancer cases were more likely to drink alcohol (unadjusted odds ratio = 3.2, 95% confidence interval: 0.83, 15.48 for above versus below the median for controls) and less likely to drink coffee (unadjusted odds ratio = 0.19, 95% confidence interval: 0.02, 1.02 for above versus below the median). Case mothers were neither more nor less likely to smoke. While low power may limit interpretation of negative results, the prospective design minimizes bias. In this cohort, maternal serum testosterone in pregnancy was previously reported to be lower in women who drank alcohol. Since populations with high testicular cancer risk also have lower maternal testosterone, we suggest that testosterone could play a role in explaining the higher risk of son's testicular cancer among mothers who drank alcohol during pregnancy.  Introduction It has been suggested that increased risk for testicular cancer occurring worldwide ( Bray et al., 2006 ; Huyghe et al., 2003 ; Maffezzini, 2007 ; Purdue et al., 2005 ; Richiardi et al., 2004 ) may be due to exposures during fetal development. ( Bergstrom et al., 1996 ; Ekbom, 1997 ; Jacobsen et al., 2006 ; Maffezzini, 2007 ) Lifestyle or environmental exposures may be the most important predictors of risk. ( Hemminki and Li, 2002 ) However, few studies have directly examined these exposures. We are aware of seven studies that examined maternal behavior during pregnancy and son's testicular cancer and only one is prospective ( Pettersson et al., 2007 ) (See Supplemental Tables ). Moreover, while these seven prior studies examined smoking, other correlated maternal behaviors have rarely been examined. Only two studies that we are aware of, both retrospective, have investigated maternal drinking during pregnancy and son's testicular cancer ( Brown et al., 1986 ; Weir et al., 2000 ) and none to our knowledge investigated maternal coffee consumption. We present new results on prenatal risk factors for testicular cancer from the Child Health and Development Studies (CHDS), a 40-year follow-up of 20,530 pregnancies enrolled before birth.  Materials and Methods CHDS subjects were members of the Kaiser Permanente Health Plan, residing in the Oakland California Area. ( van den Berg et al., 1988 ) Nearly all eligible pregnancies occurring between 1959 and 1967 were enrolled. Women were interviewed in early pregnancy about their use of tobacco, alcohol, and coffee. Germ cell testicular (ICD No. C62) cancer cases were identified by linking study records to data in the California Cancer Registry through 2003. One CHDS son was diagnosed with embryonal carcinoma in infancy (ICD No. M9070/3), and he was not included in this analysis. Twenty-three CHDS sons (born 1959–1967) were diagnosed with testicular cancer in adulthood (age range of 17 to 38 years). Median age at diagnosis was 32 and only one case was cryptorchid. Sixteen cases were Caucasian, two were Asian, one was Hispanic, and one was multiracial. Thirteen cases were seminomas, and 10 were non-seminomas. Cases lacking maternal interview data were excluded (N=3). For each of the remaining 20 cases, three controls, known to be free of testicular cancer and to reside in the California Cancer Registry surveillance area on the date of diagnosis of the case, were matched to the case on race and year of birth. Observations were censored when lost to follow-up due to death or residence outside of the surveillance areas for the California Cancer Registry, as previously described. ( Cohn et al., 2001 ; Cohn et al., 2007 ) Controls were selected at random from the pool of matches if more than three were available. All subjects gave informed consent and the Institutional Review Board of the Public Health Institute approved the protocols for this study. Associations between risk factors and case/control status were analyzed using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test of differences within matching groups and exact conditional logistic regression. Due to the computational limitations of the exact method and to limit stratification of the small sample but preserve the ability to mutually adjust potential confounders, dichotomized risk variables were used: mother's cigarette smoking, mother's alcohol consumption, mother's coffee consumption, number of prior births, mother's body mass index, son's birth weight, and length of gestation were all dichotomized at the median value for controls (0 = less than median for controls, 1 = at or above median for controls). All analyses were performed using version 9.1 of SAS and LogXact 7 Procs for SAS. (Cytel Statistical Software and Services)  Results Based on Wilcoxon Ranked Sum Tests, the most notable differences between cases and controls were higher maternal alcohol consumption and lower maternal coffee consumption during pregnancy and shorter gestations ( Table1 ). Based on exact conditional logistic regression, mothers who drank more alcohol were more likely to have a case offspring, and this effect became larger when adjusted for most other variables ( Table 2 ). Mothers who drank more coffee were less likely to have a case offspring than those who drank less than the median coffee consumption.  Results Based on Wilcoxon Ranked Sum Tests, the most notable differences between cases and controls were higher maternal alcohol consumption and lower maternal coffee consumption during pregnancy and shorter gestations ( Table1 ). Based on exact conditional logistic regression, mothers who drank more alcohol were more likely to have a case offspring, and this effect became larger when adjusted for most other variables ( Table 2 ). Mothers who drank more coffee were less likely to have a case offspring than those who drank less than the median coffee consumption.  Discussion A particular strength of this study is that the women were interviewed before widespread knowledge that maternal smoking and drinking could lead to negative health outcomes for their offspring. ( 1981 ; Jones and Smith, 1973 ; Office of the Surgeon General, 1980 ) The stigmatization of alcohol use during pregnancy presents methodological challenges for studies conducted later. The large confidence intervals for the effect estimates reflect the small sample size ( Table 2 ). Although CHDS is a large pregnancy cohort, the small number of testicular cancer cases is expected even among 9,744 liveborn sons. However, the prospective nature of the study and evidence that self-reported maternal behaviors during pregnancy are particularly accurate in our cohort( English et al., 1994 ) indicate a low level of bias. Low power to detect a modest association is a possible explanation of null results for other variables examined. Two previous case-control studies of the relationship between maternal drinking and testicular cancer are not definitive. ( Brown et al., 1986 ; Weir et al., 2000 ) The study with negative findings reported rates of alcohol drinking among case mothers in the 1990's that were less than 50 percent of those reported in the mothers of cases in the present study who were interviewed between 1959 and 1967. ( Weir et al., 2000 ) The study reporting a positive association interviewed women earlier, between 1979 and 1981, and adjusted for prenatal smoking. ( Brown et al., 1986 ) Both prior studies interviewed women after their sons had been diagnosed. One indication that our cohort is similar to other study populations previously investigated is that we observe the same lack of association between son's testicular cancer and prenatal smoking ( Table 2 ). ( Brown et al., 1986 ; Coupland et al., 2004 ; Henderson et al., 1979 ; McGlynn et al., 2006 ; Pettersson et al., 2007 ; Swerdlow et al., 1987 ; Weir et al., 2000 ) We have previously reported that maternal caffeine consumption during pregnancy may increase the risk of son's cryptorchidism in the CHDS cohort. ( Mongraw-Chaffin et al., 2008 ) This caffeine effect is primarily due to coffee use and the effect holds when coffee alone is considered. In this article we report that maternal coffee consumption may decrease the risk of testicular cancer. This contradiction indicates the need for more intense investigation into the relationship between cryptorchidism and testicular cancer within a given population. We have previously reported that alcohol consumption is associated with lower maternal testosterone levels in pregnancy. ( Stevens et al., 2005 ) Since populations with high testicular cancer risk also have lower maternal testosterone, ( Zhang et al., 2005 ) we suggest that testosterone could play a role in the maternal alcohol association observed. Fetal exposure to ethanol may affect hormonal or testicular development in humans ( Westney et al., 1991 ) and in rats, specifically by disrupting the fetal testosterone surge. ( Blanchard and Hannigan, 1994 ; Li and Kim, 2003 ; McGivern et al., 1998 ; Ward et al., 2003 ; Ward et al., 2002 ) As drinking trends in women of child-bearing age and pregnant women continue to remain high in the US ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1997 ; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2002 ; Crome and Kumar, 2007 ; Ebrahim et al., 1998 ) and Europe, ( Andersen AM et al., 2001 ; Crome and Kumar, 2007 ) this association, if replicated, has the potential to play a large role in the cancer incidence of young men.  Discussion A particular strength of this study is that the women were interviewed before widespread knowledge that maternal smoking and drinking could lead to negative health outcomes for their offspring. ( 1981 ; Jones and Smith, 1973 ; Office of the Surgeon General, 1980 ) The stigmatization of alcohol use during pregnancy presents methodological challenges for studies conducted later. The large confidence intervals for the effect estimates reflect the small sample size ( Table 2 ). Although CHDS is a large pregnancy cohort, the small number of testicular cancer cases is expected even among 9,744 liveborn sons. However, the prospective nature of the study and evidence that self-reported maternal behaviors during pregnancy are particularly accurate in our cohort( English et al., 1994 ) indicate a low level of bias. Low power to detect a modest association is a possible explanation of null results for other variables examined. Two previous case-control studies of the relationship between maternal drinking and testicular cancer are not definitive. ( Brown et al., 1986 ; Weir et al., 2000 ) The study with negative findings reported rates of alcohol drinking among case mothers in the 1990's that were less than 50 percent of those reported in the mothers of cases in the present study who were interviewed between 1959 and 1967. ( Weir et al., 2000 ) The study reporting a positive association interviewed women earlier, between 1979 and 1981, and adjusted for prenatal smoking. ( Brown et al., 1986 ) Both prior studies interviewed women after their sons had been diagnosed. One indication that our cohort is similar to other study populations previously investigated is that we observe the same lack of association between son's testicular cancer and prenatal smoking ( Table 2 ). ( Brown et al., 1986 ; Coupland et al., 2004 ; Henderson et al., 1979 ; McGlynn et al., 2006 ; Pettersson et al., 2007 ; Swerdlow et al., 1987 ; Weir et al., 2000 ) We have previously reported that maternal caffeine consumption during pregnancy may increase the risk of son's cryptorchidism in the CHDS cohort. ( Mongraw-Chaffin et al., 2008 ) This caffeine effect is primarily due to coffee use and the effect holds when coffee alone is considered. In this article we report that maternal coffee consumption may decrease the risk of testicular cancer. This contradiction indicates the need for more intense investigation into the relationship between cryptorchidism and testicular cancer within a given population. We have previously reported that alcohol consumption is associated with lower maternal testosterone levels in pregnancy. ( Stevens et al., 2005 ) Since populations with high testicular cancer risk also have lower maternal testosterone, ( Zhang et al., 2005 ) we suggest that testosterone could play a role in the maternal alcohol association observed. Fetal exposure to ethanol may affect hormonal or testicular development in humans ( Westney et al., 1991 ) and in rats, specifically by disrupting the fetal testosterone surge. ( Blanchard and Hannigan, 1994 ; Li and Kim, 2003 ; McGivern et al., 1998 ; Ward et al., 2003 ; Ward et al., 2002 ) As drinking trends in women of child-bearing age and pregnant women continue to remain high in the US ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1997 ; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2002 ; Crome and Kumar, 2007 ; Ebrahim et al., 1998 ) and Europe, ( Andersen AM et al., 2001 ; Crome and Kumar, 2007 ) this association, if replicated, has the potential to play a large role in the cancer incidence of young men.  Supplementary Material 01  Supplementary Material 01 