Oxidized phospholipids in control of inflammation and endothelial barrier The levels of circulating oxidized phospholipids (OxPL) become elevated in chronic and acute pathologic conditions such as hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis, increased intima-media thickness in the patients with systemic lupus erythematosus , vascular balloon injury, acute lung injury (ALI) and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). These pathologies are associated with inflammation and activation of endothelial cells. Depending on the biological context and specific group of phospholipid oxidation products, OxPL may exhibit both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects. This review will summarize data showing a dual role of OxPL in modulation of chronic and acute inflammation as well as OxPL effects on pulmonary endothelial permeability. Recent reports show protective effects of OxPL in the models of endotoxin and ventilator-induced ALI and suggest a potential for utilization of OxPL-derived cyclopenthenone-containing compounds with barrier protective properties for the drug design. These compounds may represent a new group of therapeutic agents for the treatment of lung syndromes associated with acute inflammation and lung vascular leak.  Conclusion Oxidized phospholipids generated in various pathologic conditions exhibit a broad range of biological activities including pro- and anti-inflammatory effects and regulation of lung permeability. Unlike classical inflammatory factors, OxPL triggers unique mechanisms leading to activation of inflammatory signaling pathways, stimulation of inflammatory transcription factors, expression of inflammatory cytokines, and generation of excessive ROS. On the other hand, OxPLs are potent inhibitors of acute inflammation mediated by toll-like receptor family. Specific group of cyclopenthenone-containing OxPLs including PEIPC and PECPC induces potent barrier protective responses in the vascular endothelial cells and inhibits hyper-permeability induced by edemagenic agonists, mediators of inflammation and pathologic mechanical strain. Thus, elevated OxPL levels observed in the course of acute inflammation, such as bacterial infection, or acute tissue injury may represent a negative feedback mechanism leading to downregulation of cellular inflammatory cascades. Further screening and characterization of OxPL compounds with barrier-protective and anti-inflammatory properties and synthesis of bioactive OxPL derivates with stabilized structure may be exciting area of research potentially leading to a new group of pharmacological molecules beneficial for the treatment of VILI, ARDS, lung inflammation and other diseases associated with increased vascular leakage. 