ADENOVIRAL EXPRESSION OF HUMAN LCAT IN NON-HUMAN PRIMATES LEADS TO AN ANTI-ATHEROGENIC LIPOPROTEIN PHENOTYPE BY INCREASING HDL AND LOWERING LDL Lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), a key enzyme in HDL metabolism, has been proposed to have atheroprotective properties, by promoting reverse cholesterol transport. Over expression of LCAT in various animal models, however, has led to conflicting results on its overall effect on lipoproteins and atherosclerosis. In this study, the effect of overexpression of LCAT in non-human primates on lipoprotein metabolism is examined. Human LCAT was expressed with adenovirus in squirrel monkeys (n=8), resulting on day 4 in a 22-fold increase of LCAT activity (257±23 vs. 5618±799 nmol/mL/h; p<0.0001). At its peak, LCAT was found to nearly double the level of HDL-C from baseline (113±7 vs. 260±24 mg/dL; p<0.01). HDL formed after treatment with the adenovirus was larger in size, as assessed by FPLC analysis. By kinetic studies, it was determined that there was a decrease in apoA-I resident time (0.373±0.027 vs. 0.685±0.045 d?1; p<0.0001), and almost a doubling in the apoA-I synthetic rate (22±2 vs. 41±3 mg/kgxd, p<0.0001) but no overall change in apoA-I levels. In addition, increased expression of LCAT was associated with a 37% reduction of apoB levels (12±1 vs. 19±1 mg/dL; p<0.05), due to increased LDL catabolism (FCR = 1.7±0.1 in controls vs. 4.2±0.3 d?1 in LCAT treated group; p<0.05). In summary, overexpression of LCAT in non-human primates leads to an anti-atherogenic lipoprotein profile, by increasing HDL-C and lowering apoB, thus making LCAT a potential drug target for reducing atherosclerosis.  MATERIAL AND METHODS ANIMALS Sixteen adult male squirrel monkeys ( Saimiri sciureus ), ranging in weight from 850 to 1200g, were fed with Fiber-Plus Monkey Diet # 5049 (PMI Nutrition Int’l Inc., St. Louis, MO). The animals used in these studies were maintained in accordance with the NIH Guide for the CARE of Laboratory Animals, protocol H-0059/H-0059R1. GENERATION OF RECOMBINANT ADENOVIRUS A full-length human wild type LCAT, and luciferase cDNA’s were subcloned into a shuttle vector (pAdl2HL), containing a CMV promoter/enhancer fragment [HindII-Pbsl, ?601 bp to f52 bp] promoter elements, as well as the SV40 polyadenylation signal. Recombinant adenovirus encoding luciferase (rLucif-AdV) and LCAT (rLCAT-AdV) were generated after co-transfection of pAdl2LCAT and pJM17 (Ad5 genome) in 293 cells, as previously described 18 , propagated in 293 cells, and purified by cesium chloride density ultracentrifugation. The purified virus was then tittered and diluted in 0.2% albumin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) before infusion into the animals. 2×1010 pfu of either rLCAT-AdV or rLucif-AdV was infused in each monkey by tail venipuncture. ANALYSIS OF LIPIDS AND APOLIPOPROTEINS Blood was collected after overnight fasting either by tail venipuncture or from an indwelling catheter into tubes containing 0.1M EDTA and centrifuged for 15 min and stored at 4°C before analysis. Total cholesterol, triglycerides, phospholipids, free cholesterol, and ApoA-I and ApoB were determined, using enzymatic or immuno-turbidometric kits from Sigma Diagnostics and Wako Chemicals. HDL cholesterol was measured after dextran sulfate (Ciba-Corning) precipitation 19 . Plasma lipoproteins were further analyzed by FPLC by gel filtration chromatography, using two Superose 6 HR 10/30 columns connected in series (Pharmacia Biotech Inc.). Lipoproteins were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.3 ml/min with PBS buffer, containing 1mM EDTA and 0.02% sodium azide. LCAT ACTIVITY ASSAY LCAT activity was determined by the formation of cholesteryl esters, using proteoliposomes containing apoA-I as substrate 20 . ISOLATION OF LIPOPROTEINS HDL (d=1.063–1.21) and LDL (d=1.030–1.050 g/mL) were isolated from monkey plasma by sequential ultracentrifugation, followed by dialysis at 4 °C against PBS, containing 0.01% (wt/vol) EDTA. Agarose gel electrophoresis and FPLC analysis were used to confirm the purity of each lipoprotein fraction. IN VIVO METABOLIC STUDIES 131I-apoA-I HDL was prepared by a modification of the iodine monochloride method 21 . Lyophilized purified human apoA-I was dissolved in a 6M guanidine-HCl, 1M glycine (pH 8.5) buffer containing one mCi of Na131I and iodinated after adding 0. 33 mM iodine monochloride and then dialyzed. 131I-labeled apoA-I was then reassociated with HDL from either untreated squirrel monkey plasma or rAdv-LCAT modified plasma for 30 min at 37°C and extensively dialyzed at 4 °C against PBS, containing 0.01% (wt/vol) EDTA. All radiolabeled HDL preparations were analyzed by FPLC and native agarose gel to confirm the purity and integrity. LDL isolated by ultracentrifugation from squirrel monkeys was dialyzed against 1M glycine (pH 10.0) before iodination, using a modification of the iodine monochloride method 21 . Briefly, 1 mCi of 125I was added to LDL rapidly followed by 0.33 mM iodine monochloride with no vortexing. After dialysis, the final LDL preparations was then analyzed by FPLC and agarose gel electrophoresis to assess the integrity and purity of the labeled LDL. All radiolabeled lipoproteins were filter sterilized through a 0.22 micrometer filter before injection into the femoral artery. Sequential blood samples of less than 50 uL were obtained for the kinetic analysis at the indicated times from an indwelling catheter or by tail vein venipuncture. Multi exponential functions were fit to the plasma decay curves, with the use of WINSAAM program. Residence times (RT) were obtained from the areas under the plasma decay curves for the first 72 h, and the fractional catabolic rate (FCR) was calculated as the reciprocal of the residence time. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Unless otherwise indicated, all values are expressed as mean±SEM. Comparisons between groups of mice were made, using 2-tailed Student’s t-test for independent samples.  ANIMALS Sixteen adult male squirrel monkeys ( Saimiri sciureus ), ranging in weight from 850 to 1200g, were fed with Fiber-Plus Monkey Diet # 5049 (PMI Nutrition Int’l Inc., St. Louis, MO). The animals used in these studies were maintained in accordance with the NIH Guide for the CARE of Laboratory Animals, protocol H-0059/H-0059R1.  GENERATION OF RECOMBINANT ADENOVIRUS A full-length human wild type LCAT, and luciferase cDNA’s were subcloned into a shuttle vector (pAdl2HL), containing a CMV promoter/enhancer fragment [HindII-Pbsl, ?601 bp to f52 bp] promoter elements, as well as the SV40 polyadenylation signal. Recombinant adenovirus encoding luciferase (rLucif-AdV) and LCAT (rLCAT-AdV) were generated after co-transfection of pAdl2LCAT and pJM17 (Ad5 genome) in 293 cells, as previously described 18 , propagated in 293 cells, and purified by cesium chloride density ultracentrifugation. The purified virus was then tittered and diluted in 0.2% albumin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) before infusion into the animals. 2×1010 pfu of either rLCAT-AdV or rLucif-AdV was infused in each monkey by tail venipuncture.  ANALYSIS OF LIPIDS AND APOLIPOPROTEINS Blood was collected after overnight fasting either by tail venipuncture or from an indwelling catheter into tubes containing 0.1M EDTA and centrifuged for 15 min and stored at 4°C before analysis. Total cholesterol, triglycerides, phospholipids, free cholesterol, and ApoA-I and ApoB were determined, using enzymatic or immuno-turbidometric kits from Sigma Diagnostics and Wako Chemicals. HDL cholesterol was measured after dextran sulfate (Ciba-Corning) precipitation 19 . Plasma lipoproteins were further analyzed by FPLC by gel filtration chromatography, using two Superose 6 HR 10/30 columns connected in series (Pharmacia Biotech Inc.). Lipoproteins were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.3 ml/min with PBS buffer, containing 1mM EDTA and 0.02% sodium azide.  LCAT ACTIVITY ASSAY LCAT activity was determined by the formation of cholesteryl esters, using proteoliposomes containing apoA-I as substrate 20 .  ISOLATION OF LIPOPROTEINS HDL (d=1.063–1.21) and LDL (d=1.030–1.050 g/mL) were isolated from monkey plasma by sequential ultracentrifugation, followed by dialysis at 4 °C against PBS, containing 0.01% (wt/vol) EDTA. Agarose gel electrophoresis and FPLC analysis were used to confirm the purity of each lipoprotein fraction.  IN VIVO METABOLIC STUDIES 131I-apoA-I HDL was prepared by a modification of the iodine monochloride method 21 . Lyophilized purified human apoA-I was dissolved in a 6M guanidine-HCl, 1M glycine (pH 8.5) buffer containing one mCi of Na131I and iodinated after adding 0. 33 mM iodine monochloride and then dialyzed. 131I-labeled apoA-I was then reassociated with HDL from either untreated squirrel monkey plasma or rAdv-LCAT modified plasma for 30 min at 37°C and extensively dialyzed at 4 °C against PBS, containing 0.01% (wt/vol) EDTA. All radiolabeled HDL preparations were analyzed by FPLC and native agarose gel to confirm the purity and integrity. LDL isolated by ultracentrifugation from squirrel monkeys was dialyzed against 1M glycine (pH 10.0) before iodination, using a modification of the iodine monochloride method 21 . Briefly, 1 mCi of 125I was added to LDL rapidly followed by 0.33 mM iodine monochloride with no vortexing. After dialysis, the final LDL preparations was then analyzed by FPLC and agarose gel electrophoresis to assess the integrity and purity of the labeled LDL. All radiolabeled lipoproteins were filter sterilized through a 0.22 micrometer filter before injection into the femoral artery. Sequential blood samples of less than 50 uL were obtained for the kinetic analysis at the indicated times from an indwelling catheter or by tail vein venipuncture. Multi exponential functions were fit to the plasma decay curves, with the use of WINSAAM program. Residence times (RT) were obtained from the areas under the plasma decay curves for the first 72 h, and the fractional catabolic rate (FCR) was calculated as the reciprocal of the residence time.  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS Unless otherwise indicated, all values are expressed as mean±SEM. Comparisons between groups of mice were made, using 2-tailed Student’s t-test for independent samples.  RESULTS Plasma LCAT activity levels Four days following injection of adenovirus, containing human LCAT transgene (rLCAT-Adv), into squirrel monkeys, a marked increase in LCAT activity was observed ( Table 1 ). Compared to a control group treated with an adenovirus encoding Luciferase (rLucif-Adv), there was approximately a 22-fold increase in LCAT activity by day 4, which returned to baseline by day 8. Effect of LCAT on plasma lipids and lipoproteins The increase of LCAT activity in the rLCAT-Adv treated group was associated with a significant increase in total plasma cholesterol, HDL-C, as well as a reduction apoB ( Table 1 ). No significant changes in lipids and lipoproteins were observed in the control group treated with rLucif-Adv, indicating that adenoviral infection in itself did not significantly alter lipoprotein metabolism by non-specific liver damage. Compared to baseline results on day 0, LCAT expression significantly increased total cholesterol from 178±11 to 325±20 mg/dL by day 4 (p<0.001). Approximately 90% of the increase in total cholesterol was due to an increase in cholesteryl esters, which nearly doubled by day 4 (p<0.001). Almost all of the increase in total cholesterol was also associated with HDL, which increased 2.3 fold on day 4 (p<0.001). No significant change was observed in the level of non-HDL-C. No change was also observed in the plasma concentration of apoA-I, but interestingly the level of plasma apoB decreased by approximately by 37% on day 4 (p=0.001). As shown in Fig. 1 , the effect of the adenoviral expression of LCAT on plasma cholesterol reached a plateau on day 4 and started to decrease by day 7–8. Increased LCAT activity was also associated with a change in the size of HDL, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 2 ). A significant shift of HDL toward larger size particles was observed (peak elution shifted from 30 mL elution volume to 27 mL). Consistent with the LCAT induced increase of HDL-C observed after dextran sulfate precipitation ( Table 1 ), there was also an overall increase in cholesterol from the FPLC fractions for HDL from the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys. A relatively small LDL peak was observed from both the control and experimental group, but the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys appeared to have slightly lower cholesterol content, although no difference was observed for non-HDL cholesterol levels ( Table 1 ). Effect of LCAT on Apolipoprotein Kinetics To determine the mechanism for the effect of LCAT on lipid and lipoprotein changes, a kinetic analysis of radioiodinated apoA-I associated with HDL and radioiodinated apoB on LDL was performed ( Fig. 3 ). We first established that potential liver damage from the adenoviral infection did not significantly alter apolipoprotein kinetic parameters. As can be seen in Fig. 3A , treatment of squirrel monkeys with luciferase by rLucif-Adv did not change the catabolism of radioiodinated apoA-I on HDL compared to a control group not treated with adenovirus over the 8 days of the study (FCR= 0.373±0.027 pools/day). Next, the effect of LCAT expression on apoA-I catabolism was assessed ( Figure 3B ). This was done on day 4 after treatment with rLCAT-Adv, because the effect of LCAT on lipoproteins appeared to peak at that time and to be relatively stable for at least the following 3 days, as shown by the total plasma cholesterol levels ( Fig. 1 ). The LCAT treated group was divided in two arms; one arm received HDL isolated from control monkeys that had not received any adenovirus, whereas the other arm received HDL isolated from monkeys previously treated 4 days earlier with rLCAT-Adv. Before injection, the two different HDL preparations were associated with radioiodinated apoA-I. The objective of this experiment was to test if apoA-I from either the native control HDL or HDL that had been modified by LCAT would have a different catabolic or production rate. Compared to rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received native control HDL (FCR=0.373±0.027 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a similar increased rate of catabolism for both the native control HDL (FCR=0.685±0.045 pools/day) and the LCAT modified HDL (FCR=0.731±0.077 pools/day). Analysis of the estimated production rate ( Table 2 ) that was calculated 72 h after injection of the labeled HDL indicated that there was also a significant increase (1.9-fold) in the apoA-I production rate for both groups. The rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received the control native HDL had an increased PR of 41±3 mg/kg/d, which was similar to the group receiving LCAT modified HDL (PR=39±5 mg/kg/d) and much higher compared to the rLucif-Adv control group (PR=22±2mg/kg/d; p<0.05). The overall plasma level of apoA-I, however, did not change after LCAT treatment ( Table 1 ), so the increased catabolism of apoA-I from the LCAT treatment was fully compensated by an increase in the production rate of apoA-I. Because we observed a decrease in plasma apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ), we also investigated the effects of increased LCAT activity on LDL kinetics ( Fig. 3C ). Compared to the rLucif-Adv treatment group (FCR=1.7±0.1 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a significant increase in the catabolism of apoB (FCR=4.2±0.3 pools/day; p<0.01). The ApoB production rate was also slightly increased (1.4-fold) compared to the control group, which apparently was negated by the much larger relative increase in LDL catabolism, resulting in lower apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ). To gain further insight into the effect of LCAT on the catabolism of HDL and LDL, samples collected at various time points after injection with rLCAT-Adv or Lucif-Adv were analyzed by FPLC ( Fig. 4 ). For the Lucif-Adv treated group, there was no apparent change in the size distribution of the HDL or LDL tracer over time (data not shown). In other words, there was a gradual decrease in the total radioactive counts of the radiolabeled lipoproteins with no shift in the lipoprotein size distribution with time. The same was also true for radiolabeled LDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated group ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, in the case of radiolabeled HDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys, the majority of the apoA-I tracer on HDL shifted after 30 min to a larger size HDL particle, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 4B ). Thereafter, the tracer remained on this larger HDL particle and then gradually decreased over time, which is consistent with a direct catabolism of the larger form of HDL produced by the increased expression of LCAT.  RESULTS Plasma LCAT activity levels Four days following injection of adenovirus, containing human LCAT transgene (rLCAT-Adv), into squirrel monkeys, a marked increase in LCAT activity was observed ( Table 1 ). Compared to a control group treated with an adenovirus encoding Luciferase (rLucif-Adv), there was approximately a 22-fold increase in LCAT activity by day 4, which returned to baseline by day 8. Effect of LCAT on plasma lipids and lipoproteins The increase of LCAT activity in the rLCAT-Adv treated group was associated with a significant increase in total plasma cholesterol, HDL-C, as well as a reduction apoB ( Table 1 ). No significant changes in lipids and lipoproteins were observed in the control group treated with rLucif-Adv, indicating that adenoviral infection in itself did not significantly alter lipoprotein metabolism by non-specific liver damage. Compared to baseline results on day 0, LCAT expression significantly increased total cholesterol from 178±11 to 325±20 mg/dL by day 4 (p<0.001). Approximately 90% of the increase in total cholesterol was due to an increase in cholesteryl esters, which nearly doubled by day 4 (p<0.001). Almost all of the increase in total cholesterol was also associated with HDL, which increased 2.3 fold on day 4 (p<0.001). No significant change was observed in the level of non-HDL-C. No change was also observed in the plasma concentration of apoA-I, but interestingly the level of plasma apoB decreased by approximately by 37% on day 4 (p=0.001). As shown in Fig. 1 , the effect of the adenoviral expression of LCAT on plasma cholesterol reached a plateau on day 4 and started to decrease by day 7–8. Increased LCAT activity was also associated with a change in the size of HDL, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 2 ). A significant shift of HDL toward larger size particles was observed (peak elution shifted from 30 mL elution volume to 27 mL). Consistent with the LCAT induced increase of HDL-C observed after dextran sulfate precipitation ( Table 1 ), there was also an overall increase in cholesterol from the FPLC fractions for HDL from the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys. A relatively small LDL peak was observed from both the control and experimental group, but the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys appeared to have slightly lower cholesterol content, although no difference was observed for non-HDL cholesterol levels ( Table 1 ). Effect of LCAT on Apolipoprotein Kinetics To determine the mechanism for the effect of LCAT on lipid and lipoprotein changes, a kinetic analysis of radioiodinated apoA-I associated with HDL and radioiodinated apoB on LDL was performed ( Fig. 3 ). We first established that potential liver damage from the adenoviral infection did not significantly alter apolipoprotein kinetic parameters. As can be seen in Fig. 3A , treatment of squirrel monkeys with luciferase by rLucif-Adv did not change the catabolism of radioiodinated apoA-I on HDL compared to a control group not treated with adenovirus over the 8 days of the study (FCR= 0.373±0.027 pools/day). Next, the effect of LCAT expression on apoA-I catabolism was assessed ( Figure 3B ). This was done on day 4 after treatment with rLCAT-Adv, because the effect of LCAT on lipoproteins appeared to peak at that time and to be relatively stable for at least the following 3 days, as shown by the total plasma cholesterol levels ( Fig. 1 ). The LCAT treated group was divided in two arms; one arm received HDL isolated from control monkeys that had not received any adenovirus, whereas the other arm received HDL isolated from monkeys previously treated 4 days earlier with rLCAT-Adv. Before injection, the two different HDL preparations were associated with radioiodinated apoA-I. The objective of this experiment was to test if apoA-I from either the native control HDL or HDL that had been modified by LCAT would have a different catabolic or production rate. Compared to rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received native control HDL (FCR=0.373±0.027 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a similar increased rate of catabolism for both the native control HDL (FCR=0.685±0.045 pools/day) and the LCAT modified HDL (FCR=0.731±0.077 pools/day). Analysis of the estimated production rate ( Table 2 ) that was calculated 72 h after injection of the labeled HDL indicated that there was also a significant increase (1.9-fold) in the apoA-I production rate for both groups. The rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received the control native HDL had an increased PR of 41±3 mg/kg/d, which was similar to the group receiving LCAT modified HDL (PR=39±5 mg/kg/d) and much higher compared to the rLucif-Adv control group (PR=22±2mg/kg/d; p<0.05). The overall plasma level of apoA-I, however, did not change after LCAT treatment ( Table 1 ), so the increased catabolism of apoA-I from the LCAT treatment was fully compensated by an increase in the production rate of apoA-I. Because we observed a decrease in plasma apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ), we also investigated the effects of increased LCAT activity on LDL kinetics ( Fig. 3C ). Compared to the rLucif-Adv treatment group (FCR=1.7±0.1 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a significant increase in the catabolism of apoB (FCR=4.2±0.3 pools/day; p<0.01). The ApoB production rate was also slightly increased (1.4-fold) compared to the control group, which apparently was negated by the much larger relative increase in LDL catabolism, resulting in lower apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ). To gain further insight into the effect of LCAT on the catabolism of HDL and LDL, samples collected at various time points after injection with rLCAT-Adv or Lucif-Adv were analyzed by FPLC ( Fig. 4 ). For the Lucif-Adv treated group, there was no apparent change in the size distribution of the HDL or LDL tracer over time (data not shown). In other words, there was a gradual decrease in the total radioactive counts of the radiolabeled lipoproteins with no shift in the lipoprotein size distribution with time. The same was also true for radiolabeled LDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated group ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, in the case of radiolabeled HDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys, the majority of the apoA-I tracer on HDL shifted after 30 min to a larger size HDL particle, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 4B ). Thereafter, the tracer remained on this larger HDL particle and then gradually decreased over time, which is consistent with a direct catabolism of the larger form of HDL produced by the increased expression of LCAT.  Plasma LCAT activity levels Four days following injection of adenovirus, containing human LCAT transgene (rLCAT-Adv), into squirrel monkeys, a marked increase in LCAT activity was observed ( Table 1 ). Compared to a control group treated with an adenovirus encoding Luciferase (rLucif-Adv), there was approximately a 22-fold increase in LCAT activity by day 4, which returned to baseline by day 8.  Plasma LCAT activity levels Four days following injection of adenovirus, containing human LCAT transgene (rLCAT-Adv), into squirrel monkeys, a marked increase in LCAT activity was observed ( Table 1 ). Compared to a control group treated with an adenovirus encoding Luciferase (rLucif-Adv), there was approximately a 22-fold increase in LCAT activity by day 4, which returned to baseline by day 8.  Effect of LCAT on plasma lipids and lipoproteins The increase of LCAT activity in the rLCAT-Adv treated group was associated with a significant increase in total plasma cholesterol, HDL-C, as well as a reduction apoB ( Table 1 ). No significant changes in lipids and lipoproteins were observed in the control group treated with rLucif-Adv, indicating that adenoviral infection in itself did not significantly alter lipoprotein metabolism by non-specific liver damage. Compared to baseline results on day 0, LCAT expression significantly increased total cholesterol from 178±11 to 325±20 mg/dL by day 4 (p<0.001). Approximately 90% of the increase in total cholesterol was due to an increase in cholesteryl esters, which nearly doubled by day 4 (p<0.001). Almost all of the increase in total cholesterol was also associated with HDL, which increased 2.3 fold on day 4 (p<0.001). No significant change was observed in the level of non-HDL-C. No change was also observed in the plasma concentration of apoA-I, but interestingly the level of plasma apoB decreased by approximately by 37% on day 4 (p=0.001). As shown in Fig. 1 , the effect of the adenoviral expression of LCAT on plasma cholesterol reached a plateau on day 4 and started to decrease by day 7–8. Increased LCAT activity was also associated with a change in the size of HDL, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 2 ). A significant shift of HDL toward larger size particles was observed (peak elution shifted from 30 mL elution volume to 27 mL). Consistent with the LCAT induced increase of HDL-C observed after dextran sulfate precipitation ( Table 1 ), there was also an overall increase in cholesterol from the FPLC fractions for HDL from the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys. A relatively small LDL peak was observed from both the control and experimental group, but the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys appeared to have slightly lower cholesterol content, although no difference was observed for non-HDL cholesterol levels ( Table 1 ).  Effect of LCAT on plasma lipids and lipoproteins The increase of LCAT activity in the rLCAT-Adv treated group was associated with a significant increase in total plasma cholesterol, HDL-C, as well as a reduction apoB ( Table 1 ). No significant changes in lipids and lipoproteins were observed in the control group treated with rLucif-Adv, indicating that adenoviral infection in itself did not significantly alter lipoprotein metabolism by non-specific liver damage. Compared to baseline results on day 0, LCAT expression significantly increased total cholesterol from 178±11 to 325±20 mg/dL by day 4 (p<0.001). Approximately 90% of the increase in total cholesterol was due to an increase in cholesteryl esters, which nearly doubled by day 4 (p<0.001). Almost all of the increase in total cholesterol was also associated with HDL, which increased 2.3 fold on day 4 (p<0.001). No significant change was observed in the level of non-HDL-C. No change was also observed in the plasma concentration of apoA-I, but interestingly the level of plasma apoB decreased by approximately by 37% on day 4 (p=0.001). As shown in Fig. 1 , the effect of the adenoviral expression of LCAT on plasma cholesterol reached a plateau on day 4 and started to decrease by day 7–8. Increased LCAT activity was also associated with a change in the size of HDL, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 2 ). A significant shift of HDL toward larger size particles was observed (peak elution shifted from 30 mL elution volume to 27 mL). Consistent with the LCAT induced increase of HDL-C observed after dextran sulfate precipitation ( Table 1 ), there was also an overall increase in cholesterol from the FPLC fractions for HDL from the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys. A relatively small LDL peak was observed from both the control and experimental group, but the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys appeared to have slightly lower cholesterol content, although no difference was observed for non-HDL cholesterol levels ( Table 1 ).  Effect of LCAT on Apolipoprotein Kinetics To determine the mechanism for the effect of LCAT on lipid and lipoprotein changes, a kinetic analysis of radioiodinated apoA-I associated with HDL and radioiodinated apoB on LDL was performed ( Fig. 3 ). We first established that potential liver damage from the adenoviral infection did not significantly alter apolipoprotein kinetic parameters. As can be seen in Fig. 3A , treatment of squirrel monkeys with luciferase by rLucif-Adv did not change the catabolism of radioiodinated apoA-I on HDL compared to a control group not treated with adenovirus over the 8 days of the study (FCR= 0.373±0.027 pools/day). Next, the effect of LCAT expression on apoA-I catabolism was assessed ( Figure 3B ). This was done on day 4 after treatment with rLCAT-Adv, because the effect of LCAT on lipoproteins appeared to peak at that time and to be relatively stable for at least the following 3 days, as shown by the total plasma cholesterol levels ( Fig. 1 ). The LCAT treated group was divided in two arms; one arm received HDL isolated from control monkeys that had not received any adenovirus, whereas the other arm received HDL isolated from monkeys previously treated 4 days earlier with rLCAT-Adv. Before injection, the two different HDL preparations were associated with radioiodinated apoA-I. The objective of this experiment was to test if apoA-I from either the native control HDL or HDL that had been modified by LCAT would have a different catabolic or production rate. Compared to rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received native control HDL (FCR=0.373±0.027 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a similar increased rate of catabolism for both the native control HDL (FCR=0.685±0.045 pools/day) and the LCAT modified HDL (FCR=0.731±0.077 pools/day). Analysis of the estimated production rate ( Table 2 ) that was calculated 72 h after injection of the labeled HDL indicated that there was also a significant increase (1.9-fold) in the apoA-I production rate for both groups. The rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received the control native HDL had an increased PR of 41±3 mg/kg/d, which was similar to the group receiving LCAT modified HDL (PR=39±5 mg/kg/d) and much higher compared to the rLucif-Adv control group (PR=22±2mg/kg/d; p<0.05). The overall plasma level of apoA-I, however, did not change after LCAT treatment ( Table 1 ), so the increased catabolism of apoA-I from the LCAT treatment was fully compensated by an increase in the production rate of apoA-I. Because we observed a decrease in plasma apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ), we also investigated the effects of increased LCAT activity on LDL kinetics ( Fig. 3C ). Compared to the rLucif-Adv treatment group (FCR=1.7±0.1 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a significant increase in the catabolism of apoB (FCR=4.2±0.3 pools/day; p<0.01). The ApoB production rate was also slightly increased (1.4-fold) compared to the control group, which apparently was negated by the much larger relative increase in LDL catabolism, resulting in lower apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ). To gain further insight into the effect of LCAT on the catabolism of HDL and LDL, samples collected at various time points after injection with rLCAT-Adv or Lucif-Adv were analyzed by FPLC ( Fig. 4 ). For the Lucif-Adv treated group, there was no apparent change in the size distribution of the HDL or LDL tracer over time (data not shown). In other words, there was a gradual decrease in the total radioactive counts of the radiolabeled lipoproteins with no shift in the lipoprotein size distribution with time. The same was also true for radiolabeled LDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated group ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, in the case of radiolabeled HDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys, the majority of the apoA-I tracer on HDL shifted after 30 min to a larger size HDL particle, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 4B ). Thereafter, the tracer remained on this larger HDL particle and then gradually decreased over time, which is consistent with a direct catabolism of the larger form of HDL produced by the increased expression of LCAT.  Effect of LCAT on Apolipoprotein Kinetics To determine the mechanism for the effect of LCAT on lipid and lipoprotein changes, a kinetic analysis of radioiodinated apoA-I associated with HDL and radioiodinated apoB on LDL was performed ( Fig. 3 ). We first established that potential liver damage from the adenoviral infection did not significantly alter apolipoprotein kinetic parameters. As can be seen in Fig. 3A , treatment of squirrel monkeys with luciferase by rLucif-Adv did not change the catabolism of radioiodinated apoA-I on HDL compared to a control group not treated with adenovirus over the 8 days of the study (FCR= 0.373±0.027 pools/day). Next, the effect of LCAT expression on apoA-I catabolism was assessed ( Figure 3B ). This was done on day 4 after treatment with rLCAT-Adv, because the effect of LCAT on lipoproteins appeared to peak at that time and to be relatively stable for at least the following 3 days, as shown by the total plasma cholesterol levels ( Fig. 1 ). The LCAT treated group was divided in two arms; one arm received HDL isolated from control monkeys that had not received any adenovirus, whereas the other arm received HDL isolated from monkeys previously treated 4 days earlier with rLCAT-Adv. Before injection, the two different HDL preparations were associated with radioiodinated apoA-I. The objective of this experiment was to test if apoA-I from either the native control HDL or HDL that had been modified by LCAT would have a different catabolic or production rate. Compared to rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received native control HDL (FCR=0.373±0.027 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a similar increased rate of catabolism for both the native control HDL (FCR=0.685±0.045 pools/day) and the LCAT modified HDL (FCR=0.731±0.077 pools/day). Analysis of the estimated production rate ( Table 2 ) that was calculated 72 h after injection of the labeled HDL indicated that there was also a significant increase (1.9-fold) in the apoA-I production rate for both groups. The rLucif-Adv treated monkeys that had received the control native HDL had an increased PR of 41±3 mg/kg/d, which was similar to the group receiving LCAT modified HDL (PR=39±5 mg/kg/d) and much higher compared to the rLucif-Adv control group (PR=22±2mg/kg/d; p<0.05). The overall plasma level of apoA-I, however, did not change after LCAT treatment ( Table 1 ), so the increased catabolism of apoA-I from the LCAT treatment was fully compensated by an increase in the production rate of apoA-I. Because we observed a decrease in plasma apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ), we also investigated the effects of increased LCAT activity on LDL kinetics ( Fig. 3C ). Compared to the rLucif-Adv treatment group (FCR=1.7±0.1 pools/day), monkeys treated with rLCAT-Adv showed a significant increase in the catabolism of apoB (FCR=4.2±0.3 pools/day; p<0.01). The ApoB production rate was also slightly increased (1.4-fold) compared to the control group, which apparently was negated by the much larger relative increase in LDL catabolism, resulting in lower apoB plasma levels ( Table 1 ). To gain further insight into the effect of LCAT on the catabolism of HDL and LDL, samples collected at various time points after injection with rLCAT-Adv or Lucif-Adv were analyzed by FPLC ( Fig. 4 ). For the Lucif-Adv treated group, there was no apparent change in the size distribution of the HDL or LDL tracer over time (data not shown). In other words, there was a gradual decrease in the total radioactive counts of the radiolabeled lipoproteins with no shift in the lipoprotein size distribution with time. The same was also true for radiolabeled LDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated group ( Fig. 4A ). In contrast, in the case of radiolabeled HDL given to the rLCAT-Adv treated monkeys, the majority of the apoA-I tracer on HDL shifted after 30 min to a larger size HDL particle, as assessed by FPLC analysis ( Fig. 4B ). Thereafter, the tracer remained on this larger HDL particle and then gradually decreased over time, which is consistent with a direct catabolism of the larger form of HDL produced by the increased expression of LCAT.  DISCUSSION There is growing evidence that increasing the level of HDL will reduce the risk for developing for CHD 22 ; 23 . The main mechanism that has been proposed for the atheroprotective effect of HDL is its ability to increase the reverse cholesterol transport pathway 24 , although HDL has also been reported to have other beneficial effects on atherosclerosis 25 ; 26 . Unfortunately, there are a limited number of drugs for raising HDL and not all approaches that increase HDL may be anti-atherogenic 27 . Interfering with the hepatic uptake of cholesterol from HDL, for example, will markedly raise HDL-C in SR-BI K/O mice but leads to increased atherosclerosis 28 . Similarly, there is concern that drug strategies based on the inhibition of CETP, which also raise HDL-C, may not be atheroprotective, because of decreased delivery of cholesterol to the liver by HDL 29 , 59 . In contrast, LCAT is believed to raise HDL by enhancing its formation rather than decreasing its catabolism and thus would be predicted to increase overall reverse cholesterol transport. Evidence against a possible atheroprotective role of LCAT is the fact that patients with a genetic defect in LCAT do not appear to have a marked increase risk of CHD 30 and in mice, increased expression of LCAT leads to increase atherosclerosis but this may be due to their lack of CETP 31 . One advantage of the present study is that LCAT was expressed in squirrel monkeys, which because they have CETP are likely to be a better animal model than mice for human atherosclerosis 35 . Another strength of this study is that not only the level of HDL was examined but also the effect of LCAT on the catabolism and production rate of apoA-I and apoB was assessed. Consistent with what has been observed in all other animals models studied to date 32 – 34 , increased LCAT expression in monkeys led to a significant increase in HDL-C; the level of HDL-C more than doubled from 113 mg/dL to 260 mg/dL ( Table 1 ). ApoA-I, the main protein component of HDL, however, did not significantly change, which would indicate that increased LCAT activity promotes the formation of a lipid enriched form of HDL. This is consistent with the observed increase in the size of HDL by FPLC ( Fig. 2 and 4 ). As would be expected, a large increase in cholesteryl esters was also observed, which was found mostly associated with HDL ( Table 1 ). Similar changes in HDL from humans has been shown to be atheroprotective 36 ; 37 . For example, large lipid rich HDL, such as the HDL2 sub fraction, has been shown in numerous epidemiologic studies to correlate better with CHD risk reduction than total HDL-C 36 ; 37 . The effect of LCAT on lipoproteins still partially persisted by day 8 even after LCAT returned to baseline most likely because of the lag in time needed for the catabolism of HDL and the clearance of cholesteryl esters formed by LCAT. Based on previous studies in other animal models 38 ; 39 , the effect of LCAT on apoB concentration appears to better correlate with atherosclerosis than changes in the level of HDL-C. In mice fed a pro-atherogenic diet, over expression of LCAT led to an increase in apoB and atherosclerosis 40 . When LCAT was overexpressed in CETP transgenic mice, there was reduced levels of apoB and reduced atherosclerosis 41 . Over expression of LCAT in rabbits, which have CETP, also resulted in reduced apoB and reduced atherosclerosis 42 ; 43 . Overexpression of LCAT in rabbits that lack LDL receptor, however, did not alter apoB levels and was not atheroprotective 44 , indicating that the LDL receptor is necessary for LCAT to lower apoB levels, most likely through its ability to remove LDL that has been enriched in cholesteryl esters by LCAT and CETP. In this study, LCAT was also found to significantly lower apoB levels in squirrel monkeys, but did not significantly change non-HDL-C levels ( Table 1 ). Because squirrel monkeys normally contain relatively low levels of apoB compared to humans, the effect of the marked increase of LCAT on decreasing apoB may, however, may not be generalized to humans. LCAT over expression was also found to reduce total triglycerides by almost 50% ( Table 1 ), which may be the consequence of the exchange of cholesteryl esters for triglycerides on LDL by CETP. Another potential consideration in predicting the effect of LCAT over expression on atherosclerosis is the mechanism behind any change in lipoprotein pool size 45 . The pool of HDL and LDL can be altered by either a change in the rate of production or catabolism or both. Because adenoviral constructs only transiently express proteins, the kinetic parameters of apoA-I and apoB may be altered, if the lipoprotein changes induced by LCAT are not in steady state. To minimize this potential problem, the kinetic analysis on apoA-I and apoB were done from day 4 to day 7 when the effect of LCAT on total cholesterol appeared to peak and remained relatively stable ( Fig. 1 ). During this time period, LCAT over expression was associated with an increase in both the production and catabolism of apoA-I, which balanced each other out ( Table 2 ), resulting in no change in the plasma concentration of apoA-I, although HDL-C increased. The mechanism for the change in the catabolism of apoA-I by LCAT is not known but is likely related to the HDL lipid compositional differences ( Table 1 ) caused by LCAT 46 . The effect of LCAT over expression on the production of apoA-I is likely an indirect effect, such as an alteration in the hepatic expression of genes like apoA-I and ABCA1 that are involved in the initial secretion of nascent HDL. In addition, the increased esterification of cholesterol by LCAT could also potentially facilitate the extracellular formation and stabilization of HDL. Several studies support the notion that increased production of apoA-I or increased formation of HDL-C, as was observed in this study, should be anti-atherogenic. Transgenic mice and rabbits that over express the gene for apoA-I are protected against atherosclerosis 47 ; 48 . Similarly, increased hepatic expression of ABCA1, which increases the formation of HDL by promoting the initial lipidation of apoA-I is atheroprotective 49 – 51 . Infusion of HDL or apoA-I mimetic peptides, which would simulate increased production of apoA-I is also atheroprotective 52 ; 53 . The effect of increasing the catabolism of HDL or apoA-I on atherosclerosis is not as clear and appears to depend on other factors. Increased catabolism of HDL, leading to a decrease in HDL pool size as occurs in patients with hypertriglyceridemia 54 , is associated with increased CHD risk. Delaying HDL catabolism, however, such as when SR-B1 gene is deleted in the liver, leads to a marked increase in HDL-C and increased atherosclerosis, because it interferes with one of the last steps in the reverse cholesterol transport pathway, the hepatic uptake of cholesterol 55 . Mice over expressing LCAT in the absence of CETP, which have increased atherosclerosis, were found to have delayed catabolism of apoA-I, because the altered lipid composition of HDL interferes with its hepatic uptake 14 . In this study, LCAT increased HDL-C even though it also increased apoA-I catabolism, presumably because the CETP-mediated transfer of cholesteryl esters from HDL to apoB containing lipoproteins prevented the formation of a dysfunctional lipid rich form of HDL that was found in mice 14 . Additional studies will have to be performed to fully understand the impact of apoA-I kinetic parameters on atherosclerosis, but overall these findings are consistent with a model whereby increased catabolism of apoA-I may not necessarily promote atherosclerosis, so long as the overall HDL-C pool size is not significantly decreased. In this situation, it would be predicted that the net flux of cholesterol from peripheral cells to HDL and then to the liver by the reverse cholesterol transport pathway may in fact be increased. LCAT was also found in this study to lower apoB levels by markedly increasing its catabolism ( Table 2 ), which would be expected to be atheroprotective. Statins, currently our most effective drug for treating atherosclerosis, decrease LDL largely by increasing its catabolism 56 ; 57 . The mechanism for how LCAT modulates apoB metabolism is not known, but one possible mechanism may be related to its ability to alter the lipid composition of LDL. Besides the CETP-mediated transfer of cholesteryl esters produced by LCAT from HDL to LDL, a significant fraction of cholesteryl esters can also be directly made by LCAT on LDL 58 . In summary, increased expression of human LCAT in squirrel monkeys by adenovirus was associated with increased HDL-C and decreased apoB levels. These results along with the potential beneficial changes in kinetic parameters for apoA-I and apoB suggest that, like in rabbits, increased expression of LCAT in an animal model that also expresses CETP is most likely anti-atherogenic. The results from this study, therefore, suggest that drug strategies to increase LCAT activity may be useful for reducing atherosclerosis because of its combined beneficial effect on HDL and LDL metabolism.  DISCUSSION There is growing evidence that increasing the level of HDL will reduce the risk for developing for CHD 22 ; 23 . The main mechanism that has been proposed for the atheroprotective effect of HDL is its ability to increase the reverse cholesterol transport pathway 24 , although HDL has also been reported to have other beneficial effects on atherosclerosis 25 ; 26 . Unfortunately, there are a limited number of drugs for raising HDL and not all approaches that increase HDL may be anti-atherogenic 27 . Interfering with the hepatic uptake of cholesterol from HDL, for example, will markedly raise HDL-C in SR-BI K/O mice but leads to increased atherosclerosis 28 . Similarly, there is concern that drug strategies based on the inhibition of CETP, which also raise HDL-C, may not be atheroprotective, because of decreased delivery of cholesterol to the liver by HDL 29 , 59 . In contrast, LCAT is believed to raise HDL by enhancing its formation rather than decreasing its catabolism and thus would be predicted to increase overall reverse cholesterol transport. Evidence against a possible atheroprotective role of LCAT is the fact that patients with a genetic defect in LCAT do not appear to have a marked increase risk of CHD 30 and in mice, increased expression of LCAT leads to increase atherosclerosis but this may be due to their lack of CETP 31 . One advantage of the present study is that LCAT was expressed in squirrel monkeys, which because they have CETP are likely to be a better animal model than mice for human atherosclerosis 35 . Another strength of this study is that not only the level of HDL was examined but also the effect of LCAT on the catabolism and production rate of apoA-I and apoB was assessed. Consistent with what has been observed in all other animals models studied to date 32 – 34 , increased LCAT expression in monkeys led to a significant increase in HDL-C; the level of HDL-C more than doubled from 113 mg/dL to 260 mg/dL ( Table 1 ). ApoA-I, the main protein component of HDL, however, did not significantly change, which would indicate that increased LCAT activity promotes the formation of a lipid enriched form of HDL. This is consistent with the observed increase in the size of HDL by FPLC ( Fig. 2 and 4 ). As would be expected, a large increase in cholesteryl esters was also observed, which was found mostly associated with HDL ( Table 1 ). Similar changes in HDL from humans has been shown to be atheroprotective 36 ; 37 . For example, large lipid rich HDL, such as the HDL2 sub fraction, has been shown in numerous epidemiologic studies to correlate better with CHD risk reduction than total HDL-C 36 ; 37 . The effect of LCAT on lipoproteins still partially persisted by day 8 even after LCAT returned to baseline most likely because of the lag in time needed for the catabolism of HDL and the clearance of cholesteryl esters formed by LCAT. Based on previous studies in other animal models 38 ; 39 , the effect of LCAT on apoB concentration appears to better correlate with atherosclerosis than changes in the level of HDL-C. In mice fed a pro-atherogenic diet, over expression of LCAT led to an increase in apoB and atherosclerosis 40 . When LCAT was overexpressed in CETP transgenic mice, there was reduced levels of apoB and reduced atherosclerosis 41 . Over expression of LCAT in rabbits, which have CETP, also resulted in reduced apoB and reduced atherosclerosis 42 ; 43 . Overexpression of LCAT in rabbits that lack LDL receptor, however, did not alter apoB levels and was not atheroprotective 44 , indicating that the LDL receptor is necessary for LCAT to lower apoB levels, most likely through its ability to remove LDL that has been enriched in cholesteryl esters by LCAT and CETP. In this study, LCAT was also found to significantly lower apoB levels in squirrel monkeys, but did not significantly change non-HDL-C levels ( Table 1 ). Because squirrel monkeys normally contain relatively low levels of apoB compared to humans, the effect of the marked increase of LCAT on decreasing apoB may, however, may not be generalized to humans. LCAT over expression was also found to reduce total triglycerides by almost 50% ( Table 1 ), which may be the consequence of the exchange of cholesteryl esters for triglycerides on LDL by CETP. Another potential consideration in predicting the effect of LCAT over expression on atherosclerosis is the mechanism behind any change in lipoprotein pool size 45 . The pool of HDL and LDL can be altered by either a change in the rate of production or catabolism or both. Because adenoviral constructs only transiently express proteins, the kinetic parameters of apoA-I and apoB may be altered, if the lipoprotein changes induced by LCAT are not in steady state. To minimize this potential problem, the kinetic analysis on apoA-I and apoB were done from day 4 to day 7 when the effect of LCAT on total cholesterol appeared to peak and remained relatively stable ( Fig. 1 ). During this time period, LCAT over expression was associated with an increase in both the production and catabolism of apoA-I, which balanced each other out ( Table 2 ), resulting in no change in the plasma concentration of apoA-I, although HDL-C increased. The mechanism for the change in the catabolism of apoA-I by LCAT is not known but is likely related to the HDL lipid compositional differences ( Table 1 ) caused by LCAT 46 . The effect of LCAT over expression on the production of apoA-I is likely an indirect effect, such as an alteration in the hepatic expression of genes like apoA-I and ABCA1 that are involved in the initial secretion of nascent HDL. In addition, the increased esterification of cholesterol by LCAT could also potentially facilitate the extracellular formation and stabilization of HDL. Several studies support the notion that increased production of apoA-I or increased formation of HDL-C, as was observed in this study, should be anti-atherogenic. Transgenic mice and rabbits that over express the gene for apoA-I are protected against atherosclerosis 47 ; 48 . Similarly, increased hepatic expression of ABCA1, which increases the formation of HDL by promoting the initial lipidation of apoA-I is atheroprotective 49 – 51 . Infusion of HDL or apoA-I mimetic peptides, which would simulate increased production of apoA-I is also atheroprotective 52 ; 53 . The effect of increasing the catabolism of HDL or apoA-I on atherosclerosis is not as clear and appears to depend on other factors. Increased catabolism of HDL, leading to a decrease in HDL pool size as occurs in patients with hypertriglyceridemia 54 , is associated with increased CHD risk. Delaying HDL catabolism, however, such as when SR-B1 gene is deleted in the liver, leads to a marked increase in HDL-C and increased atherosclerosis, because it interferes with one of the last steps in the reverse cholesterol transport pathway, the hepatic uptake of cholesterol 55 . Mice over expressing LCAT in the absence of CETP, which have increased atherosclerosis, were found to have delayed catabolism of apoA-I, because the altered lipid composition of HDL interferes with its hepatic uptake 14 . In this study, LCAT increased HDL-C even though it also increased apoA-I catabolism, presumably because the CETP-mediated transfer of cholesteryl esters from HDL to apoB containing lipoproteins prevented the formation of a dysfunctional lipid rich form of HDL that was found in mice 14 . Additional studies will have to be performed to fully understand the impact of apoA-I kinetic parameters on atherosclerosis, but overall these findings are consistent with a model whereby increased catabolism of apoA-I may not necessarily promote atherosclerosis, so long as the overall HDL-C pool size is not significantly decreased. In this situation, it would be predicted that the net flux of cholesterol from peripheral cells to HDL and then to the liver by the reverse cholesterol transport pathway may in fact be increased. LCAT was also found in this study to lower apoB levels by markedly increasing its catabolism ( Table 2 ), which would be expected to be atheroprotective. Statins, currently our most effective drug for treating atherosclerosis, decrease LDL largely by increasing its catabolism 56 ; 57 . The mechanism for how LCAT modulates apoB metabolism is not known, but one possible mechanism may be related to its ability to alter the lipid composition of LDL. Besides the CETP-mediated transfer of cholesteryl esters produced by LCAT from HDL to LDL, a significant fraction of cholesteryl esters can also be directly made by LCAT on LDL 58 . In summary, increased expression of human LCAT in squirrel monkeys by adenovirus was associated with increased HDL-C and decreased apoB levels. These results along with the potential beneficial changes in kinetic parameters for apoA-I and apoB suggest that, like in rabbits, increased expression of LCAT in an animal model that also expresses CETP is most likely anti-atherogenic. The results from this study, therefore, suggest that drug strategies to increase LCAT activity may be useful for reducing atherosclerosis because of its combined beneficial effect on HDL and LDL metabolism. 