Poland’s Syndrome: Current Thoughts in the Setting of a Controversy Poland’s syndrome is a rare congenital disorder that is characterized by hypoplasia of the pectoralis muscles and ipsilateral webbing of the fingers. The name of this condition pays homage to Dr. Alfred Poland of Guy’s Hospital who in 1841 described a case of these two deformities during the autopsy of a 27-year-old convict. An exploration of the historical series reveals a clear progression of knowledge about this syndrome, accumulated by scientists across Europe and America. As such, the name “Poland’s syndrome” stands as a point of contention to those who oppose the injudicious use of eponyms in medicine. An analysis of the relevant literature reveals a stepwise understanding of what has come to be known as Poland’s syndrome.  Conclusion Poland’s syndrome is a classic example of how some inaccurate eponyms get perpetuated because of inadequate scrutiny of historical records. Even with a comprehensive literature review, it is nearly impossible to ascertain that all the records have been exhaustively searched. For this reason, it is problematic to employ eponyms to classify medical diseases. Furthermore, the medical community would be remiss to credit one man for the achievements made by dozens of minds over many years. Nevertheless, many eponyms including “Poland’s syndrome” serve a valuable purpose by grouping together a number of related symptoms under one common name. The challenge posed by balancing the pros and cons of using eponyms brings up a point that we cannot overlook. At the essence of the controversy lays a simple reality: medicine is a human endeavor. Honoring physicians for notable achievements in the form of eponyms can be viewed as a harmless way to bring a little bit of warmth to an otherwise cold world of facts. The least we can do, though, is to recognize the contributions of those who endeavored to shape our current understanding of disease. Perhaps if history took another course, Poland’s syndrome would instead be called Froriep’s syndrome or Furst’s syndrome. Or perhaps it might simply have been called “pectoral-aplasia–dysdactylia syndrome” 20 , 27 