p130 Crk-associated Substrate (CAS) in Vascular Smooth Muscle Vascular smooth muscle is a key effector in the wall of blood vessels during the pathogenesis of hypertension. Various factors directly elicit smooth muscle cell contraction, migration, growth, and hypertrophy, which lead to the progression of hypertension. CAS, the first discovered member of the adapter protein CAS family, has recently emerged as a critical cellular component that regulates smooth muscle functions. In this review, the molecular structure and protein interactions of the CAS family members are summarized. Evidence for the role of CAS in the regulation of vascular smooth muscle contractility, cell migration, hypertrophy, and growth are presented. Regulation of CAS by novel tyrosine kinases/phosphatases and unique downstream signaling partners of CAS are also discussed. These new findings establish the important role for CAS in regulating vascular smooth muscle functions. The CAS-associated processes may be new biological targets for the development of new treatment of cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension.  Introduction Hypertension is characterized by vascular smooth muscle constriction and vascular remodeling involving cell migration, hypertrophy, and growth. Various factors including neural transmitters, angiotensin II (AngII), endothelin, natriuretic peptides, nitric oxide (NO), oxidants, and hormones directly influence smooth muscle functions, which lead to the development and progression of high blood pressure. The CAS family of adapter proteins has recently emerged as an important regulator of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) 1 – 6 . Thus far, four members of the CAS family have been identified. The first member is 130-kDa CAS that was originally identified as a major tyrosine-phosphorylated protein in v-src and v-crk transformed cells 7 , 8 . The second member is human enhancer of filamentation (HEF1), also referred to as Crk-associated substrate in lymphocyte (Cas-L), which was identified during screening for human proteins that modulate filamentous budding in yeast and as a tyrosine phosphorylated protein in lymphocytes. The third member of the CAS family, embryonal fyn substrate/Src interacting (Efs/Sin), was characterized as a fyn SH3-domain-binding protein. The fourth member, HEF1-Efs-p130CAS-like (HEPL), was recently identified 1 , 2 , 9 . Members of the CAS proteins share a conserved molecular structure with several domains for protein-protein interactions ( Figure 1 ). 1) Located at the N-terminus is a Src-homology 3 (SH3) domain that is able to interact with proteins containing the proline-rich motif. Thus far, the most intensively investigated partners for the SH3 domain are focal adhesion kinase (FAK), the autonomously expressed C-terminal domain of FAK (FRNK), proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (PYK2), protein tyrosine phosphatase-proline, glutamate, serine and threonine sequence protein (PTP-PEST); the association of CAS with these proteins modulates its phosphorylation state and subcellular localization. 2) Adjacent to the C-terminus of the SH3 domain is the proline-rich domain (RPLPSPP) that interacts with some members of the Src family including Lyn, Fyn, Yes, and Hck. 3) The substrate domain contains 15 YXXP sequences, which are phosphorylated by Abelson tyrosine kinase (Abl), c-Src, or FAK depending on cell types and external stimuli. Abl may also interact with CAS via this motif. 4) The C-terminal motif of the CAS proteins is characterized by a bipartite binding site containing a proline-rich domain (which binds the Src SH3 domain) and a tyrosine-containing sequence (YDYV) that interacts with the Src SH2 domain when phosphorylated. A helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif is also present in this region. The C-terminus is responsible for the formation of homodimers or heterodimers among the CAS family members. In addition, CAS may associate with vimentin filaments in smooth muscle via this region. 5) The serine-rich region is located between the substrate domain and the C-terminal motif. The adapter protein 14-3-3 and Grb2 are the interactive partners for this region. During mitosis, CAS serine phosphorylation occurs in a number of cells regulating cytokinesis 1 , 2 , 10 – 12 . Although these four CAS members possess conserved molecular structure, their expression, tissue distribution and functional roles are distinct. HEF1 is primarily studied in lymphocytes, epithelium and nerve tissues, which regulates cell migration, mitosis, and neurite outgrowth. Efs has been shown to regulate the functions of T-lymphocytes. HEPL is mainly distributed in the lung and the spleen as well as in cancer cells such as leukemia and ovarian cell lines. CAS is ubiquitously distributed in animal cells/tissues with high expression in vascular smooth muscle 1 , 2 , 10 – 12 . This review focuses on the functional role of CAS in vascular smooth muscle.  CAS and VSMC Contraction Recent investigations show that CAS plays a fundamental role in orchestrating smooth muscle contraction 2 – 6 , 13 – 16 . Treatment of smooth muscle strips with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) against CAS selectively downregulates CAS protein expression without affecting the protein levels of smooth muscle actin, myosin heavy chain, and paxillin. In contrast, sense ODNs do not affect the expression of these proteins. The downregulation of CAS dramatically attenuates force development and actin polymerization in response to contractile stimulation without affecting myosin regulatory light chain phosphorylation 4 , 5 . Crossbridge cycling regulated by myosin activation has been thought to be a sole mechanism modulating smooth muscle contraction 17 . These studies suggest that CAS is a necessary element of cellular processes that regulate tension development in smooth muscle, and that CAS-regulated smooth muscle contraction is independent of myosin activation. There is considerable evidence to suggest that CAS may modulate smooth muscle contraction via actin polymerization, which has recently documented to be an important cellular event in response to contractile stimulation 5 , 6 , 13 , 14 , 18 – 24 . CAS undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation in various cell types including smooth muscle cells in response to constrictor stimulation or other external signals 3 , 4 , 15 , 25 , 26 . Phosphorylation on CAS occurs in its substrate domain, which contains 15 YXXP phosphorylatable motifs 2 , 15 . Tyr-410 is a major phosphorylation site on CAS in vascular smooth muscle upon contractile activation 3 , 4 . Phosphorylation on the tyrosine residues creates docking sites for the SH2/SH3-containing signaling effector CrkII in various cell types including smooth muscle cells under contractile activation 3 , 15 , 27 , 28 . Activated CAS/CrkII recruits N-WASP, an actin-regulatory protein. When unstimulated, the C-terminal portion of N-WASP binds to its GTP-binding domain, masking its binding motif for the Arp2/3 (Actin Related Protein) complex. The interaction of CrkII with N-WASP induces conformational changes, exposing the binding motif for the Arp2/3 complex and initiating actin polymerization and branching mediated by the Arp2/3 complex 13 , 14 , 29 . In smooth muscle, actin polymerization transpires at focal adhesion sties (membrane-associated dense plaques) 13 , 14 , 18 , 29 – 32 . Actin polymerization may enhance force development by the following mechanisms. First, the actin filaments of smooth muscle cells attach to the transmembrane ? integrins, facilitating mechanical transduction between the contractile apparatus and extracellular matrix. Cortical actin assembly may strengthen the linkage of actin filaments to integrins and enhance the transmission of contractile force 13 , 14 , 18 , 29 – 34 . Second, actin assembly has been shown to increase the number of contractile units and the length of actin filaments, providing more and efficient contractile elements for force development 35 – 37 . Third, newly polymerized filaments may be a part of reorganization processes that allow for rapid adjustment of stiffness and tension 13 , 14 , 18 , 30 – 32 , 38 . Fourth, actin filament assembly may participate in the “latch” formation of contractile elements, supporting force maintenance under the condition of lower crossbridge phosphorylation 21 , 31 , 39 – 41 .  Spatial Localization of CAS in Smooth Muscle Cells As described above, actin polymerization occurs at focal adhesions, which is important for smooth muscle contraction. Therefore, spatial localization of the actin regulatory molecules is crucial to the efficient regulation of localized actin filament assembly. Immunofluorescent analysis shows that in unstimulated smooth muscle cells, CAS is primarily distributed in the myoplasm. In response to contractile activation, CAS translocates to the cell periphery where actin polymerization may occur 11 , 12 , 33 . In addition, paxillin (a cytoskeletal protein) also displays similar translocation in smooth muscle 42 . This observation is further supported by studies on rat aortic smooth muscle cells. Activation with AngII promotes the focal adhesion accumulation of CAS along with c-Src and cell movement. This translocation may be mediated by the tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS and c-Src, and CAS/Src coupling. Overexpression of inactive Src, but not wild type Src, inhibits CAS phosphorylation and spatial redistribution as well as cell migration under AngII stimulation. Furthermore, a CAS mutant lacking its substrate domain blocks CAS association with c-Src and CAS redistrubtion toward focal adhesions 25 . These studies indicate that CAS spatial translocation is an essential cellular process for focal adhesion formation, which is known to regulate smooth muscle contraction and cell migration. The spatial redistribution of CAS may be regulated by the vimentin intermediate filament network. The fractionation assay shows that a pool of CAS is found in cytoskeletal vimentin in smooth muscle cells/tissues. In addition, purified vimentin is detected in immobilized CAS in Far-Western analysis. Contractile stimulation induces the dissociation of CAS from cytoskeletal vimentin, which is regulated by vimentin phosphorylation at Ser-55 (a major phosphorylation site on vimentin in smooth muscle). Moreover, overexpression of the non-phosphorylatable vimentin mutant S56A in smooth muscle cells blocks the dissociation of CAS from the vimentin network upon agonist stimulation 4 , 5 , 10 – 12 , 43 , 44 . These results suggest that vimentin filaments are able to harbor the adapter protein. The site-specific phosphorylation of vimentin regulates the redistribution of CAS in smooth muscle cells during agonist activation. p21-activated kinase (PAK) modulates CAS translocation by affecting vimentin phosphorylation. In vitro studies demonstrate a direct role for PAK in catalyzing vimentin phosphorylation 12 , 43 , 45 – 47 . Downregulation of PAK by antisense oligonucleotides or RNAi inhibits vimentin phosphorylation at Ser-56, which initiates partial disassembly of intermediate filaments. Because CAS binds to filamentous vimentin, this depolymerization may be responsible for CAS dissociation from the vimentin cytoskeleton and the translocation from the cytoplasm to the membrane 11 , 12 , 45 . Similarly, vimentin filaments also regulate spatial redistribution of Ca2+/calmodulin protein kinase II and Rho kinase in response to external stimulation 43 , 48 , 49 .  CAS and VSMC Migration One of the major pathologic processes of hypertension is vascular remodeling that is characterized by smooth muscle cell growth and hypotrophy in the medial layer. It is well recognized that cell migration plays a fundamental role in the proliferation of various cell types including smooth muscle cells. Cell migration includes the following major steps: 1) in response to chemotactic signals, cells form lamellipodia and filapodia at the leading edge, which is mediated by local actin filament assembly; 2) new focal adhesions are created in the front part of motile cells to strengthen the attachment to extracellular matrix; 3) actin-myosin motor assembly occurs to induce cell contraction; 4) detachment of focal contacts at the rear part of cells and 5) cells move towards chemoattractants 2 , 50 . There is a wealth of evidence to suggest that CAS participates in the regulation of vascular smooth muscle cell migration. Angiotensin II (AngII), an octopeptide associated with renal hypertension, has been shown to stimulate motility of vascular smooth muscle cells 50 . Moreover, CAS-null cells display reduced cell spreading and migration along with decreases in filamentous actin in cell protrusion, which is restored by the expression of full-length CAS 2 , 51 . In contrast, expression of CAS mutants lacking phosphorylation sites and the C-terminal Src-binding domain does not restore the migratory phenotype 2 , 15 . These studies indicate an important role of phosphorylation and c-Src in CAS-mediated cell migration. Dephosphorylation of CAS inhibits the motility of aortic smooth muscle cells during the activation of IGF-I, an important mediator for cardiovascular diseases 52 , 53 . Exposure to IGF-I leads to an increase in the motility of aortic smooth muscle cells probably by stimulating CAS phosphorylation. Nitric oxide (NO) is able to induce dephosphorylation of CAS by increasing the activity of PTP-PEST. NO-mediated CAS dephosphorylation inhibits the activation of the small GTPase Rac1, the production of H2O2 (a second messenger) and cell migration. Overexpression of PTP-PEST, or dominant negative CAS mutant suppresses Rac 1 activation, H2O2 generation, actin filament assembly in the protrusion region, and cell motility, which is reversed by expression of inactive PTP-PEST, or constitutively active CAS 1 , 2 , 50 , 52 – 54 . CAS regulates smooth muscle cell motility mainly by stimulating local actin filament assembly at focal adhesions. As described above, CAS phosphorylation on the substrate domain creates high affinity for the adapter protein CrkII and DOCK-180, which stimulates N-WASP mediated formation of F-actin in the leading edge. In addition, the assembly of CAS/CrkII/DOCK-180 at focal contacts enhances the activation of Rac1 facilitating actin polymerization in lamellipodia and filapodia 2 , 10 , 29 , 43 . CAS may also regulate the association of profilin with G-actin (globular actin) transporting actin monomers to the barbed end and stimulating actin polymerization 5 , 6 . CAS may mediate AngII-induced VSMC migration by affecting activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family. In a study, phosphorylation of c-Src and CAS, the activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (Erk1/2) and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) (but not p38) upon AngII activation were depressed by Src inhibitors or in cells expressing inactive Src. In contrast, AngII-induced JNK activation, but not Erk1/2 activation, was inhibited in cells expressing an inactive CAS mutant. Motility upon AngII activation was also suppressed in VSMC expressing the inactive CAS mutant or inactive Src 25 . These results suggest that CAS mediates VSMC movement by regulating JNK activity whereas c-Src affects cell migration by modulating both Erk1/2 and JNK activity. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) may antagonize the migratory functions of CAS in non-muscle cells. In STAT3-null keratinocytes, levels of CAS tyrosine phosphorylation were significantly higher than wild type cells. Furthermore, these STAT3-null cells displayed increased adhesive capability and fast spreading on a collagen matrix. Because STAT3 is a transcription factor, the results suggest that STAT3 may negatively regulate CAS phosphorylation and cell movement possibly by inhibiting expression of protein tyrosine phosphatases or increasing the production of tyrosine kinases 2 . In addition, Bmx/Etk is a member of the Tec/Btk family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases, which has been implicated in regulating CAS phosphorylation and cell movement. Expression of Bmx resulted in an increase in the association of Bmx with CAS at membrane ruffles, microstructures containing nascent actin filaments in motile cells. Expression of Bmx also increased the tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS and CAS/CrkII coupling, and coexpression of Bmx with CAS enhanced membrane ruffling and haptotacitc cell migration. In contrast, a Bmx mutant lacking the CAS binding domain did not induce cell migration. Moreover, an inactive CAS mutant inhibited Bmx-induced cell migration 2 . Nevertheless, these results were largely from studies on non-muscle cells. More investigations are needed to evaluate whether similar mechanisms are present in VSMC.  Role of CAS in VSMC Hypertrophy, Growth, and Survival In the early stage of hypertension, increases in peripheral resistance are mainly caused by vasoconstriction that is reversibly when the local concentration of constrictors is reduced. In contrast, the increased arterial resistance in the late stage of the disease stems from VSMC hypertrophy/growth as well as contraction, which is usually not reversible 55 . The hypertrophic growth response is characterized by an increase in cell size and protein content without alterations in cell number and DNA replication. CAS may be involved in the development of VSMC hypertrophy. AngII induced CAS tyrosine phosphorylation and hypertrophic growth in cultured VSMC as well as in intact arterial tissues 2 , 55 . CAS phosphorylation can also be induced by integrin activation in response to changes in mechanical environments. AngII-induced CAS phosphorylation initiated assembly of a multiprotein complex containing CAS, PYK2 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) as determined by co-immunoprecipitation analysis. Complex formation between CAS, PYK2 and PI 3-kinase was associated with a rapid phosphorylation of the ribosomal p70 S6 kinase (an enzyme critical for protein synthesis) in a Ca2+- and tyrosine kinase-dependent manner 55 . In addition, agonist stimulation facilitates CAS/CrkII coupling that is able to activate MAP kinase via Rac1. MAP kinase has been shown to regulate phosphorylation of PHAS-1/eIF4E complex, a key regulator of translation initiation 15 , 55 , 56 . These studies suggest that CAS participates in the cellular processes which regulate the hypertrophic response in VSMC. CAS has been implicated in the signaling cascades regulating VSMC growth and survival. CAS is required for cell survival mediated by integrin activation, growth factors, and peptides. Cell detachment or the withdrawal of growth factors as well as peptides initiates rapid dephosphorylation of CAS and therefore cell death. FAK/Src mediated CAS phosphorylation activates the small GTPses Ras and Rac as well as JNK and Erk1/2, which are known to trigger gene expression for cell survival/growth. This implies a dual role for CAS in regulating survival/growth because it behaves as a critical effector in integrin and growth factor signaling and as a positive regulator of intergrin-growth factor receptor cross-talk 2 , 57 .  Regulation of CAS in VSMC Because CAS is a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein, its regulation is largely dependent upon the activity of specific tyrosine kinases and/or protein tyrosine phosphatases in VSMC in response to a variety of changes in environments ( Figure 2 ). Tyrosine kinases The tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS is mediated by Abl, a non-receptor tyrosine kinase. Studies from in vitro biochemical assay show that CAS phosphorylation is catalyzed directly by Abl 3 , 58 . Silencing of Abl by short hairpin RNA dramatically depresses CAS phosphorylation in resistance arteries upon stimulation with the ?-adrenergic receptor agonist phenylephrine 3 . Moreover, Abl silencing inhibits the AngII-mediated signaling event in VSMC 59 . Abl in vascular smooth muscle is activated by agonist stimulation; the phosphorylation of Abl at Tyr-412 (an index of kinase activation) is enhanced in stimulated arteries compared to unstimulated tissues 3 . Abl tyrosine phosphorylation has also been reported in vascular smooth muscle cells upon angiotensin II stimulation 59 . Tyr-412 is located at the activation loop of Abl kinase domain. When unstimulated, the activation loop of the kinase domain folds into the active site, thereby preventing binding of both the substrate and ATP. Phosphorylation at this residue induces conformation changes; the activation loop no longer blocks the active site, which leads to the increase in kinase activity 60 . Since Abl plays an important role in regulating CAS and arterial constriction, development of a strategy to block Abl kinase activity could be a new way to treat hypertension. Recent exciting studies support this theory; a selective inhibitor of Abl, imatinib (STI-571), is effective for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension in clinical studies 61 , 62 . Integrin-associated signaling has also been implicated in the regulation of CAS in smooth muscle. FAK and c-Src, located at the integrin-associated membrane microdomain, are activated by integrin clustering as well as activation with contractile agonists and growth factors 10 , 22 , 23 , 63 – 66 . Specifically, FAK tyrosine phosphorylation in smooth muscle is mechanosensitive, which is mediated by transmembrane integrins 22 , 63 . Integrin activation may induce FAK autophosphorylation, creating a binding site for Src-family kinases and other proteins. CAS protein binds to the C-terminal FAK poly-proline region via their SH3 domain 1 , 10 . In addition, activation of 5-HT receptor also induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS in vascular smooth muscle. The inhibition of c-Src by the inhibitor PP1 abolished CAS phosphorylation on tyrosine residues, suggesting a role for c-Src in CAS activation 4 . Similar results were obtained from studies on non-muscle cells 67 . Since Abl activation is attenuated by a c-Src inhibitor in cultured VSMC 59 , and integrin clustering and receptor activation initiate assembly of a multiprotein complex containing FAK, c-Src and Abl, it is possible that contractile activation may activate Abl via c-Src/FAK; activated Abl may directly catalyze CAS phosphorylation in vascular smooth muscle. However, other studies suggest that Src may be responsible for integrin-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS 68 , 69 . PYK2 is another non-receptor tyrosine kinase that has been found in VSMC. Unlike FAK that is largely activated by integrin aggregation and is Ca2+-independent, PYK2 activation is Ca2+-dependent in response to changes in environments surrounding cells. Agonist stimulation induced PYK2 phosphorylation on Tyr-402 and Tyr-881, and increased the association of PYK2 with CAS via its SH3 domain in VSMC, which was not inhibited by PI 3-kinase inhibitors. The interaction of PYK2 with CAS may facilitate CAS phosphorylation, or may facilitate formation of the PYK2-associated scaffold complex transducing extracellular signals to downstream effectors such as p70 S6K or Erk1/2 10 , 55 , 57 . Tyrosine phosphatases Thus far, two protein tyrosine phosphatases, PTP-PEST and SHP-2, have been shown to regulate CAS dephosphorylation in smooth muscle 52 , 70 . PTP-PEST is a ubiquitously expressed non-membrane protein tyrosine phosphatase. IGF-I stimulation of rat VSMC induced the elevation of phosphotyrosine levels in CAS in association with the enhancement of Rac1 and H2O2 elevation; overexpression of PTP-PEST blocked the effect of IGF-I. Moreover, treatment with NO donors resulted in a decrease in CAS phosphorylation and cell migration via activation of PTP-PEST 53 . Exposure of VSMC to AngII triggers reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, an important end point of CAS-mediated process. In a study, stable cell lines overexpressing wild type or constitutively inactive SHP-2 were utilized to evaluate the role of the tyrosine phosphatase in regulating AngII-induced actin cytoskeletal remodeling. Overexpression of wild type SHP-2 inhibited AngII mediated stress fiber formation whereas inactive SHP-2 increased actin cytoskeletal reorganization. Furthermore, the expression of wild type SHP-2 led to dephosphorylation of CAS and other focal adhesion associated proteins. The inactive SHP-2 mutant did not have similar effects. Dephosphorylation of the focal adhesion associated proteins caused by the overexpression of wild type SHP-2 was significantly accompanied by a decrease in focal adhesion sites within VSMC 70 . Regulation of CAS cellular localization The functional role of CAS can be regulated by its spatial localization in cells because localized actin polymerization and focal adhesion formation occur in particular cellular compartments. As described above, PAK-mediated vimentin phosphorylation at Ser-56 and partial disassembly modulates CAS redistribution in smooth muscle cells. In addition, c-Src may regulate focal accumulation of CAS in rat smooth muscle cells during AngII activation 25 . The zyxin and Ajuba family of LIM proteins are components of cellular adhesive complexes, and associated with CAS as evidenced by coimmunoprecipitation analysis. Ajuba-null fibroblasts are inhibited in their motility without affecting cell adhesions, cells spreading, and integrin activation. However, CAS and FAK phosphorylation at nascent focal adhesions and lamellipodia production are defective in these cells. Interestingly, overexpression of CAS rescue the migratory defect of Ajuba-null cells 71 . These experiments indicate that Ajuba acts as an upstream regulator of CAS to position CAS to nascent focal adhesions in migrating cells thereby leading to the activation of Rac 71 . Future studies are needed to determine whether Ajuba recruits CAS in VSMC during contractile activation.  Tyrosine kinases The tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS is mediated by Abl, a non-receptor tyrosine kinase. Studies from in vitro biochemical assay show that CAS phosphorylation is catalyzed directly by Abl 3 , 58 . Silencing of Abl by short hairpin RNA dramatically depresses CAS phosphorylation in resistance arteries upon stimulation with the ?-adrenergic receptor agonist phenylephrine 3 . Moreover, Abl silencing inhibits the AngII-mediated signaling event in VSMC 59 . Abl in vascular smooth muscle is activated by agonist stimulation; the phosphorylation of Abl at Tyr-412 (an index of kinase activation) is enhanced in stimulated arteries compared to unstimulated tissues 3 . Abl tyrosine phosphorylation has also been reported in vascular smooth muscle cells upon angiotensin II stimulation 59 . Tyr-412 is located at the activation loop of Abl kinase domain. When unstimulated, the activation loop of the kinase domain folds into the active site, thereby preventing binding of both the substrate and ATP. Phosphorylation at this residue induces conformation changes; the activation loop no longer blocks the active site, which leads to the increase in kinase activity 60 . Since Abl plays an important role in regulating CAS and arterial constriction, development of a strategy to block Abl kinase activity could be a new way to treat hypertension. Recent exciting studies support this theory; a selective inhibitor of Abl, imatinib (STI-571), is effective for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension in clinical studies 61 , 62 . Integrin-associated signaling has also been implicated in the regulation of CAS in smooth muscle. FAK and c-Src, located at the integrin-associated membrane microdomain, are activated by integrin clustering as well as activation with contractile agonists and growth factors 10 , 22 , 23 , 63 – 66 . Specifically, FAK tyrosine phosphorylation in smooth muscle is mechanosensitive, which is mediated by transmembrane integrins 22 , 63 . Integrin activation may induce FAK autophosphorylation, creating a binding site for Src-family kinases and other proteins. CAS protein binds to the C-terminal FAK poly-proline region via their SH3 domain 1 , 10 . In addition, activation of 5-HT receptor also induces the tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS in vascular smooth muscle. The inhibition of c-Src by the inhibitor PP1 abolished CAS phosphorylation on tyrosine residues, suggesting a role for c-Src in CAS activation 4 . Similar results were obtained from studies on non-muscle cells 67 . Since Abl activation is attenuated by a c-Src inhibitor in cultured VSMC 59 , and integrin clustering and receptor activation initiate assembly of a multiprotein complex containing FAK, c-Src and Abl, it is possible that contractile activation may activate Abl via c-Src/FAK; activated Abl may directly catalyze CAS phosphorylation in vascular smooth muscle. However, other studies suggest that Src may be responsible for integrin-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS 68 , 69 . PYK2 is another non-receptor tyrosine kinase that has been found in VSMC. Unlike FAK that is largely activated by integrin aggregation and is Ca2+-independent, PYK2 activation is Ca2+-dependent in response to changes in environments surrounding cells. Agonist stimulation induced PYK2 phosphorylation on Tyr-402 and Tyr-881, and increased the association of PYK2 with CAS via its SH3 domain in VSMC, which was not inhibited by PI 3-kinase inhibitors. The interaction of PYK2 with CAS may facilitate CAS phosphorylation, or may facilitate formation of the PYK2-associated scaffold complex transducing extracellular signals to downstream effectors such as p70 S6K or Erk1/2 10 , 55 , 57 .  Tyrosine phosphatases Thus far, two protein tyrosine phosphatases, PTP-PEST and SHP-2, have been shown to regulate CAS dephosphorylation in smooth muscle 52 , 70 . PTP-PEST is a ubiquitously expressed non-membrane protein tyrosine phosphatase. IGF-I stimulation of rat VSMC induced the elevation of phosphotyrosine levels in CAS in association with the enhancement of Rac1 and H2O2 elevation; overexpression of PTP-PEST blocked the effect of IGF-I. Moreover, treatment with NO donors resulted in a decrease in CAS phosphorylation and cell migration via activation of PTP-PEST 53 . Exposure of VSMC to AngII triggers reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, an important end point of CAS-mediated process. In a study, stable cell lines overexpressing wild type or constitutively inactive SHP-2 were utilized to evaluate the role of the tyrosine phosphatase in regulating AngII-induced actin cytoskeletal remodeling. Overexpression of wild type SHP-2 inhibited AngII mediated stress fiber formation whereas inactive SHP-2 increased actin cytoskeletal reorganization. Furthermore, the expression of wild type SHP-2 led to dephosphorylation of CAS and other focal adhesion associated proteins. The inactive SHP-2 mutant did not have similar effects. Dephosphorylation of the focal adhesion associated proteins caused by the overexpression of wild type SHP-2 was significantly accompanied by a decrease in focal adhesion sites within VSMC 70 .  Regulation of CAS cellular localization The functional role of CAS can be regulated by its spatial localization in cells because localized actin polymerization and focal adhesion formation occur in particular cellular compartments. As described above, PAK-mediated vimentin phosphorylation at Ser-56 and partial disassembly modulates CAS redistribution in smooth muscle cells. In addition, c-Src may regulate focal accumulation of CAS in rat smooth muscle cells during AngII activation 25 . The zyxin and Ajuba family of LIM proteins are components of cellular adhesive complexes, and associated with CAS as evidenced by coimmunoprecipitation analysis. Ajuba-null fibroblasts are inhibited in their motility without affecting cell adhesions, cells spreading, and integrin activation. However, CAS and FAK phosphorylation at nascent focal adhesions and lamellipodia production are defective in these cells. Interestingly, overexpression of CAS rescue the migratory defect of Ajuba-null cells 71 . These experiments indicate that Ajuba acts as an upstream regulator of CAS to position CAS to nascent focal adhesions in migrating cells thereby leading to the activation of Rac 71 . Future studies are needed to determine whether Ajuba recruits CAS in VSMC during contractile activation.  Conclusions and perspectives The adapter protein CAS plays a critical role in regulating VSMC functions. CAS tyrosine phosphorylation mediated by Abl/Src/FAK as well as phosphatases profoundly influences contractility, movement, hypertrophy, and growth of VSMC. The association of CAS with other protein partners also modulates its spatial localization, focal adhesion formation, and actin cytoskeletal reorganization. Because CAS translocation is important in precisely mediating the assembly of actin filaments and other microstructures, understanding whether microtubules and/or intermediate filaments participate in the unique spatial redistribution of CAS is fundamental to our knowledge in this research area. In addition, we need to evaluate whether CAS expression, spatial localization, and other molecular/biologic features are altered in the context of hypertension. Finally, promising results show that a selective inhibitor of Abl can lessen the symptoms of pulmonary hypertension. Thus, future studies are needed to develop new pharmacologic agents to specifically block Abl kinase and other kinases, or stimulate phosphatases for better treatment of essential and/or pulmonary hypertension.  Figures Figure 1 Molecular structure and protein interactions of CAS The conserved molecular structure of the CAS proteins contains a SH3 domain, a proline-rich domain (PRO), a substrate domain (SD), a serine-rich motif (SER), and the C-terminus domain. Proteins able to interact with the CAS family members are depicted in the figure (see the text for details). Figure 2 Regulation and downstream effects of CAS in smooth muscle Activation of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) or growth factor receptors (GFRs) and integrin aggregation may trigger autophosphorylation of c-Src and FAK, which may activate Abl in smooth muscle. Abl catalyzes the tyrosine phosphorylation of CAS, creating binding sites for CrkII and stimulating N-WASP actin assembly mediated by the Arp2/3 complex. Ca2+-dependent PYK2 also activates CAS whereas PTP-PEST and SHP-2 inactivates CAS via dephosphorylation. PAK may regulate CAS via the vimentin cytoskeleton. Conversely, CAS may influence PAK activity by a multiprotein complex. Ajuba may recruit CAS to focal adhesion sites for localized actin polymerization. Activated CAS regulates p70S6K, JNK and MAP kinases via PI 3-kinases and small GTPases. CAS also regulates the actin-regulatory protein profilin and possibly HSP 27 via the PAK-p38 MAPK pathway. These downstream molecules of CAS may affect VSMC contraction, movement, hypotrophy, and growth. 