Parental Depression and Family Environment Predict Distress in Children Prior to Stem-Cell Transplantation Objective To examine parental symptoms of depression, family environment, and the interaction of these parent and family factors in explaining severity of distress in children scheduled to undergo stem cell/bone marrow transplantation (SCT). Method A self-report measure of illness related distress, adjusted to reflect the experience of medical diagnosis and associated stressors was completed by 146 youth scheduled to undergo SCT. Measures of parental depressive symptoms and family environment (cohesion, expressiveness, and conflict) were completed by the resident parent. Results Parental symptoms of depression, family cohesion, and family expressiveness emerged as significant predictors of child-reported distress. Additionally, significant Parental Depression x Family Cohesion and Parental Depression x Family Expressiveness interactions emerged as predictors of the intensity of the child's distress. When parental depressive symptomatology was high, child distress was high regardless of family environment. However, when parental depressive symptomatology was low, family cohesion and expression served as protective factors against child distress. Conclusion Parental depressive symptomatology and family functioning relate to child distress in an interactive manner. These findings inform future directions for research, including interventions for parents aimed at promoting child adjustment during the pediatric cancer experience.  Method A self-report measure of illness related distress, adjusted to reflect the experience of medical diagnosis and associated stressors was completed by 146 youth scheduled to undergo SCT. Measures of parental depressive symptoms and family environment (cohesion, expressiveness, and conflict) were completed by the resident parent.  Results Parental symptoms of depression, family cohesion, and family expressiveness emerged as significant predictors of child-reported distress. Additionally, significant Parental Depression x Family Cohesion and Parental Depression x Family Expressiveness interactions emerged as predictors of the intensity of the child's distress. When parental depressive symptomatology was high, child distress was high regardless of family environment. However, when parental depressive symptomatology was low, family cohesion and expression served as protective factors against child distress.  Conclusion Parental depressive symptomatology and family functioning relate to child distress in an interactive manner. These findings inform future directions for research, including interventions for parents aimed at promoting child adjustment during the pediatric cancer experience.  Methods Participants Participants ( N =146, 43% girls) were recruited from four children's hospitals across the United States, as part of a larger clinical trial investigating the efficacy of interventions to reduce distress associated with the SCT experience. Patients between the ages of six and eighteen were recruited along with their parents if they were scheduled to undergo SCT. Other eligibility requirements included (1) an anticipated hospital stay of at least three weeks, (2) patient and parent ability to speak English, and (3) parent ability to read English. Additionally, the participating parent was expected to be the primary caregiver for the child during SCT, as well as available for the duration of the transplant hospitalization. A total of 233 parent-child dyads were approached to participate in the study, 78% of whom initially consented. Reasons given for declining to participate included: being uncomfortable with the proposed intervention ( N =6), child being uninterested ( N =11), parent being uninterested ( N =2), difficulty communicating in English ( N =6), and other reasons ( N =3). The 146 participants in the present study represent those who completed all baseline measures (i.e., both parent and child report). The sample had a mean age of 13.2 years (standard deviation=3.7), and self-identified as 78% White, 11% Black/African-American, and 9% of other racial/ethnic backgrounds. Parent report data was collected from resident parents, of whom 82% were the mother of the patient, 12% the father, and 6% another caretaker. Of the reporting mothers and fathers, 68% were married, 14% were single, 8% were divorced, 7% were remarried, and 3% reported other marital statuses. The demographic and medical background of the sample is summarized in Table 1 . Measures Child Illness-Related Distress Child symptoms of distress were measured using a modified version of the UCLA Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Index (PTSDI), 31 a measure of posttraumatic stress symptoms. Although designed to screen for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), most of the items of the PTSDI reflect non-specific symptoms that occur in response to a specified event, and the instrument can be used more generically as a measure of illness or event-related distress. 32 Here it is conceptualized as indicator of illness-related distress. The instrument includes three subscales, representing symptoms of re-experiencing and intrusion, avoidance and numbing, and arousal. In the present study, a 22-item version, identifying a serious illness requiring transplant as the precipitating event was administered as a self-report to participating patients, and total scores were calculated across the three subscales. Total scores for the instrument achieved favorable internal consistency in the current sample (? = .89). Parental Depressive Syptoms Parental symptoms of depression were assessed with the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), 33 a widely used self-report measure of symptoms of depression, including loneliness, sadness, changes in appetite, changes in sleep, and loss of pleasure. This 20-item instrument, ranging from 0 ( rarely or none of the time ) to 3 ( most or all of the time ), was administered to parents as a measure of their own depressive symptoms. Internal consistency in the present set of participants was also favorable (? =.90). When used as a screening instrument for depression, a cut-point of 16 is commonly utilized, 34 yet parental symptoms of depression were considered a continuous marker of distress in the present study. Family Environment The Family Environment Scale (FES) 35 is a widely-used measure assessing ten dimensions of family functioning and the home environment. For the present study, the subscales of the relationship domain were administered as a self-report for the resident parent. These subscales include family cohesion (9 items), expressiveness (9 items), and conflict (9 items). All 27 items were answered in a true-false format. The three subscales generated alphas of .60, .54, and .69, respectively.  Participants Participants ( N =146, 43% girls) were recruited from four children's hospitals across the United States, as part of a larger clinical trial investigating the efficacy of interventions to reduce distress associated with the SCT experience. Patients between the ages of six and eighteen were recruited along with their parents if they were scheduled to undergo SCT. Other eligibility requirements included (1) an anticipated hospital stay of at least three weeks, (2) patient and parent ability to speak English, and (3) parent ability to read English. Additionally, the participating parent was expected to be the primary caregiver for the child during SCT, as well as available for the duration of the transplant hospitalization. A total of 233 parent-child dyads were approached to participate in the study, 78% of whom initially consented. Reasons given for declining to participate included: being uncomfortable with the proposed intervention ( N =6), child being uninterested ( N =11), parent being uninterested ( N =2), difficulty communicating in English ( N =6), and other reasons ( N =3). The 146 participants in the present study represent those who completed all baseline measures (i.e., both parent and child report). The sample had a mean age of 13.2 years (standard deviation=3.7), and self-identified as 78% White, 11% Black/African-American, and 9% of other racial/ethnic backgrounds. Parent report data was collected from resident parents, of whom 82% were the mother of the patient, 12% the father, and 6% another caretaker. Of the reporting mothers and fathers, 68% were married, 14% were single, 8% were divorced, 7% were remarried, and 3% reported other marital statuses. The demographic and medical background of the sample is summarized in Table 1 .  Measures Child Illness-Related Distress Child symptoms of distress were measured using a modified version of the UCLA Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Index (PTSDI), 31 a measure of posttraumatic stress symptoms. Although designed to screen for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), most of the items of the PTSDI reflect non-specific symptoms that occur in response to a specified event, and the instrument can be used more generically as a measure of illness or event-related distress. 32 Here it is conceptualized as indicator of illness-related distress. The instrument includes three subscales, representing symptoms of re-experiencing and intrusion, avoidance and numbing, and arousal. In the present study, a 22-item version, identifying a serious illness requiring transplant as the precipitating event was administered as a self-report to participating patients, and total scores were calculated across the three subscales. Total scores for the instrument achieved favorable internal consistency in the current sample (? = .89). Parental Depressive Syptoms Parental symptoms of depression were assessed with the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), 33 a widely used self-report measure of symptoms of depression, including loneliness, sadness, changes in appetite, changes in sleep, and loss of pleasure. This 20-item instrument, ranging from 0 ( rarely or none of the time ) to 3 ( most or all of the time ), was administered to parents as a measure of their own depressive symptoms. Internal consistency in the present set of participants was also favorable (? =.90). When used as a screening instrument for depression, a cut-point of 16 is commonly utilized, 34 yet parental symptoms of depression were considered a continuous marker of distress in the present study. Family Environment The Family Environment Scale (FES) 35 is a widely-used measure assessing ten dimensions of family functioning and the home environment. For the present study, the subscales of the relationship domain were administered as a self-report for the resident parent. These subscales include family cohesion (9 items), expressiveness (9 items), and conflict (9 items). All 27 items were answered in a true-false format. The three subscales generated alphas of .60, .54, and .69, respectively.  Child Illness-Related Distress Child symptoms of distress were measured using a modified version of the UCLA Post Traumatic Stress Disorder Index (PTSDI), 31 a measure of posttraumatic stress symptoms. Although designed to screen for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), most of the items of the PTSDI reflect non-specific symptoms that occur in response to a specified event, and the instrument can be used more generically as a measure of illness or event-related distress. 32 Here it is conceptualized as indicator of illness-related distress. The instrument includes three subscales, representing symptoms of re-experiencing and intrusion, avoidance and numbing, and arousal. In the present study, a 22-item version, identifying a serious illness requiring transplant as the precipitating event was administered as a self-report to participating patients, and total scores were calculated across the three subscales. Total scores for the instrument achieved favorable internal consistency in the current sample (? = .89).  Parental Depressive Syptoms Parental symptoms of depression were assessed with the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), 33 a widely used self-report measure of symptoms of depression, including loneliness, sadness, changes in appetite, changes in sleep, and loss of pleasure. This 20-item instrument, ranging from 0 ( rarely or none of the time ) to 3 ( most or all of the time ), was administered to parents as a measure of their own depressive symptoms. Internal consistency in the present set of participants was also favorable (? =.90). When used as a screening instrument for depression, a cut-point of 16 is commonly utilized, 34 yet parental symptoms of depression were considered a continuous marker of distress in the present study.  Family Environment The Family Environment Scale (FES) 35 is a widely-used measure assessing ten dimensions of family functioning and the home environment. For the present study, the subscales of the relationship domain were administered as a self-report for the resident parent. These subscales include family cohesion (9 items), expressiveness (9 items), and conflict (9 items). All 27 items were answered in a true-false format. The three subscales generated alphas of .60, .54, and .69, respectively.  Results Descriptive statistics and zero-order correlations between observed variables can be found in Table 2 . The mean level of child illness-related distress, as measured by the PTSDI (23.3) fell on the high end of the “mild” category. Approximately 26% did not report even “mild” symptoms (i.e., scores below 12), while 33% fell in the “mild” range. Additionally, 22% reported in the “moderate” range, and 19% reported severe or very severe symptoms. The mean score of parental depressive symptomatology (19.4) was mildly elevated relative to a cut-point of 16 commonly used when screening for depression. There were no significant differences between transplant-type groups (autologous vs. allogeneic; all p s>.26) or gender of the child (all p s>.18) on any of the distress measures. Child age was significantly correlated with severity of parental depressive symptoms, with parents of younger children reporting greater depressive symptoms. Additionally, child-reported distress and parental depressive symptoms were positively correlated, and parental depressive symptoms were negatively correlated with levels of family cohesion and expressiveness and negatively related to family conflict. Of the three dimensions of family environment, severity of child distress was significantly correlated with family expressiveness, with children in more expressive families endorsing less illness-related distress. Multiple regression analyses were conducted to further explore the relations between family environment, parental depressive symptoms, and child illness-related distress. Child age, family SES, 36 and months since diagnosis were entered into all regression analyses as covariates. To examine possible main effects, family cohesion, expressiveness, conflict and parental depressive symptoms were first entered in a regression equation with the three covariates to predict intensity of child distress. In this regression analysis, parental depressive symptomatology was the only factor to explain unique variance in levels of child distress (?=.26, p <.01). Next, interaction terms were computed in order to test whether parental depressive symptomatology moderated the relation between any aspects of family environment and intensity of child distress. As a way of reducing possible multicollinearity among the variables, interaction terms were computed using z-scores of all component variables. Three separate regressions were examined with these interaction terms - for family cohesion, family expressiveness, and family conflict. Results from these regression analyses are presented in Table 2 . In the first regression, a significant interaction was found between family cohesion and parental depression, ( p =.02). In the second regression, a significant interaction was found between family expressiveness and parental depressive symptomatology, ( p =.03). In the third regression, we failed to find an interactive association between family conflict and parental depressive symptomatology in significantly accounting for differences in illness-related distress among the children, ( p =.69). In other words, parental depressive symptomatology was shown to significantly moderate the relation between family cohesion and child distress, as well as family expressiveness and child distress. Further analyses were completed in order to characterize how parental depressive symptomatology moderates these relations. Family Cohesion Procedures to probe the interaction between family cohesion and parental depression were based on Aiken and West's recommendations. 37 Two new regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptomatology in order to complete a test of simple slopes. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did not vary according to family cohesion ( r =.08, p = .44). Conversely, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did vary according to family cohesion ( r =-.29, p <.05). As depicted in Figure 1 , there was a statistically significant negative relation between family cohesion and child distress only when parental depressive symptomatology was low. When parental depressive symptomatology was low, greater family cohesion was associated with lower levels of child distress. However, at high levels of parental depressive symptomatology, family cohesion did not significantly impact child distress. Family Expressiveness Similar results were found when probing the interaction between family expressiveness and parental depressive symptomatology. Two additional regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptoms. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress and family expressiveness were not significantly related ( r =.12, p =.34). Yet, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress was significantly related to family expressiveness ( r =-.21, p =.05). As was the case with family cohesion, there was a statistically significant relation between family expressiveness and child distress only in the context of low parental depression. These relations are shown in Figure 2 .  Results Descriptive statistics and zero-order correlations between observed variables can be found in Table 2 . The mean level of child illness-related distress, as measured by the PTSDI (23.3) fell on the high end of the “mild” category. Approximately 26% did not report even “mild” symptoms (i.e., scores below 12), while 33% fell in the “mild” range. Additionally, 22% reported in the “moderate” range, and 19% reported severe or very severe symptoms. The mean score of parental depressive symptomatology (19.4) was mildly elevated relative to a cut-point of 16 commonly used when screening for depression. There were no significant differences between transplant-type groups (autologous vs. allogeneic; all p s>.26) or gender of the child (all p s>.18) on any of the distress measures. Child age was significantly correlated with severity of parental depressive symptoms, with parents of younger children reporting greater depressive symptoms. Additionally, child-reported distress and parental depressive symptoms were positively correlated, and parental depressive symptoms were negatively correlated with levels of family cohesion and expressiveness and negatively related to family conflict. Of the three dimensions of family environment, severity of child distress was significantly correlated with family expressiveness, with children in more expressive families endorsing less illness-related distress. Multiple regression analyses were conducted to further explore the relations between family environment, parental depressive symptoms, and child illness-related distress. Child age, family SES, 36 and months since diagnosis were entered into all regression analyses as covariates. To examine possible main effects, family cohesion, expressiveness, conflict and parental depressive symptoms were first entered in a regression equation with the three covariates to predict intensity of child distress. In this regression analysis, parental depressive symptomatology was the only factor to explain unique variance in levels of child distress (?=.26, p <.01). Next, interaction terms were computed in order to test whether parental depressive symptomatology moderated the relation between any aspects of family environment and intensity of child distress. As a way of reducing possible multicollinearity among the variables, interaction terms were computed using z-scores of all component variables. Three separate regressions were examined with these interaction terms - for family cohesion, family expressiveness, and family conflict. Results from these regression analyses are presented in Table 2 . In the first regression, a significant interaction was found between family cohesion and parental depression, ( p =.02). In the second regression, a significant interaction was found between family expressiveness and parental depressive symptomatology, ( p =.03). In the third regression, we failed to find an interactive association between family conflict and parental depressive symptomatology in significantly accounting for differences in illness-related distress among the children, ( p =.69). In other words, parental depressive symptomatology was shown to significantly moderate the relation between family cohesion and child distress, as well as family expressiveness and child distress. Further analyses were completed in order to characterize how parental depressive symptomatology moderates these relations. Family Cohesion Procedures to probe the interaction between family cohesion and parental depression were based on Aiken and West's recommendations. 37 Two new regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptomatology in order to complete a test of simple slopes. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did not vary according to family cohesion ( r =.08, p = .44). Conversely, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did vary according to family cohesion ( r =-.29, p <.05). As depicted in Figure 1 , there was a statistically significant negative relation between family cohesion and child distress only when parental depressive symptomatology was low. When parental depressive symptomatology was low, greater family cohesion was associated with lower levels of child distress. However, at high levels of parental depressive symptomatology, family cohesion did not significantly impact child distress. Family Expressiveness Similar results were found when probing the interaction between family expressiveness and parental depressive symptomatology. Two additional regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptoms. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress and family expressiveness were not significantly related ( r =.12, p =.34). Yet, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress was significantly related to family expressiveness ( r =-.21, p =.05). As was the case with family cohesion, there was a statistically significant relation between family expressiveness and child distress only in the context of low parental depression. These relations are shown in Figure 2 .  Family Cohesion Procedures to probe the interaction between family cohesion and parental depression were based on Aiken and West's recommendations. 37 Two new regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptomatology in order to complete a test of simple slopes. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did not vary according to family cohesion ( r =.08, p = .44). Conversely, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did vary according to family cohesion ( r =-.29, p <.05). As depicted in Figure 1 , there was a statistically significant negative relation between family cohesion and child distress only when parental depressive symptomatology was low. When parental depressive symptomatology was low, greater family cohesion was associated with lower levels of child distress. However, at high levels of parental depressive symptomatology, family cohesion did not significantly impact child distress.  Family Cohesion Procedures to probe the interaction between family cohesion and parental depression were based on Aiken and West's recommendations. 37 Two new regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptomatology in order to complete a test of simple slopes. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did not vary according to family cohesion ( r =.08, p = .44). Conversely, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress did vary according to family cohesion ( r =-.29, p <.05). As depicted in Figure 1 , there was a statistically significant negative relation between family cohesion and child distress only when parental depressive symptomatology was low. When parental depressive symptomatology was low, greater family cohesion was associated with lower levels of child distress. However, at high levels of parental depressive symptomatology, family cohesion did not significantly impact child distress.  Family Expressiveness Similar results were found when probing the interaction between family expressiveness and parental depressive symptomatology. Two additional regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptoms. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress and family expressiveness were not significantly related ( r =.12, p =.34). Yet, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress was significantly related to family expressiveness ( r =-.21, p =.05). As was the case with family cohesion, there was a statistically significant relation between family expressiveness and child distress only in the context of low parental depression. These relations are shown in Figure 2 .  Family Expressiveness Similar results were found when probing the interaction between family expressiveness and parental depressive symptomatology. Two additional regressions were performed using high and low probes of parental depressive symptoms. For families with high parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress and family expressiveness were not significantly related ( r =.12, p =.34). Yet, for families with low parental depressive symptomatology, severity of child distress was significantly related to family expressiveness ( r =-.21, p =.05). As was the case with family cohesion, there was a statistically significant relation between family expressiveness and child distress only in the context of low parental depression. These relations are shown in Figure 2 .  Discussion The primary goal of the present study was to investigate the interplay between parental depressive symptoms and factors related to the quality of the family environment in explaining illness-related distress in children undergoing SCT. Because patient distress levels pre-SCT have been related to poorer outcomes for survivors, this study assessed parent, family, and child patient variables prior to SCT. Results indicated that parental depressive symptomatology moderated the relations between family cohesion and child distress and family expressiveness and child distress. Results failed to demonstrate significant direct or interactive effects for family conflict and child distress. This study adds to the current literature regarding family influences on child adjustment to the cancer and pediatric illness experience. Recent research related to the pediatric cancer experience in general has focused on systemic influences on children's psychological adjustment, as well as interactions among multiple family systems. 5 , 26 , 38 From a social ecological perspective, the present results underscore the relevance of focusing on the functioning of familial systems in conceptualizing children's adjustment to the SCT experience, including pre-SCT distress. 5 This study adds to the growing body of evidence that beyond the overall impact of parent and family functioning, the interplay between these factors also has important implications for children's adjustment. The current findings indicate that in the context of low parental depressive symptoms family cohesion and family expressiveness act as protective factors against child distress related to their illness. Yet, in the context of high parental depressive symptoms, these family factors do not have significant relations to child distress, and children report higher levels of distress regardless of the quality of the family environment. When parental depressive symptoms are low, having a family that is cohesive and expressive appears to buffer children from exhibiting symptoms of distress. However, in situations in which a parent is struggling with symptoms of depression, quality of the family environment does not appear to serve such a protective function. Although the majority of research understanding family influences on child adjustment as focused on influence being exerted from the parents to the child, it is also accepted that many aspects of a child's behavior, temperament, and distress can have effects on parents and family systems. 39 , 40 So, it is possible that children who were more distressed in general or specifically by the cancer experience put a larger emotional strain on their resident parent which resulted in the parental expression of depressive symptoms. In order to disentangle the apparent interplay between parental depression and family cohesion and expressiveness in relation to severity of symptoms in children undergoing SCT, as well as to understand how these factors relate to child outcomes post-SCT, a prospective longitudinal investigation would be necessary. Nonetheless, we believe that the current results have important implications for research and clinical work with children and families beginning the SCT experience. The results of the present study highlight the importance of looking at parent and family influences in conjunction with one another. Had only the main effects of family environment and parental depression been examined, an important aspect of the influence of the family on child adjustment would have been missed. From a practical perspective, these results indicate that children benefit from a cohesive and expressive family environment when their parents are maintaining healthy levels of psychological functioning (e.g., parental depression is low) and the family environment includes high cohesion and expressiveness. Yet, when one or both of these factors is missing or becomes compromised, children become vulnerable to higher levels of distress. Consistent with other research, the distress reported by patients was generally mild. Given that the time of admission for transplant is typically found to be the most stressful phase of the procedure, 5 , 41 the low levels of distress are striking. Nevertheless, 20% of children did endorse problematic levels of symptoms (i.e., “severe” or “very severe”), which underscores the need to identify factors characterizing those children who do not fare as well emotionally before, during, and after SCT. While the present study highlighted the importance of including parent and family factors when understanding child illness-related distress, many other factors, such as dispositional and personality characteristics, are important as well. In contrast to the children, parental depression scores were moderately elevated. Over half of the parents met or exceeded the commonly used criterion for clinical levels of depression. This supports the idea that the time of admission for SCT is extremely stressful for parents, and that parents may be more vulnerable to psychological difficulties than their children. Yet, more research is needed to understand which parents are at highest risk for experiencing depressive symptomatology during this time, and how to best support parents at time of SCT admission and throughout the SCT process. The present study had several limitations. As highlighted already, all measures were collected simultaneously, so no definitive conclusions can be drawn regarding the temporal relations between these variables. Also, no measure of disease severity was included. SCT is a high risk procedure that is not standard treatment for most children with cancer. Yet, within this subset, there is also a range of disease severity. In the present study, only type of illness was collected, and although measures of distress may include aspects of disease severity, self-reported cancer-related distress was the outcome of interest so no indicator of disease severity was available. Future research would extend knowledge in this area by having medical professionals rate objectively the severity of the illnesses children have that are being treated with SCT. Additionally, all measures were self-reported. Future research would benefit by assessing aspects of family functioning observationally. For instance, it may be valuable to compare general measures of the family environment (i.e., the FES) and aspects of the family environment more specific to the childhood cancer experience. This could include observational coding of behaviors and conversations between parents and children regarding the cancer treatment and associated experiences. Due to the unique challenges associated with SCT (e.g., physical separation), assessment tools used in the general population may be less relevant, and may be missing some aspects of family functioning that are important during this time. Additionally, the present study was limited by only having one parent report on depressive symptoms. Even though the resident parent likely spends more time with the child currently, the non-resident parent undoubtedly is still important in the child's social ecology. Further, the parent who becomes the resident parent is likely not randomly chosen of the two parents, but is chosen for a number of reasons. For example, families may choose the parent who is more psychologically able to deal with the stress of having a child with cancer, which would make the sample in the present study report less depressive symptoms than representative of the parental unit. Alternatively, the family may choose the parent who holds less financial responsibility in the household inasmuch as their time spent away from a job and in the hospital would not add an additional strain to the family. For this reason, a necessary extension of the present study would include all important caregivers to the child as possible influences on adjustment. In spite of these limitations, there are several clinical implications of the current findings. First, interventions aimed at increasing open communication between parents and children, as well as increasing bonding between all members of the family may be in the best interest of the child's adjustment to SCT. Yet, such interventions may not be successful in the context of high parental depression. In these cases family interventions may actually increase negative communication patterns and emotional fusion characteristic of families with a depressed parent. 25 Hence, in situations involving a depressed parent, clinicians may do well to focus initially on intervening with the individual parent and providing the necessary support to improve his or her functioning. Once the parent achieves a greater sense of stability, interventions may be more effectively focused on family expressiveness or cohesion, depending on the needs of the particular resident parent-patient dyad. Indeed, recent research has shown that treatment of parental symptoms can decrease child symptoms. 42 , 43 Clinical work with children undergoing SCT and their families will also benefit from attending to multiple levels of systemic influence in assessment and possible intervention with patients and their family members.  Discussion The primary goal of the present study was to investigate the interplay between parental depressive symptoms and factors related to the quality of the family environment in explaining illness-related distress in children undergoing SCT. Because patient distress levels pre-SCT have been related to poorer outcomes for survivors, this study assessed parent, family, and child patient variables prior to SCT. Results indicated that parental depressive symptomatology moderated the relations between family cohesion and child distress and family expressiveness and child distress. Results failed to demonstrate significant direct or interactive effects for family conflict and child distress. This study adds to the current literature regarding family influences on child adjustment to the cancer and pediatric illness experience. Recent research related to the pediatric cancer experience in general has focused on systemic influences on children's psychological adjustment, as well as interactions among multiple family systems. 5 , 26 , 38 From a social ecological perspective, the present results underscore the relevance of focusing on the functioning of familial systems in conceptualizing children's adjustment to the SCT experience, including pre-SCT distress. 5 This study adds to the growing body of evidence that beyond the overall impact of parent and family functioning, the interplay between these factors also has important implications for children's adjustment. The current findings indicate that in the context of low parental depressive symptoms family cohesion and family expressiveness act as protective factors against child distress related to their illness. Yet, in the context of high parental depressive symptoms, these family factors do not have significant relations to child distress, and children report higher levels of distress regardless of the quality of the family environment. When parental depressive symptoms are low, having a family that is cohesive and expressive appears to buffer children from exhibiting symptoms of distress. However, in situations in which a parent is struggling with symptoms of depression, quality of the family environment does not appear to serve such a protective function. Although the majority of research understanding family influences on child adjustment as focused on influence being exerted from the parents to the child, it is also accepted that many aspects of a child's behavior, temperament, and distress can have effects on parents and family systems. 39 , 40 So, it is possible that children who were more distressed in general or specifically by the cancer experience put a larger emotional strain on their resident parent which resulted in the parental expression of depressive symptoms. In order to disentangle the apparent interplay between parental depression and family cohesion and expressiveness in relation to severity of symptoms in children undergoing SCT, as well as to understand how these factors relate to child outcomes post-SCT, a prospective longitudinal investigation would be necessary. Nonetheless, we believe that the current results have important implications for research and clinical work with children and families beginning the SCT experience. The results of the present study highlight the importance of looking at parent and family influences in conjunction with one another. Had only the main effects of family environment and parental depression been examined, an important aspect of the influence of the family on child adjustment would have been missed. From a practical perspective, these results indicate that children benefit from a cohesive and expressive family environment when their parents are maintaining healthy levels of psychological functioning (e.g., parental depression is low) and the family environment includes high cohesion and expressiveness. Yet, when one or both of these factors is missing or becomes compromised, children become vulnerable to higher levels of distress. Consistent with other research, the distress reported by patients was generally mild. Given that the time of admission for transplant is typically found to be the most stressful phase of the procedure, 5 , 41 the low levels of distress are striking. Nevertheless, 20% of children did endorse problematic levels of symptoms (i.e., “severe” or “very severe”), which underscores the need to identify factors characterizing those children who do not fare as well emotionally before, during, and after SCT. While the present study highlighted the importance of including parent and family factors when understanding child illness-related distress, many other factors, such as dispositional and personality characteristics, are important as well. In contrast to the children, parental depression scores were moderately elevated. Over half of the parents met or exceeded the commonly used criterion for clinical levels of depression. This supports the idea that the time of admission for SCT is extremely stressful for parents, and that parents may be more vulnerable to psychological difficulties than their children. Yet, more research is needed to understand which parents are at highest risk for experiencing depressive symptomatology during this time, and how to best support parents at time of SCT admission and throughout the SCT process. The present study had several limitations. As highlighted already, all measures were collected simultaneously, so no definitive conclusions can be drawn regarding the temporal relations between these variables. Also, no measure of disease severity was included. SCT is a high risk procedure that is not standard treatment for most children with cancer. Yet, within this subset, there is also a range of disease severity. In the present study, only type of illness was collected, and although measures of distress may include aspects of disease severity, self-reported cancer-related distress was the outcome of interest so no indicator of disease severity was available. Future research would extend knowledge in this area by having medical professionals rate objectively the severity of the illnesses children have that are being treated with SCT. Additionally, all measures were self-reported. Future research would benefit by assessing aspects of family functioning observationally. For instance, it may be valuable to compare general measures of the family environment (i.e., the FES) and aspects of the family environment more specific to the childhood cancer experience. This could include observational coding of behaviors and conversations between parents and children regarding the cancer treatment and associated experiences. Due to the unique challenges associated with SCT (e.g., physical separation), assessment tools used in the general population may be less relevant, and may be missing some aspects of family functioning that are important during this time. Additionally, the present study was limited by only having one parent report on depressive symptoms. Even though the resident parent likely spends more time with the child currently, the non-resident parent undoubtedly is still important in the child's social ecology. Further, the parent who becomes the resident parent is likely not randomly chosen of the two parents, but is chosen for a number of reasons. For example, families may choose the parent who is more psychologically able to deal with the stress of having a child with cancer, which would make the sample in the present study report less depressive symptoms than representative of the parental unit. Alternatively, the family may choose the parent who holds less financial responsibility in the household inasmuch as their time spent away from a job and in the hospital would not add an additional strain to the family. For this reason, a necessary extension of the present study would include all important caregivers to the child as possible influences on adjustment. In spite of these limitations, there are several clinical implications of the current findings. First, interventions aimed at increasing open communication between parents and children, as well as increasing bonding between all members of the family may be in the best interest of the child's adjustment to SCT. Yet, such interventions may not be successful in the context of high parental depression. In these cases family interventions may actually increase negative communication patterns and emotional fusion characteristic of families with a depressed parent. 25 Hence, in situations involving a depressed parent, clinicians may do well to focus initially on intervening with the individual parent and providing the necessary support to improve his or her functioning. Once the parent achieves a greater sense of stability, interventions may be more effectively focused on family expressiveness or cohesion, depending on the needs of the particular resident parent-patient dyad. Indeed, recent research has shown that treatment of parental symptoms can decrease child symptoms. 42 , 43 Clinical work with children undergoing SCT and their families will also benefit from attending to multiple levels of systemic influence in assessment and possible intervention with patients and their family members.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Probing of Interaction between Family Cohesion and Parental Depression Figure 2 Probing of Interaction between Family Expressiveness and Parental Depression Table 1 Demographic and Medical Background n % Child's Sex Male 83 56.8 Female 63 43.2 Child's Race/Ethnicity White 112 76.7 Black/African-American 17 11.6 Other 17 11.6 Resident Parent Mother 119 81.5 Father 18 12.3 Other 9 6.2 Diagnosis ALL 40 29.6 AML 36 26.6 Other leukemia 13 9.6 Hodgkins lymphoma 6 4.4 NHL 9 6.6 Neuroblastoma 5 3.7 Other solid tumor 6 4.4 Nonmalignancy 14 10.4 Myelodysplastic Syndrome 6 4.4 Type of Transplant Allogeneic Matched sibling 40 27.4 Other allogeneic 78 53.4 Autologous 28 19.2 ALL=Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia; AML=Acute Myeloid Leukeumia; NHL= Non-Hodgkins' Lymphoma. Table 2 Descriptive Statistics and Zero-order Correlations among Study Measures 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 1. Child's Age - 2. Months since Diagnosis .02 - 3. Family SES .11 -.03 - 4. Child Distress (c) -.04 .07 -.08 - 5. Parental Depression (p) -.22 ** -.11 .03 .29 *** - 6. Family Cohesion (p) .02 .08 -.02 -.12 -.27 *** - 7. Family Expressiveness (p) -.07 -.11 -.04 -.17 * -.31 *** .44 *** - 8. Family Conflict (p) -.04 -.04 -.09 .09 .23 ** -.54 *** -.17 * - Mean 13.22 25.79 2.41 23.33 19.37 7.34 5.70 2.64 Standard Deviation 3.67 38.04 1.10 14.55 10.74 1.63 1.86 1.97 Note . c = child self-report, p = parent self-report * p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001. Table 3 Regression Analyses Predicting Child-Reported Distress Predictor B SE ? 1. Family Cohesion Child Age .22 .35 .06 Months Since .06 .03 .14 SES -.63 1.15 -.05 FES Cohesion -.52 .87 -.06 Parental CES-D .48 .13 .35 *** CES-D * Cohesion .15 .07 .21 * 1. Family Expressiveness Child Age .24 .35 .06 Months Since .04 .04 .11 SES -.53 1.17 -.04 FES Expressiveness -.48 .71 -.06 Parental CES-D .44 .13 .32 ** CES-D * Expressiveness .12 .06 .19 * 1. Family Conflict Child Age .27 .35 .07 Months Since .05 .04 .13 SES -.88 1.17 -.07 FES Conflict .10 .67 .01 Parental CES-D .43 .13 .32 ** CES-D * Conflict -.03 .07 -.04 Note . CES-D = Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression † p<.10 * p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Probing of Interaction between Family Cohesion and Parental Depression Figure 2 Probing of Interaction between Family Expressiveness and Parental Depression Table 1 Demographic and Medical Background n % Child's Sex Male 83 56.8 Female 63 43.2 Child's Race/Ethnicity White 112 76.7 Black/African-American 17 11.6 Other 17 11.6 Resident Parent Mother 119 81.5 Father 18 12.3 Other 9 6.2 Diagnosis ALL 40 29.6 AML 36 26.6 Other leukemia 13 9.6 Hodgkins lymphoma 6 4.4 NHL 9 6.6 Neuroblastoma 5 3.7 Other solid tumor 6 4.4 Nonmalignancy 14 10.4 Myelodysplastic Syndrome 6 4.4 Type of Transplant Allogeneic Matched sibling 40 27.4 Other allogeneic 78 53.4 Autologous 28 19.2 ALL=Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia; AML=Acute Myeloid Leukeumia; NHL= Non-Hodgkins' Lymphoma. Table 2 Descriptive Statistics and Zero-order Correlations among Study Measures 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 1. Child's Age - 2. Months since Diagnosis .02 - 3. Family SES .11 -.03 - 4. Child Distress (c) -.04 .07 -.08 - 5. Parental Depression (p) -.22 ** -.11 .03 .29 *** - 6. Family Cohesion (p) .02 .08 -.02 -.12 -.27 *** - 7. Family Expressiveness (p) -.07 -.11 -.04 -.17 * -.31 *** .44 *** - 8. Family Conflict (p) -.04 -.04 -.09 .09 .23 ** -.54 *** -.17 * - Mean 13.22 25.79 2.41 23.33 19.37 7.34 5.70 2.64 Standard Deviation 3.67 38.04 1.10 14.55 10.74 1.63 1.86 1.97 Note . c = child self-report, p = parent self-report * p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001. Table 3 Regression Analyses Predicting Child-Reported Distress Predictor B SE ? 1. Family Cohesion Child Age .22 .35 .06 Months Since .06 .03 .14 SES -.63 1.15 -.05 FES Cohesion -.52 .87 -.06 Parental CES-D .48 .13 .35 *** CES-D * Cohesion .15 .07 .21 * 1. Family Expressiveness Child Age .24 .35 .06 Months Since .04 .04 .11 SES -.53 1.17 -.04 FES Expressiveness -.48 .71 -.06 Parental CES-D .44 .13 .32 ** CES-D * Expressiveness .12 .06 .19 * 1. Family Conflict Child Age .27 .35 .07 Months Since .05 .04 .13 SES -.88 1.17 -.07 FES Conflict .10 .67 .01 Parental CES-D .43 .13 .32 ** CES-D * Conflict -.03 .07 -.04 Note . CES-D = Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression † p<.10 * p<.05 ** p<.01 *** p<.001. 