Environmental Causes of Esophageal Cancer Synopsis This articles reviews the environmental risk factors and predisposing conditions for the two main histological types of esophageal cancer, esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA). Tobacco smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, drinking maté, low intake of fresh fruits and vegetables, achalasia, and low socioeconomic status increase the risk of ESCC. Results of investigations on several other potential risk factors, including opium consumption, intake of hot drinks, eating pickled vegetables, poor oral health, and exposure to human papillomavirus, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, N -nitroso compounds, acetaldehyde, and fumonisins are also discussed. Gastroesophageal reflux, obesity, tobacco smoking, hiatal hernia, achalasia, and probably absence of H. pylori in the stomach increase the risk of EA. Results of studies investigating other factors, including low intake of fresh fruits and vegetables, consumption of carbonated soft drink, use of H2 blockers, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and drugs that relax the lower esophageal sphincter are also discussed.  Summary and conclusions Over the past century, a large number of factors have been tested for their potential association with EC risk. Whereas older studies mainly investigated the etiology of ESCC, the newer studies in Western countries have also investigated the causes of EA. The results of these studies have established excessive use of alcohol, tobacco use, low intake of fresh fruit and vegetables, low socioeconomic status, and drinking maté as risk factors for ESCC. Also, certain physiologic or pathologic conditions, such as gastric atrophy and achalasia, may predispose people to higher risk of ESCC. There are other potential but as yet unsubstantiated risk factors. For example, PAHs and acetaldehyde may play an important role in the etiology of ESCC in high-risk areas of Iran or China, but this remains to be verified in future studies. Three important risk factors have been identified for EA: gastroesophageal acid reflux, obesity, and smoking. Absence of H. pylori in the stomach is also becoming increasingly recognized as a risk factor. Other factors, such as the use of LES-relaxing medications need to be further studied.  Table Table 1 Environmental risk factors and predisposing conditions for esophageal cancer Habits Tobacco use There is strong evidence for a causal association between tobacco use and both ESCC and EA. Tobacco use is more strongly associated with ESCC (3–7-fold increased risk) than EA (2-fold increased risk). Alcohol consumption Excessive alcohol use (>3 drinks/day) is a strong risk factor for ESCC, increasing risk by 3–5-fold. There is little evidence for an association between alcohol use and EA risk. Opium use Studies point toward an association with ESCC (2-fold increased risk), but the level of evidence is not yet strong. Drinking maté Epidemiologic studies have consistently shown an increased risk of EC associated with drinking maté, especially hot maté. Most studies have been conducted in areas with high prevalence of ESCC. Ingestions of high-temperature foods and drinks A large number of epidemiologic studies have investigated the association of hot foods and drinks with EC, but the results are still controversial. Consumption of carbonated soft drinks Results from epidemiologic studies have shown no evidence for an increased risk of EA or ESCC associated with drinking carbonated soft drinks. Eating pickled vegetables Eating pickled vegetables was once considered an important risk factor for EC in China, but the results of epidemiologic studies have been controversial. Nutritional deficiencies Low intake of fresh fruits and vegetables There is a large body of evidence linking low intake of fresh fruits and vegetables to higher risk of EC, especially ESCC. Eating 50 additional grams of fruits and vegetables per day may decrease EC risk by 20%. Vitamin and micronutrient deficiency Most vitamins and minerals do not change EC risk. However, intake of selenium in selenium-deficient populations may decrease ESCC risk, especially in younger people. Medications Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) There is evidence that intake of aspirin and other NSAIDs may decrease both ESCC and EA by approximately 40%. Medications that relax lower esophageal sphincter (LES) LES-relaxing drugs have been suggested to increase EA risk by increasing acid reflux. However, the results of epidemiologic studies have been controversial. H2 receptor antagonists Although some studies have shown an increased risk of EA associated with taking these drugs, these results may be confounded by inadequate adjustment for acid reflux. Infections Helicobacter pylori Presence of H. pylori in the stomach is associated with a 50% reduced risk of EA. There is no clear pattern of association between H. pylori and ESCC. Human papillomavirus (HPV) A large number of epidemiologic studies have investigated the association of HPV with EC, but the results are still controversial. Chemical carcinogens Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) There is circumstantial evidence linking PAHs to EC, but there is no convincing evidence from case- control or cohort studies. N -nitroso compounds (NNCs) Intake of processed meat, which contains large amounts of NNCs, has been consistently linked to higher EC risk, but more evidence is required to make a causal link between NNCs and EC. Acetaldehyde Acetaldehyde may be the common denominator linking alcohol consumption, poor oral health, and gastric atrophy to EC. The most convincing evidence for an association between acetaldehyde and EC comes from ADH and ALDH polymorphism studies, but more evidence is needed to make a causal link. Fumonisins Ecologic studies have linked fumonisin exposure to increased risk of EC, but additional individual based epidemiologic studies are needed to establish or refute this association. Predisposing conditions Gastroesophageal acid reflux Acid reflux is one of the main risk factors for EA, increasing its risk by approximately 5-fold. Obesity There is strong evidence for a causal association between obesity and higher risk of EA. Hiatal hernia Hiatal hernia increases EA risk by 2–6-fold, most likely by increasing gastroesophageal acid reflux. Achalasia Achalasia increases the risk of both EA and ESCC by approximately 10-fold. Gastric atrophy A few studies have shown that gastric atrophy could be a risk factor for ESCC but more studies are needed to confirm these results. There is no evidence for an association between gastric atrophy and EA. Poor oral health Several epidemiologic studies have linked poor oral health to higher risk of EC, especially ESCC, but more evidence is required to conclude that there is a causal association. Others Occupational exposure A number of studies have linked occupational exposure to silica and asbestos to higher risk of EC, but the results have not been entirely consistent. Low socioeconomic status Low socioeconomic status is a risk factor for EC. It is a definite risk factor for ESCC, but it may also increase risk of EA. EC: esophageal cancer; ESCC: esophageal squamous cell carcinoma; EA: esophageal adenocarcinoma 