Progression of skin lesions from normal skin to squamous cell carcinoma Objective This study was designed to assess the changes in the nuclear chromatin pattern concomitant with progressive sun damage in skin biopsies ranging from sun-exposed, normal-appearing skin to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Materials Biopsies were taken from 140 individuals with sun-exposed, but histopathologically normal skin, from 20 cases visually assessed as pre-actinic keratosis (pre-AK), or early AK, from 30 cases of AK, and 21 cases of squamous cell carcinoma. A total of 21,094 nuclei were recorded from these biopsies. High resolution digital imagery was recorded and features descriptive of the nuclear chromatin pattern were computed. Both supervised learning and unsupervised learning algorithms were employed to derive progression plots. Results With increased sun exposure, the proportion of nuclei exhibiting changes in the nuclear chromatin pattern rises notably. Using karyometry, no significant differences could be substantiated between nuclei collected from early AK sites and AK lesions. Cases of SCC appear to fall into two distinct groups. A larger group, consisting of about two thirds of the cases, has characteristics similar to AK. A smaller group, formed by one third of the cases, represents much more progressed lesions. Conclusions Karyometric assessment can provide a numeric measure of progression for sun damage and of the deviation from normal in both actinic keratosis and squamous cell carcinoma lesions.  Introduction Actinic keratoses (AK) are common lesions with a high prevalence. They are due to chronic sun exposure, and are a health issue of major economic impact due to significant morbidity and medical costs 1 . Without treatment, AK may develop into squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 2 with a risk of metastases 3 – 5 . There have been clinical estimates of malignancy rates as high as 25% related to AK among patients with persistent AK lesions 6 . A study by Marks and colleagues 7 estimated that up to 60% of SCC arise from previously diagnosed AK. Hurwitz and colleagues 8 reviewed 458 cases of cutaneous SCC and showed that 98% were associated with a contiguous AK. It has been considered that AK may lead to SCC in situ and may lead to invasive SCC in a continuous progression. In a number of preceding studies, 9 – 11 procedures were developed to follow the progression of sun damage by objective, quantitatively defined measures. Karyometric methods are able to record changes in the nuclear chromatin pattern in sun-exposed skin before histopathologically apparent changes occur 12 . These methods therefore lend themselves well to an assessment of efficacy of a chemopreventive intervention at an early stage of deviation from “normal,” as well as in AK 13 . Karyometric analysis, however, not only allows objective measures of lesion progression or regression due to an intervention. It also provides clinically useful information. Multivariate analysis may reveal a grouping of cases into distinct groups, representing statistically significantly different degrees of progression. Such information may ultimately prove to be of prognostic value. The objective of this study was to define the progression of skin lesions from visually normal appearing, sun-exposed skin, to AK and to SCC.  Materials and Methods The material for this study was collected in the context of the skin cancer program project at the Arizona Cancer Center 14 . Materials consisted of 140 biopsies from study participants with normal-appearing, sun exposed skin (14,085 nuclei), 20 biopsies from sites visually diagnosed as pre-AK or early AK (1,980 nuclei), 30 biopsies from cases of AK (2,877 nuclei), and 21 cases of SCC (2,152 nuclei). The analysis was carried out at two levels. The first was that of diagnostic categories, in order to define in numeric terms the process of progressive actinic damage in skin. The second level of analysis was aimed at the individual case or biopsy, to provide directly relevant clinical information. To determine a direction in feature space that might lend itself as a measure of progression, a Kruskal Wallis test 15 was performed to identify features undergoing a monotonic trend from normal-appearing, sun exposed skin to SCC. In a companion study of actinic damage in histopathologically normal skin that had been subjected to varying degrees of sun exposure 12 , a discriminant function had been derived for the distinction of biopsies from skin with no visible sun damage, and skin with visually notable sun damage. By setting a threshold on the discriminant function score axis a subpopulation of nuclei could be identified that expresses the effects of actinic damage. This function and the threshold were applied to the early AK and AK data sets. This study also investigated the potential heterogeneity of the SCC samples. This problem was approached on the basis of case mean feature values, since the distribution of nuclei in the SCC material showed a very substantial dispersion. The same feature set used in the discriminant function (DF I,1) was submitted to the unsupervised learning algorithm P-index 16 , 17 . The rationale for this choice of features was that any heterogeneity might express differences in progression. The unsupervised learning algorithm P-index was used to derive the subgroups SCC 1 and SCC 2 and to establish the statistical significance of their differences, using the Beale statistic 18 .  Results The Kruskal Wallis test revealed more than 20 features with statistically highly significant differences, at p < 0.005. Of these features, six were selected, based on their value for the Kruskal Wallis test statistic and the block of features that they belonged to, so that different aspects of the nuclear chromatin distribution were considered. The six features included relative nuclear area and several features representing different aspects of nuclear chromatin texture. These features are listed in Table I, in order of the value of their standardized coefficients in the discriminant function DF I,1. All feature values are given in arbitrary, relative numbers. A discriminant function was derived using the nuclei of half the SCC cases and from all of the normal cases as the training set. Wilks’ Lambda was reduced by the discriminant function to 0.592. The classification rates for nuclei are given in Table II . The overall accuracy was 94.2%. The asymmetry in the classification rate suggests that, in the SCC material, numerous nuclei were encountered with near-normal characteristics. This is confirmed by the extension of the discriminant function scores of the SCC data set into the “normal” range, as seen in Figure 1 . A repeat, test set discriminant run with the remainder of the SCC nuclei resulted in a 93% overall accuracy, and virtually the same classification rates. Applying the discriminant function to the early AK and AK data sets led to the mean scores for all four diagnostic groups listed in Table III . The mean score for the AK samples is close to, and actually slightly lower than, the early AK sample, suggesting that the two diagnostic categories are very similar in their characteristics. Table IV lists the average nuclear abnormalities. The distributions of nuclear abnormality values in the early AK and in the AK samples are practically identical ( Figure 2 ). This similarity is further evident in the lesion signatures, shown in Figure 3 . Also to be noted is the large mode of nuclei from SCC in the normal to near-normal value range. The DF I,1 discriminant function does not lend itself to a diagnostic discrimination between early AK and AK. In an attempt to derive a function of better discriminatory power, a Kruskal Wallis test based on only the early AK and the AK samples was conducted. It did identify discriminating features that were distinctly different from the feature set selected for the discrimination of normal skin from SCC, but the discriminant run resulted in an overall accuracy of only 55%. This is within the random selection range, and the score distributions show an almost complete overlap. Therefore, the visual distinction of early AK from AK is not reflected in the characteristics of the nuclei in these lesions. By setting the threshold on the discriminant function score axis, a subpopulation of nuclei could be identified that expresses the effects of actinic damage. These nuclei were referred to as “sun damaged nuclei”. Applying this function and the threshold to the data sets of nuclei from early AK and from AK a small difference in the proportion of such nuclei can be found ( Table V ). The frequency distribution of these proportions for the different diagnostic categories is given in Table VI . The preceding companion study 12 of actinic sun damage in histopathologically normal skin had led to the development of a discriminant function (denoted as DF I,2 in that study) distinguishing nuclei from skin without visually apparent sun damage, and nuclei from skin with visually apparent sun damage. The discriminant function scores from the DF I,1 function and the average nuclear abnormality were used to plot a progression curve. This is shown in Figure 4 . The ellipses are the 95% confidence ellipses for the case mean values. The early AK and the AK samples are located between normal-appearing and SCC, and again, their distributions overlap completely. The P-index algorithm separated the 21 cases into two groups with statistically significant differences, in an effort to address potential heterogeneity. The two resultant groups contained 15 and 6 entries, respectively. The result is shown in Table V . Figure 5 shows a bivariate plot of the two features relative nuclear area and number of lightly stained pixels in the nucleus. The plot shows the case means for the AK and the SCC samples. Figure 5 suggests that the SCC cases fall into two subgroups of greatly differing progression. One subgroup (SCC 1) is slightly more progressed than AK while the other (SCC 2) is clearly far progressed from AK lesions. Figure 6 shows the nuclear signatures for AK, the less progressed subgroup, SCC 1, and the far progressed subgroup SCC 2. Figure 7 shows representative fields from these groups. Figure 8 shows the distribution of case mean values for the discriminant function DF I,1 for normal-appearing, sun exposed skin, AK, and the subgroups SCC 1 and SCC 2. The increase in total optical density in subgroup SCC 2 is seen in Figure 9 , compared to the total optical density distribution for subgroup SCC 1. The progression of actinic damage is reflected by a number of karyometric features, such as the total optical density (feature #001), relative nuclear area (feature #002), pixel optical density nonuniformity (feature #305), pixel optical density heterogeneity (feature #312), pixel optical density clumping (feature #315), the number of lightly stained pixels (feature #319), and the number of densely stained pixels (feature #321). All of these features undergo a monotonic change, as can be seen in the values provided in Table VI . Included in this listing are values recorded for skin biopsies from the upper inner arm from unpublished and published data from a previous study[12] for a reference with no, or only minimum sun exposure. Figure 10 shows a progression curve based on two chromatin texture features, ranging from upper inner arm biopsies from the prior study to the two subgroups of SCC.  Results The Kruskal Wallis test revealed more than 20 features with statistically highly significant differences, at p < 0.005. Of these features, six were selected, based on their value for the Kruskal Wallis test statistic and the block of features that they belonged to, so that different aspects of the nuclear chromatin distribution were considered. The six features included relative nuclear area and several features representing different aspects of nuclear chromatin texture. These features are listed in Table I, in order of the value of their standardized coefficients in the discriminant function DF I,1. All feature values are given in arbitrary, relative numbers. A discriminant function was derived using the nuclei of half the SCC cases and from all of the normal cases as the training set. Wilks’ Lambda was reduced by the discriminant function to 0.592. The classification rates for nuclei are given in Table II . The overall accuracy was 94.2%. The asymmetry in the classification rate suggests that, in the SCC material, numerous nuclei were encountered with near-normal characteristics. This is confirmed by the extension of the discriminant function scores of the SCC data set into the “normal” range, as seen in Figure 1 . A repeat, test set discriminant run with the remainder of the SCC nuclei resulted in a 93% overall accuracy, and virtually the same classification rates. Applying the discriminant function to the early AK and AK data sets led to the mean scores for all four diagnostic groups listed in Table III . The mean score for the AK samples is close to, and actually slightly lower than, the early AK sample, suggesting that the two diagnostic categories are very similar in their characteristics. Table IV lists the average nuclear abnormalities. The distributions of nuclear abnormality values in the early AK and in the AK samples are practically identical ( Figure 2 ). This similarity is further evident in the lesion signatures, shown in Figure 3 . Also to be noted is the large mode of nuclei from SCC in the normal to near-normal value range. The DF I,1 discriminant function does not lend itself to a diagnostic discrimination between early AK and AK. In an attempt to derive a function of better discriminatory power, a Kruskal Wallis test based on only the early AK and the AK samples was conducted. It did identify discriminating features that were distinctly different from the feature set selected for the discrimination of normal skin from SCC, but the discriminant run resulted in an overall accuracy of only 55%. This is within the random selection range, and the score distributions show an almost complete overlap. Therefore, the visual distinction of early AK from AK is not reflected in the characteristics of the nuclei in these lesions. By setting the threshold on the discriminant function score axis, a subpopulation of nuclei could be identified that expresses the effects of actinic damage. These nuclei were referred to as “sun damaged nuclei”. Applying this function and the threshold to the data sets of nuclei from early AK and from AK a small difference in the proportion of such nuclei can be found ( Table V ). The frequency distribution of these proportions for the different diagnostic categories is given in Table VI . The preceding companion study 12 of actinic sun damage in histopathologically normal skin had led to the development of a discriminant function (denoted as DF I,2 in that study) distinguishing nuclei from skin without visually apparent sun damage, and nuclei from skin with visually apparent sun damage. The discriminant function scores from the DF I,1 function and the average nuclear abnormality were used to plot a progression curve. This is shown in Figure 4 . The ellipses are the 95% confidence ellipses for the case mean values. The early AK and the AK samples are located between normal-appearing and SCC, and again, their distributions overlap completely. The P-index algorithm separated the 21 cases into two groups with statistically significant differences, in an effort to address potential heterogeneity. The two resultant groups contained 15 and 6 entries, respectively. The result is shown in Table V . Figure 5 shows a bivariate plot of the two features relative nuclear area and number of lightly stained pixels in the nucleus. The plot shows the case means for the AK and the SCC samples. Figure 5 suggests that the SCC cases fall into two subgroups of greatly differing progression. One subgroup (SCC 1) is slightly more progressed than AK while the other (SCC 2) is clearly far progressed from AK lesions. Figure 6 shows the nuclear signatures for AK, the less progressed subgroup, SCC 1, and the far progressed subgroup SCC 2. Figure 7 shows representative fields from these groups. Figure 8 shows the distribution of case mean values for the discriminant function DF I,1 for normal-appearing, sun exposed skin, AK, and the subgroups SCC 1 and SCC 2. The increase in total optical density in subgroup SCC 2 is seen in Figure 9 , compared to the total optical density distribution for subgroup SCC 1. The progression of actinic damage is reflected by a number of karyometric features, such as the total optical density (feature #001), relative nuclear area (feature #002), pixel optical density nonuniformity (feature #305), pixel optical density heterogeneity (feature #312), pixel optical density clumping (feature #315), the number of lightly stained pixels (feature #319), and the number of densely stained pixels (feature #321). All of these features undergo a monotonic change, as can be seen in the values provided in Table VI . Included in this listing are values recorded for skin biopsies from the upper inner arm from unpublished and published data from a previous study[12] for a reference with no, or only minimum sun exposure. Figure 10 shows a progression curve based on two chromatin texture features, ranging from upper inner arm biopsies from the prior study to the two subgroups of SCC.  Discussion In a preceding study 12 , changes in the chromatin pattern of nuclei, from minimally sun-exposed and sun-exposed histopathologically normal skin were examined. These changes reflect progressive actinic damage associated with to increased sun exposure. They are interpreted as sun damage since the affected features, in their nature and direction of change, are the same as seen in AK lesions and eventually squamous cell carcinoma. With the progression toward cancer, there is a consistent increase in nuclear size, total optical density, and number of densely stained chromatin particles 9 – 11 , 13 . There is also an increase in the dispersion of many of the characteristics of nuclear chromatin texture. In the current study, emphasis was placed on changes occurring in the progression from early AK to AK and on to squamous cell carcinoma. Karyometry could not establish a significant difference between nuclei from biopsies visually assessed as early AK and AK lesions. This might reflect the observation made on other body sites and in preneoplastic lesions 19 , that changes in the nuclear chromatin pattern precede gross changes in the tissue structure of lesions. The SCC cases appear to fall into two distinct groups. Both are statistically different in their characteristics of the chromatin pattern from AK. One of the two groups (SCC 1) is just slightly more progressed than AK, but the other, smaller group (SCC 2) shows drastically increased characteristics of a progressed lesion. While the distinction between those two groups of SCC cases will have to be confirmed with a much larger data set, this finding may have future prognostic potential. The role of aneuploidy in AK as a risk factor for the development of SCC has been examined by Biesterfeld et al. 20 The H&E stain employed in the current study is not stoechiometric stain, but it clearly reflects the overall ploidy pattern. The total optical density distribution recorded for the more progressed SCC 2 group of cases has its mode at twice the value seen in normal skin, and reaches well into the 5N range as seen in Figure 9 . The numeric characterization of progressive sun damage, from sun exposed skin with no visually apparent sun damage to skin with visually apparent sun damage, and on to AK and SCC supports the concept of a continuous process of carcinogenesis. The distributions of case means with their confidence ellipses do not overlap between AK and SCC, but one has to consider that the histopathologic diagnostic label serves as the gold standard, and that necessarily introduces discreteness. The diagnostic categories in any case are, at best, fuzzy sets with mutual overlap of their tolerance regions; per se they do not rule out a continuous progression.  Discussion In a preceding study 12 , changes in the chromatin pattern of nuclei, from minimally sun-exposed and sun-exposed histopathologically normal skin were examined. These changes reflect progressive actinic damage associated with to increased sun exposure. They are interpreted as sun damage since the affected features, in their nature and direction of change, are the same as seen in AK lesions and eventually squamous cell carcinoma. With the progression toward cancer, there is a consistent increase in nuclear size, total optical density, and number of densely stained chromatin particles 9 – 11 , 13 . There is also an increase in the dispersion of many of the characteristics of nuclear chromatin texture. In the current study, emphasis was placed on changes occurring in the progression from early AK to AK and on to squamous cell carcinoma. Karyometry could not establish a significant difference between nuclei from biopsies visually assessed as early AK and AK lesions. This might reflect the observation made on other body sites and in preneoplastic lesions 19 , that changes in the nuclear chromatin pattern precede gross changes in the tissue structure of lesions. The SCC cases appear to fall into two distinct groups. Both are statistically different in their characteristics of the chromatin pattern from AK. One of the two groups (SCC 1) is just slightly more progressed than AK, but the other, smaller group (SCC 2) shows drastically increased characteristics of a progressed lesion. While the distinction between those two groups of SCC cases will have to be confirmed with a much larger data set, this finding may have future prognostic potential. The role of aneuploidy in AK as a risk factor for the development of SCC has been examined by Biesterfeld et al. 20 The H&E stain employed in the current study is not stoechiometric stain, but it clearly reflects the overall ploidy pattern. The total optical density distribution recorded for the more progressed SCC 2 group of cases has its mode at twice the value seen in normal skin, and reaches well into the 5N range as seen in Figure 9 . The numeric characterization of progressive sun damage, from sun exposed skin with no visually apparent sun damage to skin with visually apparent sun damage, and on to AK and SCC supports the concept of a continuous process of carcinogenesis. The distributions of case means with their confidence ellipses do not overlap between AK and SCC, but one has to consider that the histopathologic diagnostic label serves as the gold standard, and that necessarily introduces discreteness. The diagnostic categories in any case are, at best, fuzzy sets with mutual overlap of their tolerance regions; per se they do not rule out a continuous progression. 