Myelodysplasia and Acute Leukemia as Late Complications of Marrow Failure; Future Prospects for Leukemia Prevention Synopsis Patients with acquired and inherited bone marrow failure syndromes are at risk for the development of clonal neoplasms including AML, MDS, and PNH. This chapter reviews the evidence supporting a model of clonal selection, a paradigm that provides a reasonable expectation that these often fatal complications might be prevented in the future.  The future of leukemia prevention research Basic research Much scientific and financial energy today focuses, for good reason, on developing targeted therapies for leukemic disorders. Taking into account the recent evidence, reviewed above that new clones arise in the context of an unfit cohort of stem cells, it is a perfect time to apply the same systems, molecular, genetic and chemical biology approaches to the problem of clonal evolution with the goal of preventing MDS and AML in patients at risk. Novel agents could, by reducing apoptotic stresses on hematopoietic stem cell pool, lower the selection coefficient and thereby lower the risk of clonal evolution. While this would require matching the screening assay with the particular type of bone marrow failure syndrome, there is sufficient scientific evidence that a stressed stem cell population is a major factor in the evolution of preleukemic clones to warrant such an approach. Use of new preclinical models Reliable murine models now exist and will permit the assessment of new agents. For acquired (autoimmune) aplastic anemia, the infusion of F1 mice with cells from parental lymph nodes results in marrow failure and increases in serum IFN?. The F1 mice respond favorably to both immunosuppressive therapy and neutralizing antibodies to IFN? and TNF?. 57 For Fanconi anemia at least two tractable models of clonal evolution exist now. The first is one in which murine Fanconi cells cultured ex vivo then transplanted into radiated recipients are at risk for clonal evolution 12 a complication prevented by correcting the FA defect. 42 The second model ( Figure 3 ) is one in which clonal evolution can be forced in vitro by exposing Fancc -/- cells to TNF?. 11 These models will allow identification of small molecules that normalize responses to stress factors like TNF?. Indeed, candidate molecular targets (e.g. TNF?, IFN?, reactive oxygen species, p38, and JNK) have already been identified in preclinical models for acquired aplastic anemia 57 and Fanconi anemia 31 . The ultimate goal would be to reduce the impact of unusual environmental stress factors on stem cells without reducing the responses of those cells to normal regulatory factors. Design of clinical prevention trials Clinical trials designed to increase the number of completely responsive patients are warranted because if the goal is achieved the relative risks of clonal evolution will likely decline. However, it is equally important that long-term interventional trials be developed for patients who have already received immunosuppressive therapy for aplastic anemia. The goal of these studies must focus on the goal of reducing late morbidity and mortality including the relative risk of clonal evolution. In light of the limited sensitivity of FISH and Giemsa banded cytogenetic analyses, more sensitive methods now available for quantifying genetic losses and gains ought to be exploited. 58 Identification of potential molecular targets for prevention can also be addressed using systems biology approaches. They would necessarily include attempts to define the emergent phenotypes associated with discrete cytogenetic rearrangements on a genome-wide scale (as has been done with 5q- cells 44 ) and to establish robust target validation analyses for interventional studies using new targeted agents. Marrow Transplantation In both acquired and inherited types of aplastic anemia, novel approaches to transplantation ought to be developed because of the clear superiority of that approach in preventing clonal evolution. Key limiting factors for transplantation are lack of perfectly matched donors, age over 40 years, and the high transplant related mortality for recipients of mismatched marrows, so increasing the safety of transplantation in the mismatch setting is an important objective. To date there has been some improvement in outcomes using alternative donors for aplastic anemia. The improvement has evolved for a variety of reasons including: (1) the use of non-TBI or low dose TBI-based conditioning regimens, 59 - 63 (2) the development of high-resolution histocompatibility typing 64 , 65 and (3) improvements in supportive care. 66 , 67 In the future, for patients ineligible for transplantation three strategic research paths ought to be considered. First, new immunosuppressive agents and combinations should be developed; ones that induce a higher fraction of complete responses. The second investigative opportunity is to identify or develop agents that suppress discrete apoptotic pathways in stem cells ignited by the immune system (or by inherited mutations that reduce their fitness). The third opportunity is to do both things; combine new immunosuppressive agents with agents that lower the coefficient of selection by raising thresholds of adverse stem cell responses to the activated immune system. This approach is no longer simply theoretically appealing. Robust preclinical models now exist 11 that could facilitate this kind of approach and will clearly point the way to agents that ought to be tested first. Modulating responses to TNF TNF? is a key mediator not only in aplastic anemia but in clonal evolution as described above. This cytokine also plays a seminal role in the pathogenesis of other autoimmune diseases and a number of agents targeting the TNF? pathway have been effective in controlling some of them, including rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. 68 - 72 The extensive use of these agents in humans to treat multiple disease states and relatively good tolerance of these drugs makes them attractive options for management of the pro-inflammatory state characteristic of aplastic anemia. While there are little preclinical and clinical data for the use of these agents in the treatment of marrow failure, the evidence supports consideration of these or like agents in the treatment of this disease. In their mouse model of aplastic anemia, Bloom et al describe significant improvement in survival in aplastic mice treated with TNF? blocking antibodies compared to control mice. 57 In addition, Dufour et al have recently reported the successful use of etanercept in a child with refractory aplastic anemia. 73 More importantly, because TNF is a kind of final common pathway, more work needs to be done to identify the factors that underlie TNF overproduction and, in Fanconi anemia stem cells, the characteristic TNF-hypersensitivity of stem cells. Natural modulators of the TNF-response are being identified regularly and some of them not only function as nodal points that determine whether the TNF-response will be cell survival or death 74 but play key roles in stem cell maintenance. 75 If dysfunction of such molecules underlies the pathogenesis of some marrow failure states, they may prove to be ideal targets. Therefore, future approaches do need to focus precisely on molecular pathogenesis in individual patients. Blocking TNF-induced oxidative stress TNF? stimulation leads to a rapid increase in intracellular levels of ROS, with multiple downstream implications ending in activation of cell death (apoptosis and necrosis) pathways. 76 - 79 and in some instances, antioxidants can protect against TNF? induced cytotoxicity, 80 including in hematopoietic cells of Fanconi anemia knockout mice. 31 Some anti-oxidants, like N-acetyl cysteine, are safe to use in humans so use of this and other ROS scavengers may find a place in the future management of TNF?-induced marrow injury and subsequent clonal adaptation. Other cytokine pathways of potential relevance Additional biologic agents targeting other inflammatory cytokines, in particular IL-1, IL-6, IL-15 and TNF superfamily members, in particular LIGHT, BlyS, APRIL, and RANKL, are currently in clinical trials for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases. 81 It is fortunate for the bone marrow failure field that the search for additional agents targeting these pathways is brisk.  Basic research Much scientific and financial energy today focuses, for good reason, on developing targeted therapies for leukemic disorders. Taking into account the recent evidence, reviewed above that new clones arise in the context of an unfit cohort of stem cells, it is a perfect time to apply the same systems, molecular, genetic and chemical biology approaches to the problem of clonal evolution with the goal of preventing MDS and AML in patients at risk. Novel agents could, by reducing apoptotic stresses on hematopoietic stem cell pool, lower the selection coefficient and thereby lower the risk of clonal evolution. While this would require matching the screening assay with the particular type of bone marrow failure syndrome, there is sufficient scientific evidence that a stressed stem cell population is a major factor in the evolution of preleukemic clones to warrant such an approach.  Use of new preclinical models Reliable murine models now exist and will permit the assessment of new agents. For acquired (autoimmune) aplastic anemia, the infusion of F1 mice with cells from parental lymph nodes results in marrow failure and increases in serum IFN?. The F1 mice respond favorably to both immunosuppressive therapy and neutralizing antibodies to IFN? and TNF?. 57 For Fanconi anemia at least two tractable models of clonal evolution exist now. The first is one in which murine Fanconi cells cultured ex vivo then transplanted into radiated recipients are at risk for clonal evolution 12 a complication prevented by correcting the FA defect. 42 The second model ( Figure 3 ) is one in which clonal evolution can be forced in vitro by exposing Fancc -/- cells to TNF?. 11 These models will allow identification of small molecules that normalize responses to stress factors like TNF?. Indeed, candidate molecular targets (e.g. TNF?, IFN?, reactive oxygen species, p38, and JNK) have already been identified in preclinical models for acquired aplastic anemia 57 and Fanconi anemia 31 . The ultimate goal would be to reduce the impact of unusual environmental stress factors on stem cells without reducing the responses of those cells to normal regulatory factors.  Design of clinical prevention trials Clinical trials designed to increase the number of completely responsive patients are warranted because if the goal is achieved the relative risks of clonal evolution will likely decline. However, it is equally important that long-term interventional trials be developed for patients who have already received immunosuppressive therapy for aplastic anemia. The goal of these studies must focus on the goal of reducing late morbidity and mortality including the relative risk of clonal evolution. In light of the limited sensitivity of FISH and Giemsa banded cytogenetic analyses, more sensitive methods now available for quantifying genetic losses and gains ought to be exploited. 58 Identification of potential molecular targets for prevention can also be addressed using systems biology approaches. They would necessarily include attempts to define the emergent phenotypes associated with discrete cytogenetic rearrangements on a genome-wide scale (as has been done with 5q- cells 44 ) and to establish robust target validation analyses for interventional studies using new targeted agents.  Marrow Transplantation In both acquired and inherited types of aplastic anemia, novel approaches to transplantation ought to be developed because of the clear superiority of that approach in preventing clonal evolution. Key limiting factors for transplantation are lack of perfectly matched donors, age over 40 years, and the high transplant related mortality for recipients of mismatched marrows, so increasing the safety of transplantation in the mismatch setting is an important objective. To date there has been some improvement in outcomes using alternative donors for aplastic anemia. The improvement has evolved for a variety of reasons including: (1) the use of non-TBI or low dose TBI-based conditioning regimens, 59 - 63 (2) the development of high-resolution histocompatibility typing 64 , 65 and (3) improvements in supportive care. 66 , 67 In the future, for patients ineligible for transplantation three strategic research paths ought to be considered. First, new immunosuppressive agents and combinations should be developed; ones that induce a higher fraction of complete responses. The second investigative opportunity is to identify or develop agents that suppress discrete apoptotic pathways in stem cells ignited by the immune system (or by inherited mutations that reduce their fitness). The third opportunity is to do both things; combine new immunosuppressive agents with agents that lower the coefficient of selection by raising thresholds of adverse stem cell responses to the activated immune system. This approach is no longer simply theoretically appealing. Robust preclinical models now exist 11 that could facilitate this kind of approach and will clearly point the way to agents that ought to be tested first.  Modulating responses to TNF TNF? is a key mediator not only in aplastic anemia but in clonal evolution as described above. This cytokine also plays a seminal role in the pathogenesis of other autoimmune diseases and a number of agents targeting the TNF? pathway have been effective in controlling some of them, including rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. 68 - 72 The extensive use of these agents in humans to treat multiple disease states and relatively good tolerance of these drugs makes them attractive options for management of the pro-inflammatory state characteristic of aplastic anemia. While there are little preclinical and clinical data for the use of these agents in the treatment of marrow failure, the evidence supports consideration of these or like agents in the treatment of this disease. In their mouse model of aplastic anemia, Bloom et al describe significant improvement in survival in aplastic mice treated with TNF? blocking antibodies compared to control mice. 57 In addition, Dufour et al have recently reported the successful use of etanercept in a child with refractory aplastic anemia. 73 More importantly, because TNF is a kind of final common pathway, more work needs to be done to identify the factors that underlie TNF overproduction and, in Fanconi anemia stem cells, the characteristic TNF-hypersensitivity of stem cells. Natural modulators of the TNF-response are being identified regularly and some of them not only function as nodal points that determine whether the TNF-response will be cell survival or death 74 but play key roles in stem cell maintenance. 75 If dysfunction of such molecules underlies the pathogenesis of some marrow failure states, they may prove to be ideal targets. Therefore, future approaches do need to focus precisely on molecular pathogenesis in individual patients.  Blocking TNF-induced oxidative stress TNF? stimulation leads to a rapid increase in intracellular levels of ROS, with multiple downstream implications ending in activation of cell death (apoptosis and necrosis) pathways. 76 - 79 and in some instances, antioxidants can protect against TNF? induced cytotoxicity, 80 including in hematopoietic cells of Fanconi anemia knockout mice. 31 Some anti-oxidants, like N-acetyl cysteine, are safe to use in humans so use of this and other ROS scavengers may find a place in the future management of TNF?-induced marrow injury and subsequent clonal adaptation.  Other cytokine pathways of potential relevance Additional biologic agents targeting other inflammatory cytokines, in particular IL-1, IL-6, IL-15 and TNF superfamily members, in particular LIGHT, BlyS, APRIL, and RANKL, are currently in clinical trials for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases. 81 It is fortunate for the bone marrow failure field that the search for additional agents targeting these pathways is brisk.  Summary From 10 to 20% of acquired aplastic anemia survivors will develop a clonal disease within the decade following their diagnosis as will up to 40% of children and young adults with some of the congenital marrow failure syndromes. A good amount of recent evidence from the disparate fields of genetics, adaptation, stem cell biology, and hematopoiesis leads inescapably to the conclusion that clonal evolution in aplastic states arises in the context of ongoing stem cell damage through a process of clonal selection and adaptation. In the past two years this theoretical paradigm has been validated in clinical and preclinical models robust enough to inform surveillance strategies and reconsider therapeutic objectives in patients with aplastic states and to support the planning and development of rationally designed leukemia prevention trials in patients with bone marrow failure syndromes.  Figures Figure 1 The fitness landscape for hematopoietic stem cells. A. A popular model of clonal evolution in hematopoietic stem cells proposes that somatic mutations occur stochastically in hematopoietic stem cells and that rare mutations of this kind confer upon the mutant stem cell (red) an inherent proliferative/survival advantage over the non mutant (blue) stem cells. A key principle of this model is that the non mutant stem cells are not unfit, at least at the time the new clone initially evolves. The fitness differences between the evolving clone and the normal stem cell pool can be described as a selection coefficient, here given a value of X. B. An alternative model, one more consistent with studies on clonal evolution in the setting of marrow failure is one in which the entire population of normal hematopoietic stem cells is unfit as a result of environmental stress. A somatic mutant (red) stem cell has developed resistance to the specific environmental stressor so remains fit while the remainder of the stem cell pool has become unfit as a result of environmental stress. In this instance the coefficient for selection of the abnormal clone is identical (X) to that of the model described in A. Figure 2 Clonal evolution in acquired aplastic anemia. In the ground state, somatically mutated stem cells do not expand because the mutation doesn’t confer upon that cell a selective advantage. The coefficient of selection for clonal expansion of that cell is low. If the microenvironment remains normal over time (pathway 1), no clonal expansion occurs because the microenvironment is highly supportive of the majority of stem cells in the pool. That is, no clonal evolution occurs in pathway 1 because the relative fitness differences between the normal and mutant cells are trivial. If, however, T-lymphocytes arise that inhibit the replication, expansion or survival of normal hematopoietic stem cells, and if the somatic mutation confers upon a stem cell the capacity to resist the effect of the T cells (by resisting, for example, the apoptotic effects of suppressive cytokines like TNF? and IFN?), then pathway 2 is most relevant. During the development of aplasia, normal stem cells are suppressed but the mutant one is not and, because the coefficient of selection for that cell is now high (as a result of a decline in fitness of the normal stem cells) it can expand clonally. In some cases the very cytokines that suppress the normal stem cells function to enhance the expansion of the mutant clone. Under continued pressure from the aberrant T cell population, the neoplastic clone preferentially expands over time while the less fit normal HSC are selected against. Not shown in this figure is a theoretical process by which a mutant stem cell arises in a population only after it is exposed to a hostile environment. This would meet strict genetic standards for a truly “adaptive mutation” in which the hostile environment per se induces mutations some of which permit an adaptive response to the environment. In light of the capacity of TNF? to induce oxidative DNA damage, 82 this process is not simply a remote possibility. The coefficient of selection idea would still be relevant here as well because relief of the environmental stress (e.g. fully effective immunotherapy of aplastic anemia) might lower the coefficient in time to prevent an outgrowth of adapted clonal progeny. Finally, in some cases the new clone is able to subordinate the signals from the suppressive population and convert them to growth and survival signals (represented by the dashed line leading from the T-cell in pathway 2). For example, we have noted that in some cases of MDS arising in the context of bone marrow failure, TNF? enhances the proliferation of clonal erythroid and myeloid progenitors, a distinctly aberrant response. Figure 3 Clonal evolution is adaptive. Fanconi anemia group C mutant cells are intrinsically hypersensitive to the apoptotic effects of TNF? yet clonally evolved cells are resistant. 41 , 42 Li et al 11 tested the hypothesis that TNF exposure would change the fitness landscape significantly enough to permit clonal evolution ex vivo. When mutant Fancc stem cells (Kit+, Lin-, Sca1+) were exposed to a combination of hematopoietic growth factors (HGFs) in suspension culture they expanded logarithmically, then, as differentiated cells accumulated cell counts declined. This proliferative capacity of stem cell progeny in vitro was slightly suppressed in Fancc knockout mice, but the slope of the expansion curve did not differ from that of stem cells from wild type mice. However, when the Fancc mutant cells were exposed to both growth factors and TNF? (to which they are intrinsically hypersensitive), there was little expansion at all until late in culture. At this late time point (A) cells that began to proliferate in the face of ongoing TNF? exposure exhibited clonal cytogenetic abnormalities, were TNF resistant, and, when injected into sublethally radiated mice, gave rise to acute myelogenous leukemia. 