Stressor paradigms in developmental studies: What does and does not work to produce mean increases in salivary cortisol Summary The stress response system is comprised of an intricate interconnected network that includes the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenocortical (HPA) axis. The HPA axis maintains the organism’s capacity to respond to acute and prolonged stressors and is a focus of research on the sequelae of stress. Human studies of the HPA system have been facilitated enormously by the development of salivary assays which measure cortisol, the steroid end-product of the HPA axis. The use of salivary cortisol is prevalent in child development stress research. However, in order to measure children’s acute cortisol reactivity to circumscribed stressors, researchers must put children in stressful situations which produce elevated levels of cortisol. Unfortunately, many studies on the cortisol stress response in children use paradigms that fail to produce mean elevations in cortisol. This paper reviews stressor paradigms used with infants, children, and adolescents to guide researchers in selecting effective stressor tasks. A number of different types of stressor paradigms were examined, including: public speaking, negative emotion, relationship disruption/threatening, novelty, handling, and mild pain paradigms. With development, marked changes are evident in the effectiveness of the same stressor paradigm to provoke elevations in cortisol. Several factors appear to be critical in determining whether a stressor paradigm is successful, including the availability of coping resources and the extent to which, in older children, the task threatens the social self. A consideration of these issues is needed to promote the implementation of more effective stressor paradigms in human developmental psychoendocrine research.  2. Tasks designed to elicit negative emotions Beginning with infants as young as six months and extending to work with preadolescent children, researchers have made various attempts to activate the HPA axis by subjecting children to protocols designed to elicit negative emotions (see Table 3 ). Typically, in these studies the protocols are complex, involving multiple tasks. We have sorted the protocols into two groups: those whose predominant aim was to elicit wariness, fearfulness, or anxiety, and those whose principal goal was to provoke anger and frustration. Some protocols included both fear-eliciting and anger-eliciting tasks. In these cases, we sorted the study based on whether the timing of post-task cortisol assessment should have detected more of one versus the other type of provocation. In many cases, the emotion-eliciting tasks were drawn from the Laboratory Temperament Assessment Battery ( Goldsmith and Rothbart, 1992 ; Goldsmith et al., 1999 ). Studies using tasks from this battery are indicated by a superscript in the table. The LabTAB includes brief tasks (3–5 min) designed to elicit specific emotions in young children. In nearly all of the studies with young children, fear- and anger-evocative tasks are preceded and followed by tasks designed either to be calming or to elicit positive emotionality. Furthermore, in all of the studies in this table, if intense negative responses were observed, the task was stopped and the child was comforted. Finally, for infants and toddlers, parents were typically in the room, although often seated behind the child during the provocation tasks. Two primary approaches have been used to elicit shy or fearful behavior from young children in the laboratory setting: allowing the child to come in close contact with either strange, novel objects or events (e.g., scary gorilla mask) or an unfamiliar adult. Despite these varying approaches, in no instance were researchers successful in provoking a mean increase in cortisol ( Table 3 ). Failure to elevate cortisol may be due to several factors, though two are of particular note. Many of the provocations used were mild and elicited significant individual differences in emotional reaction. For example, some children did display anxious, fearful behavior; however, some responded positively, with smiles and approach behaviors. Under such circumstances, we would not expect a main effect of the fear-evocative tasks, but rather cortisol responses that differed by whether the child responded with fear or not. In some instances, cortisol responses were noted that correlated with indices of fearfulness (e.g., freezing, Buss et al., 2004 ), but in other instances, even extremely fearful/anxious children did not show evidence of elevations in cortisol, although their average cortisol levels across the session might be higher than for other children ( Kagan et al., 1987 ). The second issue of particular note in childhood fear/wariness paradigms is that failure to find “reactivity” differences among extremely fearful children may relate to the challenge of detecting such associations when the parent is present. One of the primary functions of the attachment relationship is to provide the infant and young child with a sense of security in the parent’s presence ( Bowlby, 1969 ). Thus, as noted in the study by Nachmias et al. (1996) , elevations in cortisol to a series of threatening events (strange puppets, live clown, and loud mechanical toy) were seen only for a subsample of the children who were both fearful and accompanied by a parent with whom they had an insecure attachment relationship. Unfortunately, most of the studies of cortisol and fearfulness have not evaluated the security of the parent–child attachment relationship. Thus, we are left with the primary finding that fear-evocative stressor tasks are generally ineffective in elevating cortisol, even for the subset of children who appear to be clearly frightened by the task. In summary, the failure of fear provocative tasks to produce significant increases in cortisol levels among children may be related to several key factors: (1) the termination of the task if the child evidences intense negative emotional reactivity, (2) the placement of threatening tasks between pleasant or calming tasks, (3) the poor timing of response samples, (4) the mildness of the provocation, and (5) the presence and availability of the parent. Changing some of these parameters may increase the evocative nature of the paradigm, but such changes are circumscribed by what is ethical with young children. A variety of tasks designed to elicit anger and frustration have been used which attempt to elicit cortisol elevations ( Table 3 ). With infants, the most common task is the still-face paradigm. In this task, mother and infant engage in en face interaction. Then for a period of several minutes, the mother is instructed to maintain a still, non-responsive, and neutral face. Following this, there is a recovery phase when the mother again interacts normally. The standard still-face paradigm involves one non-responsive period, while the extended still-face involves two such periods. Assuming that the infant’s goal is to get the mother to respond, the still-face can be viewed as a goal-blocking task. Likewise, many of the anger/frustration tasks in the LabTAB restrict the child from reaching their goals, including tasks where the child is blocked from playing with attractive toys or tasks in which the child’s movements are briefly restrained. Coding of facial expressions during all of these goal-blocking tasks indicates that anger is the predominant emotion, although other emotions (including sadness) are also evoked ( Goldsmith and Rothbart, 1992 ; Goldsmith et al., 1999 ; Lewis and Ramsay, 2005 ). Several researchers have also used competitive challenges that include periods during which the child is losing to the competitor ( Donzella et al., 2000 ). Notably, most of these paradigms fail to produce mean increases in cortisol in typically developing children. The exception is a paradigm developed by van Goozen et al., (1998 , 2000 ). This complex, 80 min protocol involves several periods during which the participant plays a difficult computer task under time pressure designed so that the participant will perform badly. During these periods, the video-opponent makes derogatory comments about the participant’s performance, and mean increases in cortisol peak at 20–30 min after the mid-point of this frustration-provocation task. Why was this task effective in elevating cortisol when the other anger-frustration tasks were not? Certainly, the task developed by van Goozen and colleagues lasts longer than the tasks used in other studies and this might be an important factor. However, it is notable that the derogatory comments of the video-competitor meant that this was also a social-evaluative stressor ( Dickerson and Kemeny, 2004 ). Thus, while the other tasks may have produced anger in response to goal-blocking, this task also involved shaming. The importance of negative self-evaluative emotions in eliciting cortisol responses was also apparent in the study by Lewis and Ramsay (2002) . In their study, four-year-old children solved a color matching task under time pressure. The task was rigged so that children solved the task on some trials but not on others. Facial expressions, body posture, and verbalizations were coded in response to failure trials. While anger was the predominant emotion, children also expressed shame and embarrassment. Those children who expressed high levels of these negative self-referent emotions exhibited increased cortisol in response to this task. In summary, the literature suggests that stressor paradigms designed to evoke anger are ineffective in elevating cortisol unless the task also evokes negative self-referent emotions. If true, then the anger paradigms most effective in children will be ones that bear similarity to the public speaking paradigms reviewed earlier. Specifically, the child will need to be blocked from or fail at achieving goals in a way that is public or explicitly acknowledged. Additionally, Lewis et al. (1992) have shown that task difficulty may matter. Among three-year-old children, they found that expression of shame in response to failure was much more frequent for easy than difficult tasks. One of the hallmarks of childhood is that there are many things that you are unable to understand or do. However, children have a strong belief, and much confirmatory evidence, that they will be able to do these things when they get older. Thus, failing publicly on a task that even a younger child could do or losing a competition to an age-mate or younger child might be more likely to evoke feelings of shame and thus elevate cortisol, even more so than failing on a very difficult task or losing to an adult (e.g., Donzella et al., 2000 ). These types of tasks might be effective in elevating cortisol by the preschool years, once self-referent emotions have emerged ( Lewis et al., 1989 ).  3. Threats to social relationships Presumably, social evaluative situations activate the HPA axis because they threaten one’s social status which is critical to self-preservation. However, as Taylor et al. (2000) have argued, threats to close and supportive relationships may also activate the stress response system, especially in women. While their tend-and-befriend hypothesis was formulated to explain sex differences in patterns of stress and coping among adults, various iterations of this hypothesis are likely to be important in understanding stress and coping in children and adolescents. We will consider three types of tasks that threaten social relationships: (1) separation tasks that directly challenge the infant and young child’s needs for the presence and availability of the attachment figure, (2) conflict–discussion tasks that threaten to disrupt or disturb important emotional relationships, and (3) peer rejection tasks that activate fears of being socially undesirable. 3.1. Maternal separation The results of maternal separation studies are shown in Table 4 . Before discussing these studies, it is important to note that although maternal separation is a potent stimulus of the HPA axis in non-human primate infants ( Coe et al., 1993 ), separation paradigms in human studies differ markedly from those used in monkey research. Human separation paradigms do not always involve maternal separation, although they typically involve separation from a primary attachment figure. Unless the separation is very brief (i.e., <3 min), the infant or young child is never left alone. Additionally, if the child cries at any point, an adult provides comfort, and if that does not suffice, the child is reunited with their parent. Even separations with a substitute caregiver present are typically brief. The Strange Situation paradigm is most often used and involves a total of 9 min of separation, one 3-min period and one 6-min period. The longest separation period used in any of the studies described in Table 4 was 30 min. Thus, the laboratory separation paradigms that have been used involve relatively short periods of separation under conditions where the child is comforted by an adult or reunited with the parent if he/she becomes distressed. Human laboratory separation paradigms, therefore, would appear to be very mild stressor tasks in their current form. Nonetheless, as shown in Table 4 , separation paradigms do evoke elevations in cortisol, at least for children of certain ages and under certain conditions of separation. Human children begin to resist separation from attachment figures at about six months of age. Four of the five studies of children between six and nine months in Table 4 noted significant increases in cortisol. One of these studies ( Gunnar et al., 1992 ) obtained a significant elevation in cortisol only for the condition in which the baby was given a low responsive rather than high responsive substitute caregiver. Thus, during the latter part of the first year, separation paradigms evoke elevations in cortisol that appear to be moderated by the sensitivity and responsiveness of the person caring for the child in the parent’s absence. Strikingly, by about a year of age, infants do not produce elevations in cortisol to separation even when the substitute caregiver is low responsive ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). By a year of age, infants are mobile and have developed social-initiation skills. Gunnar and Nelson (1994) noted that when faced with a low responsive caregiver, some 13-month-olds took the book the caregiver was reading out of her hands, placed their toys in her lap, and insisted on being picked up. Thus, toddlers compared to babies, are less helpless in the parent’s absence. This may explain why only two of the eight separation studies with children between 12 and 18 months of age ( Table 4 ) reported significant mean increases in cortisol. Several of the studies did note increases in cortisol for insecurely attached children who were also highly fearful ( Spangler and Gorssman, 1993 ; Gunnar et al., 1996b ; Nachmias et al., 1996 ). Insecurely attached infants have histories of less parental responsiveness, and thus might have lower expectations of being able to get a substitute caregiver to respond to them. However, only one study in this table found that insecure attachment alone predicted larger elevations in cortisol to separation ( Spangler and Grossman, 1993 ). In the others studies, the insecurely attached child also had to be highly fearful. The potential importance of child fearfulness is worth comment. On the one hand, this might reflect a greater vulnerability of the HPA axis in children with more reactive fear systems ( Kagan et al., 1987 ). On the other hand, toddlers who are shy or fearful may find it more difficult to use a stranger as a temporary source of comfort ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). The fact that fearful, insecurely attached toddlers continue to exhibit elevations in cortisol to brief separations at an age when most toddlers do not, conforms to the hypothesis that the HPA axis responds under conditions in which the individual lacks the resources to cope with threat ( Levine, 1989 ). By the second year of life, most infants appear to be able to tolerate a few minutes of separation without producing increases in cortisol. However, this does not mean that they can do so during longer separations. Indeed, Ahnert et al. (2004) noted elevations in cortisol for both securely and insecurely attached toddlers following entry into child care. As reviewed by Vermeer and van IJzendoorn (2006) , there are now a number of reports that, on average, cortisol levels rise over the day at child care for children under four years of age. In summary, separation may continue to be a potent stressor for children well beyond the first birthday, but perhaps the very mild forms of separation used in laboratory experiments cease to provoke mean increases in most typically developing children by the second year of life. The child care studies suggest that laboratory paradigms can mimic conditions of placement in a new child care environment. Additionally, researchers can exert experimental control over naturally occurring conditions of starting a new child care, such that we might effectively use separation as a stressor paradigm in children beyond a year of age. 3.2. Conflict–discussion and parent–infant interaction tasks Conflict–discussion tasks have been used in studies of both adult couples ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ; Roisman, 2007 ) and parent–child dyads ( Granger et al., 1994 ) to examine differences in the ways dyads manage arguments. Many of these studies have focused on autonomic reactivity ( Jacobson et al., 1994 ); however, a handful have also included measures of HPA axis reactivity. Among adults, those assessing cortisol have failed to show that simply arguing with one’s spouse activates the HPA axis. Elevations depend both on the target and the partner’s behavior during conflict ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ). In developmental research, conflict–discussion paradigms have been used to reveal patterns in the parent–child relationship associated with child adjustment ( Granic and Lamey, 2002 ). In studies of maltreated children, simulated parent–parent conflicts have also been used to examine emotion regulation and stress reactivity in children ( Atkins et al., 1993 ; Davies et al., 2007 ). Remarkably, of the six studies that examined changes in salivary cortisol levels over the course of either parent–child or simulated parent–parent conflict, none produced significant elevations in cortisol ( Table 5 ). In fact, three of these studies noted significant decreases in cortisol over the conflict period. Consistent with the data on separation paradigms, although many children showed either no change or decreasing patterns of cortisol production, arguments with parents provoked increases in cortisol among a subset of children, particularly those who were socially anxious and attributed their successes and failures to factors out of their control ( Granger et al., 1994 ). It seems likely that, as in the adult work, cortisol increases are evident when the characteristics of the child and the behavior of the partner heighten the child’s expectation that they cannot win the argument and that the parent or others will judge them badly in the process. This hypothesis is supported by the study of Smeekens et al. (2007) . This study with five-year-olds did not involve a parent–child conflict–discussion, but simply involved the parent getting the child to label emotional expressions and then remember a time when he or she had experienced that emotion. Both child characteristics (low ego resilience as rated by a teacher) and maternal behavior during the task (negativity to the child) were needed to provoke a cortisol response. Finally, Table 5 includes parent–infant interaction tasks. There is no particular reason to expect that such tasks would produce increases in cortisol. In fact, to the extent that playing with the parent is enjoyable, decreases in cortisol might be expected. We included these studies in Table 5 , because, as in conflict–discussion paradigms, when infants play with their parent, the parent and child need to negotiate the flow of the interaction. There are often periods of mild conflict when the parent’s and child’s goals for play collide. Such “free play” paradigms are used in developmental research to obtain measures of parent sensitivity and responsiveness to the infant (e.g., Biringen et al., 1998 ). Interacting with an insensitive parent might be stressful to infants and young children, and indeed, there is evidence in Table 5 that this is the case for very young babies. At three months of age, simply playing with an insensitive parent for 15 min elevated the baby’s cortisol levels. For the same infants, this was not the case at six and nine months ( Spangler and Schieche, 1994 ). By these ages, playing with the mother lowered cortisol levels for the infants of high responsive mothers, but had no such effect for infants of low responsive mothers. The importance of adult sensitivity and responsiveness in regulating activity of the HPA axis has already been noted in studies of maternal separation, and it will appear again when we discuss infant cortisol responses to handling and blood draw/inoculation stressors. In summary, conflict–discussion and parent–child interaction tasks do not appear to be successful in elevating cortisol for most children. However, these tasks appear to be useful in identifying the psychosocial processes in parent–child dyads, possibly resulting in the parent–child relationship providing either a less effective buffer of the HPA axis or being the source of evocation of HPA responses.  3. Threats to social relationships Presumably, social evaluative situations activate the HPA axis because they threaten one’s social status which is critical to self-preservation. However, as Taylor et al. (2000) have argued, threats to close and supportive relationships may also activate the stress response system, especially in women. While their tend-and-befriend hypothesis was formulated to explain sex differences in patterns of stress and coping among adults, various iterations of this hypothesis are likely to be important in understanding stress and coping in children and adolescents. We will consider three types of tasks that threaten social relationships: (1) separation tasks that directly challenge the infant and young child’s needs for the presence and availability of the attachment figure, (2) conflict–discussion tasks that threaten to disrupt or disturb important emotional relationships, and (3) peer rejection tasks that activate fears of being socially undesirable. 3.1. Maternal separation The results of maternal separation studies are shown in Table 4 . Before discussing these studies, it is important to note that although maternal separation is a potent stimulus of the HPA axis in non-human primate infants ( Coe et al., 1993 ), separation paradigms in human studies differ markedly from those used in monkey research. Human separation paradigms do not always involve maternal separation, although they typically involve separation from a primary attachment figure. Unless the separation is very brief (i.e., <3 min), the infant or young child is never left alone. Additionally, if the child cries at any point, an adult provides comfort, and if that does not suffice, the child is reunited with their parent. Even separations with a substitute caregiver present are typically brief. The Strange Situation paradigm is most often used and involves a total of 9 min of separation, one 3-min period and one 6-min period. The longest separation period used in any of the studies described in Table 4 was 30 min. Thus, the laboratory separation paradigms that have been used involve relatively short periods of separation under conditions where the child is comforted by an adult or reunited with the parent if he/she becomes distressed. Human laboratory separation paradigms, therefore, would appear to be very mild stressor tasks in their current form. Nonetheless, as shown in Table 4 , separation paradigms do evoke elevations in cortisol, at least for children of certain ages and under certain conditions of separation. Human children begin to resist separation from attachment figures at about six months of age. Four of the five studies of children between six and nine months in Table 4 noted significant increases in cortisol. One of these studies ( Gunnar et al., 1992 ) obtained a significant elevation in cortisol only for the condition in which the baby was given a low responsive rather than high responsive substitute caregiver. Thus, during the latter part of the first year, separation paradigms evoke elevations in cortisol that appear to be moderated by the sensitivity and responsiveness of the person caring for the child in the parent’s absence. Strikingly, by about a year of age, infants do not produce elevations in cortisol to separation even when the substitute caregiver is low responsive ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). By a year of age, infants are mobile and have developed social-initiation skills. Gunnar and Nelson (1994) noted that when faced with a low responsive caregiver, some 13-month-olds took the book the caregiver was reading out of her hands, placed their toys in her lap, and insisted on being picked up. Thus, toddlers compared to babies, are less helpless in the parent’s absence. This may explain why only two of the eight separation studies with children between 12 and 18 months of age ( Table 4 ) reported significant mean increases in cortisol. Several of the studies did note increases in cortisol for insecurely attached children who were also highly fearful ( Spangler and Gorssman, 1993 ; Gunnar et al., 1996b ; Nachmias et al., 1996 ). Insecurely attached infants have histories of less parental responsiveness, and thus might have lower expectations of being able to get a substitute caregiver to respond to them. However, only one study in this table found that insecure attachment alone predicted larger elevations in cortisol to separation ( Spangler and Grossman, 1993 ). In the others studies, the insecurely attached child also had to be highly fearful. The potential importance of child fearfulness is worth comment. On the one hand, this might reflect a greater vulnerability of the HPA axis in children with more reactive fear systems ( Kagan et al., 1987 ). On the other hand, toddlers who are shy or fearful may find it more difficult to use a stranger as a temporary source of comfort ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). The fact that fearful, insecurely attached toddlers continue to exhibit elevations in cortisol to brief separations at an age when most toddlers do not, conforms to the hypothesis that the HPA axis responds under conditions in which the individual lacks the resources to cope with threat ( Levine, 1989 ). By the second year of life, most infants appear to be able to tolerate a few minutes of separation without producing increases in cortisol. However, this does not mean that they can do so during longer separations. Indeed, Ahnert et al. (2004) noted elevations in cortisol for both securely and insecurely attached toddlers following entry into child care. As reviewed by Vermeer and van IJzendoorn (2006) , there are now a number of reports that, on average, cortisol levels rise over the day at child care for children under four years of age. In summary, separation may continue to be a potent stressor for children well beyond the first birthday, but perhaps the very mild forms of separation used in laboratory experiments cease to provoke mean increases in most typically developing children by the second year of life. The child care studies suggest that laboratory paradigms can mimic conditions of placement in a new child care environment. Additionally, researchers can exert experimental control over naturally occurring conditions of starting a new child care, such that we might effectively use separation as a stressor paradigm in children beyond a year of age. 3.2. Conflict–discussion and parent–infant interaction tasks Conflict–discussion tasks have been used in studies of both adult couples ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ; Roisman, 2007 ) and parent–child dyads ( Granger et al., 1994 ) to examine differences in the ways dyads manage arguments. Many of these studies have focused on autonomic reactivity ( Jacobson et al., 1994 ); however, a handful have also included measures of HPA axis reactivity. Among adults, those assessing cortisol have failed to show that simply arguing with one’s spouse activates the HPA axis. Elevations depend both on the target and the partner’s behavior during conflict ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ). In developmental research, conflict–discussion paradigms have been used to reveal patterns in the parent–child relationship associated with child adjustment ( Granic and Lamey, 2002 ). In studies of maltreated children, simulated parent–parent conflicts have also been used to examine emotion regulation and stress reactivity in children ( Atkins et al., 1993 ; Davies et al., 2007 ). Remarkably, of the six studies that examined changes in salivary cortisol levels over the course of either parent–child or simulated parent–parent conflict, none produced significant elevations in cortisol ( Table 5 ). In fact, three of these studies noted significant decreases in cortisol over the conflict period. Consistent with the data on separation paradigms, although many children showed either no change or decreasing patterns of cortisol production, arguments with parents provoked increases in cortisol among a subset of children, particularly those who were socially anxious and attributed their successes and failures to factors out of their control ( Granger et al., 1994 ). It seems likely that, as in the adult work, cortisol increases are evident when the characteristics of the child and the behavior of the partner heighten the child’s expectation that they cannot win the argument and that the parent or others will judge them badly in the process. This hypothesis is supported by the study of Smeekens et al. (2007) . This study with five-year-olds did not involve a parent–child conflict–discussion, but simply involved the parent getting the child to label emotional expressions and then remember a time when he or she had experienced that emotion. Both child characteristics (low ego resilience as rated by a teacher) and maternal behavior during the task (negativity to the child) were needed to provoke a cortisol response. Finally, Table 5 includes parent–infant interaction tasks. There is no particular reason to expect that such tasks would produce increases in cortisol. In fact, to the extent that playing with the parent is enjoyable, decreases in cortisol might be expected. We included these studies in Table 5 , because, as in conflict–discussion paradigms, when infants play with their parent, the parent and child need to negotiate the flow of the interaction. There are often periods of mild conflict when the parent’s and child’s goals for play collide. Such “free play” paradigms are used in developmental research to obtain measures of parent sensitivity and responsiveness to the infant (e.g., Biringen et al., 1998 ). Interacting with an insensitive parent might be stressful to infants and young children, and indeed, there is evidence in Table 5 that this is the case for very young babies. At three months of age, simply playing with an insensitive parent for 15 min elevated the baby’s cortisol levels. For the same infants, this was not the case at six and nine months ( Spangler and Schieche, 1994 ). By these ages, playing with the mother lowered cortisol levels for the infants of high responsive mothers, but had no such effect for infants of low responsive mothers. The importance of adult sensitivity and responsiveness in regulating activity of the HPA axis has already been noted in studies of maternal separation, and it will appear again when we discuss infant cortisol responses to handling and blood draw/inoculation stressors. In summary, conflict–discussion and parent–child interaction tasks do not appear to be successful in elevating cortisol for most children. However, these tasks appear to be useful in identifying the psychosocial processes in parent–child dyads, possibly resulting in the parent–child relationship providing either a less effective buffer of the HPA axis or being the source of evocation of HPA responses.  3.1. Maternal separation The results of maternal separation studies are shown in Table 4 . Before discussing these studies, it is important to note that although maternal separation is a potent stimulus of the HPA axis in non-human primate infants ( Coe et al., 1993 ), separation paradigms in human studies differ markedly from those used in monkey research. Human separation paradigms do not always involve maternal separation, although they typically involve separation from a primary attachment figure. Unless the separation is very brief (i.e., <3 min), the infant or young child is never left alone. Additionally, if the child cries at any point, an adult provides comfort, and if that does not suffice, the child is reunited with their parent. Even separations with a substitute caregiver present are typically brief. The Strange Situation paradigm is most often used and involves a total of 9 min of separation, one 3-min period and one 6-min period. The longest separation period used in any of the studies described in Table 4 was 30 min. Thus, the laboratory separation paradigms that have been used involve relatively short periods of separation under conditions where the child is comforted by an adult or reunited with the parent if he/she becomes distressed. Human laboratory separation paradigms, therefore, would appear to be very mild stressor tasks in their current form. Nonetheless, as shown in Table 4 , separation paradigms do evoke elevations in cortisol, at least for children of certain ages and under certain conditions of separation. Human children begin to resist separation from attachment figures at about six months of age. Four of the five studies of children between six and nine months in Table 4 noted significant increases in cortisol. One of these studies ( Gunnar et al., 1992 ) obtained a significant elevation in cortisol only for the condition in which the baby was given a low responsive rather than high responsive substitute caregiver. Thus, during the latter part of the first year, separation paradigms evoke elevations in cortisol that appear to be moderated by the sensitivity and responsiveness of the person caring for the child in the parent’s absence. Strikingly, by about a year of age, infants do not produce elevations in cortisol to separation even when the substitute caregiver is low responsive ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). By a year of age, infants are mobile and have developed social-initiation skills. Gunnar and Nelson (1994) noted that when faced with a low responsive caregiver, some 13-month-olds took the book the caregiver was reading out of her hands, placed their toys in her lap, and insisted on being picked up. Thus, toddlers compared to babies, are less helpless in the parent’s absence. This may explain why only two of the eight separation studies with children between 12 and 18 months of age ( Table 4 ) reported significant mean increases in cortisol. Several of the studies did note increases in cortisol for insecurely attached children who were also highly fearful ( Spangler and Gorssman, 1993 ; Gunnar et al., 1996b ; Nachmias et al., 1996 ). Insecurely attached infants have histories of less parental responsiveness, and thus might have lower expectations of being able to get a substitute caregiver to respond to them. However, only one study in this table found that insecure attachment alone predicted larger elevations in cortisol to separation ( Spangler and Grossman, 1993 ). In the others studies, the insecurely attached child also had to be highly fearful. The potential importance of child fearfulness is worth comment. On the one hand, this might reflect a greater vulnerability of the HPA axis in children with more reactive fear systems ( Kagan et al., 1987 ). On the other hand, toddlers who are shy or fearful may find it more difficult to use a stranger as a temporary source of comfort ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). The fact that fearful, insecurely attached toddlers continue to exhibit elevations in cortisol to brief separations at an age when most toddlers do not, conforms to the hypothesis that the HPA axis responds under conditions in which the individual lacks the resources to cope with threat ( Levine, 1989 ). By the second year of life, most infants appear to be able to tolerate a few minutes of separation without producing increases in cortisol. However, this does not mean that they can do so during longer separations. Indeed, Ahnert et al. (2004) noted elevations in cortisol for both securely and insecurely attached toddlers following entry into child care. As reviewed by Vermeer and van IJzendoorn (2006) , there are now a number of reports that, on average, cortisol levels rise over the day at child care for children under four years of age. In summary, separation may continue to be a potent stressor for children well beyond the first birthday, but perhaps the very mild forms of separation used in laboratory experiments cease to provoke mean increases in most typically developing children by the second year of life. The child care studies suggest that laboratory paradigms can mimic conditions of placement in a new child care environment. Additionally, researchers can exert experimental control over naturally occurring conditions of starting a new child care, such that we might effectively use separation as a stressor paradigm in children beyond a year of age.  3.1. Maternal separation The results of maternal separation studies are shown in Table 4 . Before discussing these studies, it is important to note that although maternal separation is a potent stimulus of the HPA axis in non-human primate infants ( Coe et al., 1993 ), separation paradigms in human studies differ markedly from those used in monkey research. Human separation paradigms do not always involve maternal separation, although they typically involve separation from a primary attachment figure. Unless the separation is very brief (i.e., <3 min), the infant or young child is never left alone. Additionally, if the child cries at any point, an adult provides comfort, and if that does not suffice, the child is reunited with their parent. Even separations with a substitute caregiver present are typically brief. The Strange Situation paradigm is most often used and involves a total of 9 min of separation, one 3-min period and one 6-min period. The longest separation period used in any of the studies described in Table 4 was 30 min. Thus, the laboratory separation paradigms that have been used involve relatively short periods of separation under conditions where the child is comforted by an adult or reunited with the parent if he/she becomes distressed. Human laboratory separation paradigms, therefore, would appear to be very mild stressor tasks in their current form. Nonetheless, as shown in Table 4 , separation paradigms do evoke elevations in cortisol, at least for children of certain ages and under certain conditions of separation. Human children begin to resist separation from attachment figures at about six months of age. Four of the five studies of children between six and nine months in Table 4 noted significant increases in cortisol. One of these studies ( Gunnar et al., 1992 ) obtained a significant elevation in cortisol only for the condition in which the baby was given a low responsive rather than high responsive substitute caregiver. Thus, during the latter part of the first year, separation paradigms evoke elevations in cortisol that appear to be moderated by the sensitivity and responsiveness of the person caring for the child in the parent’s absence. Strikingly, by about a year of age, infants do not produce elevations in cortisol to separation even when the substitute caregiver is low responsive ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). By a year of age, infants are mobile and have developed social-initiation skills. Gunnar and Nelson (1994) noted that when faced with a low responsive caregiver, some 13-month-olds took the book the caregiver was reading out of her hands, placed their toys in her lap, and insisted on being picked up. Thus, toddlers compared to babies, are less helpless in the parent’s absence. This may explain why only two of the eight separation studies with children between 12 and 18 months of age ( Table 4 ) reported significant mean increases in cortisol. Several of the studies did note increases in cortisol for insecurely attached children who were also highly fearful ( Spangler and Gorssman, 1993 ; Gunnar et al., 1996b ; Nachmias et al., 1996 ). Insecurely attached infants have histories of less parental responsiveness, and thus might have lower expectations of being able to get a substitute caregiver to respond to them. However, only one study in this table found that insecure attachment alone predicted larger elevations in cortisol to separation ( Spangler and Grossman, 1993 ). In the others studies, the insecurely attached child also had to be highly fearful. The potential importance of child fearfulness is worth comment. On the one hand, this might reflect a greater vulnerability of the HPA axis in children with more reactive fear systems ( Kagan et al., 1987 ). On the other hand, toddlers who are shy or fearful may find it more difficult to use a stranger as a temporary source of comfort ( Gunnar and Nelson, 1994 ). The fact that fearful, insecurely attached toddlers continue to exhibit elevations in cortisol to brief separations at an age when most toddlers do not, conforms to the hypothesis that the HPA axis responds under conditions in which the individual lacks the resources to cope with threat ( Levine, 1989 ). By the second year of life, most infants appear to be able to tolerate a few minutes of separation without producing increases in cortisol. However, this does not mean that they can do so during longer separations. Indeed, Ahnert et al. (2004) noted elevations in cortisol for both securely and insecurely attached toddlers following entry into child care. As reviewed by Vermeer and van IJzendoorn (2006) , there are now a number of reports that, on average, cortisol levels rise over the day at child care for children under four years of age. In summary, separation may continue to be a potent stressor for children well beyond the first birthday, but perhaps the very mild forms of separation used in laboratory experiments cease to provoke mean increases in most typically developing children by the second year of life. The child care studies suggest that laboratory paradigms can mimic conditions of placement in a new child care environment. Additionally, researchers can exert experimental control over naturally occurring conditions of starting a new child care, such that we might effectively use separation as a stressor paradigm in children beyond a year of age.  3.2. Conflict–discussion and parent–infant interaction tasks Conflict–discussion tasks have been used in studies of both adult couples ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ; Roisman, 2007 ) and parent–child dyads ( Granger et al., 1994 ) to examine differences in the ways dyads manage arguments. Many of these studies have focused on autonomic reactivity ( Jacobson et al., 1994 ); however, a handful have also included measures of HPA axis reactivity. Among adults, those assessing cortisol have failed to show that simply arguing with one’s spouse activates the HPA axis. Elevations depend both on the target and the partner’s behavior during conflict ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ). In developmental research, conflict–discussion paradigms have been used to reveal patterns in the parent–child relationship associated with child adjustment ( Granic and Lamey, 2002 ). In studies of maltreated children, simulated parent–parent conflicts have also been used to examine emotion regulation and stress reactivity in children ( Atkins et al., 1993 ; Davies et al., 2007 ). Remarkably, of the six studies that examined changes in salivary cortisol levels over the course of either parent–child or simulated parent–parent conflict, none produced significant elevations in cortisol ( Table 5 ). In fact, three of these studies noted significant decreases in cortisol over the conflict period. Consistent with the data on separation paradigms, although many children showed either no change or decreasing patterns of cortisol production, arguments with parents provoked increases in cortisol among a subset of children, particularly those who were socially anxious and attributed their successes and failures to factors out of their control ( Granger et al., 1994 ). It seems likely that, as in the adult work, cortisol increases are evident when the characteristics of the child and the behavior of the partner heighten the child’s expectation that they cannot win the argument and that the parent or others will judge them badly in the process. This hypothesis is supported by the study of Smeekens et al. (2007) . This study with five-year-olds did not involve a parent–child conflict–discussion, but simply involved the parent getting the child to label emotional expressions and then remember a time when he or she had experienced that emotion. Both child characteristics (low ego resilience as rated by a teacher) and maternal behavior during the task (negativity to the child) were needed to provoke a cortisol response. Finally, Table 5 includes parent–infant interaction tasks. There is no particular reason to expect that such tasks would produce increases in cortisol. In fact, to the extent that playing with the parent is enjoyable, decreases in cortisol might be expected. We included these studies in Table 5 , because, as in conflict–discussion paradigms, when infants play with their parent, the parent and child need to negotiate the flow of the interaction. There are often periods of mild conflict when the parent’s and child’s goals for play collide. Such “free play” paradigms are used in developmental research to obtain measures of parent sensitivity and responsiveness to the infant (e.g., Biringen et al., 1998 ). Interacting with an insensitive parent might be stressful to infants and young children, and indeed, there is evidence in Table 5 that this is the case for very young babies. At three months of age, simply playing with an insensitive parent for 15 min elevated the baby’s cortisol levels. For the same infants, this was not the case at six and nine months ( Spangler and Schieche, 1994 ). By these ages, playing with the mother lowered cortisol levels for the infants of high responsive mothers, but had no such effect for infants of low responsive mothers. The importance of adult sensitivity and responsiveness in regulating activity of the HPA axis has already been noted in studies of maternal separation, and it will appear again when we discuss infant cortisol responses to handling and blood draw/inoculation stressors. In summary, conflict–discussion and parent–child interaction tasks do not appear to be successful in elevating cortisol for most children. However, these tasks appear to be useful in identifying the psychosocial processes in parent–child dyads, possibly resulting in the parent–child relationship providing either a less effective buffer of the HPA axis or being the source of evocation of HPA responses.  3.2. Conflict–discussion and parent–infant interaction tasks Conflict–discussion tasks have been used in studies of both adult couples ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ; Roisman, 2007 ) and parent–child dyads ( Granger et al., 1994 ) to examine differences in the ways dyads manage arguments. Many of these studies have focused on autonomic reactivity ( Jacobson et al., 1994 ); however, a handful have also included measures of HPA axis reactivity. Among adults, those assessing cortisol have failed to show that simply arguing with one’s spouse activates the HPA axis. Elevations depend both on the target and the partner’s behavior during conflict ( Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1996 ). In developmental research, conflict–discussion paradigms have been used to reveal patterns in the parent–child relationship associated with child adjustment ( Granic and Lamey, 2002 ). In studies of maltreated children, simulated parent–parent conflicts have also been used to examine emotion regulation and stress reactivity in children ( Atkins et al., 1993 ; Davies et al., 2007 ). Remarkably, of the six studies that examined changes in salivary cortisol levels over the course of either parent–child or simulated parent–parent conflict, none produced significant elevations in cortisol ( Table 5 ). In fact, three of these studies noted significant decreases in cortisol over the conflict period. Consistent with the data on separation paradigms, although many children showed either no change or decreasing patterns of cortisol production, arguments with parents provoked increases in cortisol among a subset of children, particularly those who were socially anxious and attributed their successes and failures to factors out of their control ( Granger et al., 1994 ). It seems likely that, as in the adult work, cortisol increases are evident when the characteristics of the child and the behavior of the partner heighten the child’s expectation that they cannot win the argument and that the parent or others will judge them badly in the process. This hypothesis is supported by the study of Smeekens et al. (2007) . This study with five-year-olds did not involve a parent–child conflict–discussion, but simply involved the parent getting the child to label emotional expressions and then remember a time when he or she had experienced that emotion. Both child characteristics (low ego resilience as rated by a teacher) and maternal behavior during the task (negativity to the child) were needed to provoke a cortisol response. Finally, Table 5 includes parent–infant interaction tasks. There is no particular reason to expect that such tasks would produce increases in cortisol. In fact, to the extent that playing with the parent is enjoyable, decreases in cortisol might be expected. We included these studies in Table 5 , because, as in conflict–discussion paradigms, when infants play with their parent, the parent and child need to negotiate the flow of the interaction. There are often periods of mild conflict when the parent’s and child’s goals for play collide. Such “free play” paradigms are used in developmental research to obtain measures of parent sensitivity and responsiveness to the infant (e.g., Biringen et al., 1998 ). Interacting with an insensitive parent might be stressful to infants and young children, and indeed, there is evidence in Table 5 that this is the case for very young babies. At three months of age, simply playing with an insensitive parent for 15 min elevated the baby’s cortisol levels. For the same infants, this was not the case at six and nine months ( Spangler and Schieche, 1994 ). By these ages, playing with the mother lowered cortisol levels for the infants of high responsive mothers, but had no such effect for infants of low responsive mothers. The importance of adult sensitivity and responsiveness in regulating activity of the HPA axis has already been noted in studies of maternal separation, and it will appear again when we discuss infant cortisol responses to handling and blood draw/inoculation stressors. In summary, conflict–discussion and parent–child interaction tasks do not appear to be successful in elevating cortisol for most children. However, these tasks appear to be useful in identifying the psychosocial processes in parent–child dyads, possibly resulting in the parent–child relationship providing either a less effective buffer of the HPA axis or being the source of evocation of HPA responses.  4. Peer social stress We found only three studies using either peer entry or social rejection tasks to elevate cortisol, which are summarized in Table 6 . Stansbury and Harris (2000) found that 4-year-old but not 3-year-old children showed an increase in cortisol to a 5 min peer entry stressor. This peer entry task was designed to make it difficult for the child to enter the group. The peers, all children from the same laboratory preschool, were seated together working on a project when the target child was shown into the room. The adult did not introduce the target child to the children and there was nothing else in the room for the target child to do. Interestingly, Brotman et al. (2007) did not find similar elevations in cortisol in the same age group. The peer entry task used by Brotman et al. (2007) simply required the target child to play in a preschool classroom of same-aged, unfamiliar peers during the class’s free play period. While there were many children with whom the target child could try to play, there were also many activities available that did not require peer interaction. Thus, it is likely that the latter task involved fewer peer rejection cues than did the former one, as well as greater opportunities for the implementation of various coping strategies. The differences between these studies suggest that peer-rejection tasks may be effective even for young children as long as the cues of rejection are made highly salient to the child and the child interprets the cues as indicative of rejection. The Yale Interpersonal Stressor task for Children (YIPS-C), designed by Stroud et al. (2009) is the only social rejection paradigm so far used to elevate cortisol in children and adolescents. The YIPS-C involves having the participant interact with two unfamiliar, similar-age, same-sex confederates. Using both verbal and nonverbal techniques, the confederates gradually exclude the participant from a conversation by bonding with each other. This task is based on a paradigm previously used with adults (YIPS; Stroud et al., 2002 ). In the adult study, women showed a stronger cortisol response to the peer rejection task than did men. In the child study, adolescents (13+ years) showed more marked sympathetic responses to the rejection paradigm than did children (7–13 years) and, overall, cortisol levels were higher among the adolescents ( Table 6 ; Stroud et al., 2009 ). However, in neither age group did the paradigm produce increases in cortisol. One reason may be that, unlike in the adult study, the adolescent’s cortisol levels were high in anticipation of the peer task, potentially masking any elevations associated with the paradigm. This was true even though the participants were given time to adapt after entering the laboratory and had, in fact, come to the laboratory on a separate day in order to reduce potential cortisol responses to novelty. Eliminating anticipatory cortisol responses is a significant challenge in developmental research, as will be discussed below.  4. Peer social stress We found only three studies using either peer entry or social rejection tasks to elevate cortisol, which are summarized in Table 6 . Stansbury and Harris (2000) found that 4-year-old but not 3-year-old children showed an increase in cortisol to a 5 min peer entry stressor. This peer entry task was designed to make it difficult for the child to enter the group. The peers, all children from the same laboratory preschool, were seated together working on a project when the target child was shown into the room. The adult did not introduce the target child to the children and there was nothing else in the room for the target child to do. Interestingly, Brotman et al. (2007) did not find similar elevations in cortisol in the same age group. The peer entry task used by Brotman et al. (2007) simply required the target child to play in a preschool classroom of same-aged, unfamiliar peers during the class’s free play period. While there were many children with whom the target child could try to play, there were also many activities available that did not require peer interaction. Thus, it is likely that the latter task involved fewer peer rejection cues than did the former one, as well as greater opportunities for the implementation of various coping strategies. The differences between these studies suggest that peer-rejection tasks may be effective even for young children as long as the cues of rejection are made highly salient to the child and the child interprets the cues as indicative of rejection. The Yale Interpersonal Stressor task for Children (YIPS-C), designed by Stroud et al. (2009) is the only social rejection paradigm so far used to elevate cortisol in children and adolescents. The YIPS-C involves having the participant interact with two unfamiliar, similar-age, same-sex confederates. Using both verbal and nonverbal techniques, the confederates gradually exclude the participant from a conversation by bonding with each other. This task is based on a paradigm previously used with adults (YIPS; Stroud et al., 2002 ). In the adult study, women showed a stronger cortisol response to the peer rejection task than did men. In the child study, adolescents (13+ years) showed more marked sympathetic responses to the rejection paradigm than did children (7–13 years) and, overall, cortisol levels were higher among the adolescents ( Table 6 ; Stroud et al., 2009 ). However, in neither age group did the paradigm produce increases in cortisol. One reason may be that, unlike in the adult study, the adolescent’s cortisol levels were high in anticipation of the peer task, potentially masking any elevations associated with the paradigm. This was true even though the participants were given time to adapt after entering the laboratory and had, in fact, come to the laboratory on a separate day in order to reduce potential cortisol responses to novelty. Eliminating anticipatory cortisol responses is a significant challenge in developmental research, as will be discussed below.  5. Exposure to novel stimulation and handling In animals, being placed in a novel chamber or even having the bedding changed in the home cage can produce significant activation of the HPA axis ( Hennessy and Levine, 1978 ). It is also well known that handling can elevate corticoids ( Gunnar et al., 1981 ; Levine and Wiener, 1988 ). The top section of Table 7 describes cortisol responses to handling stressors in infants between birth and six months, the age period during which this has been examined. Notably, for infants three months of age and younger, handling is an effective stressor. This appears to be true whether the handling involves a brief physical examination, developmental assessments (e.g., Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale, NBAS), or events common in the experience of babies such as being taken from the bath or having a diaper changed. After three months, these types of handling experiences cease to produce mean increases in cortisol. Thus, there appears to be a marked developmental change in the reactivity and regulation of the HPA axis to handling around 3–4 months of age, a point we have made previously ( Gunnar et al., 1996a ; Larson et al., 1998 ). The bottom half of Table 7 describes studies involving novel stimulation for most young children, including being taken swimming for the first time, going in an MRI machine, and an ERP/EEG assessment. Strikingly, none of these experiences elevated cortisol, even among children as young as one year of age. In fact, pre-test to post-test decreases in cortisol were noted in several of the studies. Researchers argued that cortisol decreased over the assessment because it was elevated in anticipation of the task. While this might be reasonable for studies involving older children, this explanation seems less likely for the studies involving infants, including the study involving infants being taken swimming for the first time. These babies experienced a multitude of novel stimulation in the swim class environment (e.g., the smell of chlorine, the sight of the swimming pool). There is no evidence that their pre-swim cortisol levels were elevated as they were comparable to pre-test levels of a comparison group who merely came to the laboratory and played with toys in their mother’s presence. Thus, in the infant swim study, true decreases in cortisol to the assessment paradigm were observed. In addition to novelty activating the HPA axis in animals, there is evidence that first exposures to emotionally challenging situations provoke elevations in cortisol among human adults as well ( Rose, 1980 ); thus, it is not clear why children did not respond to these novel, first-time experiences. One possibility is that in all instances the adults present, including the children’s parents, were attempting to make the experience pleasant and safe. As we saw for separation paradigms, the supportiveness of adults provides a potent stress buffer for children.  5. Exposure to novel stimulation and handling In animals, being placed in a novel chamber or even having the bedding changed in the home cage can produce significant activation of the HPA axis ( Hennessy and Levine, 1978 ). It is also well known that handling can elevate corticoids ( Gunnar et al., 1981 ; Levine and Wiener, 1988 ). The top section of Table 7 describes cortisol responses to handling stressors in infants between birth and six months, the age period during which this has been examined. Notably, for infants three months of age and younger, handling is an effective stressor. This appears to be true whether the handling involves a brief physical examination, developmental assessments (e.g., Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale, NBAS), or events common in the experience of babies such as being taken from the bath or having a diaper changed. After three months, these types of handling experiences cease to produce mean increases in cortisol. Thus, there appears to be a marked developmental change in the reactivity and regulation of the HPA axis to handling around 3–4 months of age, a point we have made previously ( Gunnar et al., 1996a ; Larson et al., 1998 ). The bottom half of Table 7 describes studies involving novel stimulation for most young children, including being taken swimming for the first time, going in an MRI machine, and an ERP/EEG assessment. Strikingly, none of these experiences elevated cortisol, even among children as young as one year of age. In fact, pre-test to post-test decreases in cortisol were noted in several of the studies. Researchers argued that cortisol decreased over the assessment because it was elevated in anticipation of the task. While this might be reasonable for studies involving older children, this explanation seems less likely for the studies involving infants, including the study involving infants being taken swimming for the first time. These babies experienced a multitude of novel stimulation in the swim class environment (e.g., the smell of chlorine, the sight of the swimming pool). There is no evidence that their pre-swim cortisol levels were elevated as they were comparable to pre-test levels of a comparison group who merely came to the laboratory and played with toys in their mother’s presence. Thus, in the infant swim study, true decreases in cortisol to the assessment paradigm were observed. In addition to novelty activating the HPA axis in animals, there is evidence that first exposures to emotionally challenging situations provoke elevations in cortisol among human adults as well ( Rose, 1980 ); thus, it is not clear why children did not respond to these novel, first-time experiences. One possibility is that in all instances the adults present, including the children’s parents, were attempting to make the experience pleasant and safe. As we saw for separation paradigms, the supportiveness of adults provides a potent stress buffer for children.  6. Blood draws and inoculations Blood draws and inoculations are the last type of stressor task we examined ( Table 8 ). These mild pain stressors have been used extensively to examine reactivity of the HPA axis in infants and for good reason. Up through six months of age, blood draws (typically heel lances) and inoculations provoke significant mean elevations in cortisol. Blood draws and inoculations become less reliable stressors by the second year of life. Indeed, only one of the seven studies of children between 13 months and 17 years reported mean increases in cortisol to blood draws or inoculations, and a study by Felt et al. (2000) may shed light as to why this is the case. Their study involved two groups of parents: those who were given brief written instructions on how they could support their infants during the inoculation procedures and those who were given no instructions. The instructions described ways of touching, holding and comforting the infants while they were being given their shots. The study showed that the 2–24-month-old infants of parents given these instructions showed no increases in cortisol to the inoculation procedures. Studies of the impact of inoculations and blood draws on HPA axis activity differ in the instructions given to parents. In some, parents are allowed to comfort the child throughout ( Gunnar et al., 1996a , b ), while in other studies, parents are told to withhold comforting for 30 s following inoculations in order to obtain measures of child distress that are not confounded with parental behavior ( Lewis and Ramsay, 1995a ). It is possible that this is why at 18 months, Lewis and Ramsay (1995b) observed an elevation in cortisol when others studying infants of comparable ages did not. Regardless, by about one year of age, there is little evidence that either blood draws or inoculations activate the HPA axis in children and adolescents. As with the separation paradigms, it seems likely that by this age children have the social skills needed to elicit the comforting and support they need from their attachment figure, unless the parent is specifically instructed to withhold that support.  6. Blood draws and inoculations Blood draws and inoculations are the last type of stressor task we examined ( Table 8 ). These mild pain stressors have been used extensively to examine reactivity of the HPA axis in infants and for good reason. Up through six months of age, blood draws (typically heel lances) and inoculations provoke significant mean elevations in cortisol. Blood draws and inoculations become less reliable stressors by the second year of life. Indeed, only one of the seven studies of children between 13 months and 17 years reported mean increases in cortisol to blood draws or inoculations, and a study by Felt et al. (2000) may shed light as to why this is the case. Their study involved two groups of parents: those who were given brief written instructions on how they could support their infants during the inoculation procedures and those who were given no instructions. The instructions described ways of touching, holding and comforting the infants while they were being given their shots. The study showed that the 2–24-month-old infants of parents given these instructions showed no increases in cortisol to the inoculation procedures. Studies of the impact of inoculations and blood draws on HPA axis activity differ in the instructions given to parents. In some, parents are allowed to comfort the child throughout ( Gunnar et al., 1996a , b ), while in other studies, parents are told to withhold comforting for 30 s following inoculations in order to obtain measures of child distress that are not confounded with parental behavior ( Lewis and Ramsay, 1995a ). It is possible that this is why at 18 months, Lewis and Ramsay (1995b) observed an elevation in cortisol when others studying infants of comparable ages did not. Regardless, by about one year of age, there is little evidence that either blood draws or inoculations activate the HPA axis in children and adolescents. As with the separation paradigms, it seems likely that by this age children have the social skills needed to elicit the comforting and support they need from their attachment figure, unless the parent is specifically instructed to withhold that support.  7. Issues, conclusions and future directions 7.1. Achieving baseline pre-test levels In stressor studies with adults, it is common to have the participants in the laboratory engaging in non-stressful activities for a fairly long period before beginning the stressor task ( Kirschbaum et al., 1993 ). These periods are important in achieving low pre-test cortisol levels and clear evidence of response to the stressor task. Many of the studies of older children and adolescents have included these periods of relaxation prior to the onset of the stressor task ( Buske-Kirschbaum et al., 1997 ; van Goozen et al., 2000 ); however, this is not always the case. Indeed, in a number of studies, researchers have ended up using the first cortisol sample as the index of a stress response as it is the highest level assessed ( Ellis et al., 2005 ). While initial values do often correlate as expected with measures of personality, temperament, or behavior problems, it would be better to add relaxation or adaptation periods to stressor paradigms in order to ensure that the stressor task is imposed after the HPA axis has recovered from anticipatory elevations. When activity of the HPA axis is only one of many foci of investigation, it is difficult to impose such stringent criteria. Furthermore, when researchers are studying very young children who cannot tolerate long laboratory sessions, using the first 45 min to an hour to allow the child’s HPA system to adapt to the laboratory may push the limits of both the experimenter’s and child’s tolerance. Nonetheless, we need to be much more careful about adaptation periods if we are to effectively study cortisol stress responses under controlled laboratory conditions in children. 7.2. Intensity of fear evocative events For ethical reasons, when researchers study fear-eliciting events in infants and young children, tasks are designed to produce fear or wariness for only a few moments and are terminated if they provoke an intense fear response. Parents are typically present and, even when not, ethical standards require the experimenters to be responsive to the child’s bids for support. While such mild evocation may activate the HPA axis among very young infants, with development, it is likely that most children develop the coping skills needed to manage such situations without mounting an HPA stress response. Given the ethical constraints of laboratory studies of fearfulness in young children, it seems very likely that we will never be able to develop laboratory fear-evocative paradigms which will produce mean increases in cortisol. These paradigms may still be very useful in psychoneuroendocrine studies as they may reveal individual differences in reactivity of the HPA axis or identify subgroups of children more vulnerable to heightened or prolonged HPA activation. However, if tasks are to be used successfully, we need assess not only individual differences in fearful behavior, but also differences in the child’s access to personal, social, and situational resources that impact the child’s ability to cope with the fear-evocative event. 7.3. Supportive care from parents and other adults One message from this review of stressor paradigms is that the supportiveness of adults is a very critical factor in determining cortisol responses to a range of stressors in infants and children. These effects are apparent as early as they have been examined, as indexed by Spangler et al. (1994) study of parent–infant play interactions. The history of support, as reflected in the security of the parent–child attachment relationship, plays a critical role in determining whether fearful infants exhibit cortisol increases by the second year of life. One reason why it may become more difficult to provoke elevations in cortisol to many stressors with development is that children become increasingly capable of eliciting the adult support they need from the child-friendly researchers who populate research laboratories. When that support is threatened, particularly in children who may hold low expectations of their own social potency, even innocuous situations such as talking about past emotion-eliciting experiences, can produce elevations in cortisol ( Smeekens et al., 2007 ). The power of social support in buffering the HPA axis in young children leads to the hypothesis that the most critical element of stress-evocative situations for young children will involve threats to their adult support systems. While we have focused most of our attention on developing stressor paradigms that threaten the child, perhaps with young children we should refocus our attention on developing paradigms that threaten their main sources of security: specifically, their primary attachment figure(s). Figuring out how to do this in a way that is ethical is challenging to consider; however, there are developmental studies in which the child observes the parent being verbally attacked by an experimenter, and these have been used effectively to study emotions and coping in maltreated children ( Cummings et al., 1994 ). Thus, there may be ways to create ethical “threaten the child’s primary source of security” paradigms to study HPA stress reactivity in children. 7.4. Individual differences Although the current review has evaluated existing stress paradigms and their ability to elicit mean increases in salivary cortisol in samples of children of varying ages, this analysis has also revealed sources of individual differences that might relate to varying patterns of HPA responsivity, including pubertal status, sex, age, behavioral approach vs. inhibition, utilization of available coping resources, and the quality of the parent–child relationship. These differences may be important in identifying subgroups of children who might display sensitivity to cortisol elevations relative to their peers, which may perhaps map onto differing patterns of risk or resilience with respect to (e.g.) the development of psychopathology.  7.1. Achieving baseline pre-test levels In stressor studies with adults, it is common to have the participants in the laboratory engaging in non-stressful activities for a fairly long period before beginning the stressor task ( Kirschbaum et al., 1993 ). These periods are important in achieving low pre-test cortisol levels and clear evidence of response to the stressor task. Many of the studies of older children and adolescents have included these periods of relaxation prior to the onset of the stressor task ( Buske-Kirschbaum et al., 1997 ; van Goozen et al., 2000 ); however, this is not always the case. Indeed, in a number of studies, researchers have ended up using the first cortisol sample as the index of a stress response as it is the highest level assessed ( Ellis et al., 2005 ). While initial values do often correlate as expected with measures of personality, temperament, or behavior problems, it would be better to add relaxation or adaptation periods to stressor paradigms in order to ensure that the stressor task is imposed after the HPA axis has recovered from anticipatory elevations. When activity of the HPA axis is only one of many foci of investigation, it is difficult to impose such stringent criteria. Furthermore, when researchers are studying very young children who cannot tolerate long laboratory sessions, using the first 45 min to an hour to allow the child’s HPA system to adapt to the laboratory may push the limits of both the experimenter’s and child’s tolerance. Nonetheless, we need to be much more careful about adaptation periods if we are to effectively study cortisol stress responses under controlled laboratory conditions in children.  7.2. Intensity of fear evocative events For ethical reasons, when researchers study fear-eliciting events in infants and young children, tasks are designed to produce fear or wariness for only a few moments and are terminated if they provoke an intense fear response. Parents are typically present and, even when not, ethical standards require the experimenters to be responsive to the child’s bids for support. While such mild evocation may activate the HPA axis among very young infants, with development, it is likely that most children develop the coping skills needed to manage such situations without mounting an HPA stress response. Given the ethical constraints of laboratory studies of fearfulness in young children, it seems very likely that we will never be able to develop laboratory fear-evocative paradigms which will produce mean increases in cortisol. These paradigms may still be very useful in psychoneuroendocrine studies as they may reveal individual differences in reactivity of the HPA axis or identify subgroups of children more vulnerable to heightened or prolonged HPA activation. However, if tasks are to be used successfully, we need assess not only individual differences in fearful behavior, but also differences in the child’s access to personal, social, and situational resources that impact the child’s ability to cope with the fear-evocative event.  7.3. Supportive care from parents and other adults One message from this review of stressor paradigms is that the supportiveness of adults is a very critical factor in determining cortisol responses to a range of stressors in infants and children. These effects are apparent as early as they have been examined, as indexed by Spangler et al. (1994) study of parent–infant play interactions. The history of support, as reflected in the security of the parent–child attachment relationship, plays a critical role in determining whether fearful infants exhibit cortisol increases by the second year of life. One reason why it may become more difficult to provoke elevations in cortisol to many stressors with development is that children become increasingly capable of eliciting the adult support they need from the child-friendly researchers who populate research laboratories. When that support is threatened, particularly in children who may hold low expectations of their own social potency, even innocuous situations such as talking about past emotion-eliciting experiences, can produce elevations in cortisol ( Smeekens et al., 2007 ). The power of social support in buffering the HPA axis in young children leads to the hypothesis that the most critical element of stress-evocative situations for young children will involve threats to their adult support systems. While we have focused most of our attention on developing stressor paradigms that threaten the child, perhaps with young children we should refocus our attention on developing paradigms that threaten their main sources of security: specifically, their primary attachment figure(s). Figuring out how to do this in a way that is ethical is challenging to consider; however, there are developmental studies in which the child observes the parent being verbally attacked by an experimenter, and these have been used effectively to study emotions and coping in maltreated children ( Cummings et al., 1994 ). Thus, there may be ways to create ethical “threaten the child’s primary source of security” paradigms to study HPA stress reactivity in children.  7.4. Individual differences Although the current review has evaluated existing stress paradigms and their ability to elicit mean increases in salivary cortisol in samples of children of varying ages, this analysis has also revealed sources of individual differences that might relate to varying patterns of HPA responsivity, including pubertal status, sex, age, behavioral approach vs. inhibition, utilization of available coping resources, and the quality of the parent–child relationship. These differences may be important in identifying subgroups of children who might display sensitivity to cortisol elevations relative to their peers, which may perhaps map onto differing patterns of risk or resilience with respect to (e.g.) the development of psychopathology.  8. Conclusions What this review should make very clear is that just because a paradigm appears stressful, it might not effectively produce mean increases in cortisol in children. With the exception of tasks that clearly threaten the social self, there is little evidence that researchers have carefully crafted and tested their paradigms to be sure that they are effective in activating the HPA axis. Additionally, it is rare to find that the paradigm has been examined against conditions in which the same or other children experience conditions that are comparable, but do not involve the stressor tasks. Thus, in many, but certainly not all, of the work on stress reactivity with children, we are trying to move forward without doing the basic studies to show that the stressor paradigms we employ actually produce a stress response. This review should make it clear that we very much need this basic work, especially in research on stress reactivity in children between about one and seven years. In lieu of some concerted effort to develop reliable stressor tasks for this age range, we may be left with a broad span of development during which we cannot really assess reactivity of the axis in typically developing children. Thus, it may be challenging to understand how reactivity is altered either by early adverse experiences or by a mental disorder. As it is likely that the neural systems regulating the development of HPA reactions to stressors are being shaped by an interaction of genes and experience over these early years, lack of ethical, appropriate, and effective stressor paradigms for use in this age group is particularly troubling.  Tables Table 1 Successful cortisol reactivity studies by age group. Age group Number of studies/tests Percentage showing mean increase in cortisol ?3 months 23 91 4–9 months 20 55 12–24 months 15 20 2–5 years 11 9 6–11 years 18 28 12–18 years 14 42 Table 2 Public speaking tasks. First author Date Stressor Age (years) Sex N Sampling times ?Cortisol Schmidt 1999 Anticipation of self disclosure 7 Both 36 0, +20, +36 ns Jones 2006 TSST-C 7–9 Both 140 7× Increase Jansen 2000 TSST-C modified 9 Both 12 7× Increase Gunnar 2009 a TSST-C 9 Both 22 6× Increase Gunnar 2009 a TSST-C 11 Both 18 6× Decrease Stroud 2009 a TSST-C modified 7–12 Both 24 6× ns Buske-Kirschbaum 2003 TSST-C 7–12 Both 18 10× Increase Buske-Kirschbaum 1997 TSST-C 8–14 Both 16 10× Increase Dorn 2003 TSST-C 8–16 Both 14 6× ns Gordis 2006 TSST-C modified 10–14 Both 32 6× Increase Klimes-Dougan 2001 TSST-C modified 11–17 Both 71 0, +20, +40 Increase b Gunnar 2009 a TSST-C 13 Both 22 6× Increase c Gunnar 2009 a TSST-C 15 Both 21 6× Increase Martel 1999 TSST-C modified 15 Girls 18 0, +10 Decrease d Popma 2006 TSST-C modified 12–17 Boys 30 7× Increase Stroud 2009 a TSST-C modified 13–17 Both 27 6× Increase Zonnevylle-Bender 2005 TSST-C modified 14–18 Girls 22 8× Increase a Age groups appear separately in this table or children were also exposed to other stressor tasks described in other tables. b No increase for 11–13-year-old boys. c No increase for 13-year-old boys. d Pretest (time 0) elevated over home baseline. Table 3 Paradigms designed to elicit negative emotions. First author Date Stressor Age Sex N Sampling times ?Cortisol Fear/behavioral inhibition paradigms ?Buss 2003 Stranger approach a 6 m Both 41 0, +20 ns ?Nachmias 1996 b Strange events/people 18 m Both 77 0, +30 ns c ?Goldberg 2003 b Strange events/people 18 m Both 27 0, +20, +40 ns ?Ouellet-Morin 2008 Strange events/people 19 m Both 418 0, +20 ns ?Buss 2004 Risk room/stranger approach a 2 y Both 58 Pre/Pst visit ns ?Sethre-Hofstad 2002 High balance beam 2–4 y Both 64 0, +30 ns ?Zimmerman 2004 Stranger approach a 3 y Both 53 0, +20, +35 ns ?Kagan 1987 Strange events/people 5.5 y Both 48 0, +90 ns ?Quas 2004 Strange events, intense sensations 4–6 y Both 63 0, +50 ns ?Battaglia 1997 Scary movie clips 4–8 y Both 16 0, +15 ns ?Ashman 2002 Air-blast startle 7–8 y Both 29 0, +20–30 ns ?Kagan 1988 Strange events/people 7.5 y Both 41 Pre, mid, end ns ?Boyce 2006 Strange events/intense sensations 7 y Both 120 4× Decrease Anger/frustration paradigms ?Lewis 2005 Extinction of reinforcing action 4 m Both 56 0, +20 ns ?Azar 2007 Arm restraint 4 m Both 218 0, +20 ns ?Lewis 2005 Standard still face paradigm 6 m Both 84 0, +20 ns ?Hayley 2003 Repeated still face paradigm 6 m Both 43 0, +30 Increase ?Blair 2006 Frustration tasks a 6 m Both 988 0, +20, +40 Increase ?Luby 2003 Frustration tasks a 3–5.6 y Both 57 0, +30 ns ?Lewis 2002 Rigged failure tasks 4 y Both 53 0, +20 ns d ?Donzella 2000 Rigged competition 3–5 y Both 61 0, +40 ns e ?van Goozen 1998 Competition + insults 8–11 y Both 31 6× Increase ?van Goozen 2000 Competition + insults 8–12 y Both 38 9× Increase a Tasks from the Laboratory Temperament Assessment Battery (LabTAB). b Age groups appear separately in this table or children were also exposed to other stressor tasks described in other tables. c Elevations for fearful + insecurely attached. d Increases correlated with shame, embarrassment. e Increases correlated with tense/angry behavior. Table 4 Maternal separation with child in the care of unfamiliar adult a . First author Date Stressor Age Sex N Sampling times ?Cortisol Gunnar 1989 b Separation, reunion, separation c 9 m Both 66 0, +60 Increase Larson 1991 30 min separation 9 m Both 37 0, +30 Increase Gunnar 1992 Exp 1: 30 min separation 9 m Both 38 0, +30, +45 Increase d Gunnar 1992 Exp 2: 30 min separation 9 m Both 64 0, +30 ns e Spangler 1993 Ainsworth strange situation 12 m Both 32 0, +15, +30 ns f Spangler 1998 Ainsworth strange situation 12 m Both 106 0, +15, +30 ns g Goldberg 2003 b Ainsworth strange situation 12 m Both 27 0, +20, +40 Increase Gunnar 1994 b 30 min separation 13 m Both 49 0, +30 ns Gunnar 1989 b Ainsworth strange situation 13 m Both 66 0, +30 ns van Bakel 2004 Modified strange situation 15 m Both 85 0, +55 Increase Nachmias 1996 b Ainsworth strange situation 18 m Both 77 0, +45 ns g Gunnar 1996b Ainsworth strange situation 18 m Both 73 0, +45 ns g Luby 2003 b Separation 3–5.6 y Both 57 0, +30 Decrease a Adult with child is low responsive unless otherwise indicated. b Age groups appear separately in this table or children were also exposed to other stressor tasks described in other tables. c Total separation was 49 min. d Only for low responsive care condition. e High responsive care. f Ainsworth strange situation: 9 min separation total, 3 min with children alone. Increase only for insecurely attached children. g Only for insecurely attached and highly fearful children. Table 5 Parent–child interaction and conflict–discussions. First author Date Stressor Age Sex N Sampling times ?Cortisol Spangler 1994 a 15 min play with mother 3 m Both 41 0, +25 ns b Spangler 1994 a 15 min play with mother 6 m Both 41 0, +25 ns c Spangler 1994 a 15 min play with mother 9 m Both 41 0, +25 ns c Larson 1991 a 30 min play with mother 9 m Both 24 0, +30 ns Davies 2007 Simulated parent argument 4–5 y Both 178 0, +25, +36 Decrease Smeekens 2007 10 min emotion discussion task 5 y Both 129 0, +20 ns d Granger 1998 Conflict–discussion task 5–11 y Both 62 0, +20 ns Granger 1994 Conflict–discussion task 7–17 y Both 102 0, +20 Decrease e Kliewer 2006 Discussion of violent video clip 8–14 y Both 101 0, +20, +40 ns Granger 1996 Conflict–discussion task 9–16 y Both 64 0, +20 ns e Klimes-Dougan 2001 Conflict–discussion task 11–17 y Both 71 0, +20, +40 Decrease a Age groups appear separately in this table or children were also exposed to other stressor tasks described in other tables. b Increase if mother is insensitive. c Decrease if mother is sensitive. d Increase if child low ego resilient and parent high negativity. e Clinic-referred youth. Table 6 Peer entry and peer rejection paradigms. First author Date Stressor Age Sex N Sampling times ?Cortisol Stansbury 2000 a Peer entry 3 y Both 38 0, +25 ns Stansbury 2000 a Peer entry 4 y Both 25 0, +25 Increase Brotman 2007 Peer entry 2.8–5 y Both 92 0, +30 ns Stroud 2009 a Peer rejection/social exclusion 7–12 y Both 39 6× ns Stroud 2009 a Peer rejection/social exclusion 13–17 y Both 43 6× Increase b a Age groups appear separately in this table or children were also exposed to other stressor tasks described in other tables. b Elevated over baseline taken on another day in anticipation of the peer interaction task, prior to exclusion/rejection. Table 7 Handling and strange/novel stimulation. First author Date Stressor Age Sex N Sampling times ?Cortisol Handling stressors ?Gunnar 1989 Physical examination Newborn Both 49 0, +25 Increase a ?Gunnar 1992 Physical examination Newborn Both 22 0, +25 Increase a ?Spangler 1993 NBAS b Newborn Both 51 0, +15 increase c ?Keenan 2002 d Physical examination Newborn Both 62 0, +20, +45 Increase ?Gunnar 1996a d Physical examination 2 m Both 18 0, +25 Increase ?Lewis 1995a d Physical examination 2 m Both 64 0, +30 Increase ?Larson 1998 Physical and dev’l examination 2–3.8 m Both 86 0, +60 Increase e ?Morelius 2007 Diaper change <3 m Both 15 0, +30 Increase ?Albers 2008 Removal from bath 3 m Both 64 0, +25, +40 Increase f ?Lewis 1995a d Physical examination 4 m Both 64 0, +30 ns ?Gunnar 1996a d Physical examination 4 m Both 18 0, +25 ns ?Lewis 1995a d Physical examination 6 m Both 64 0, +30 ns ?Gunnar 1996a d Physical examination 6 m Both 18 0, +25 ns Novel event stressors ?Hertsgaard 1992 1st infant swim class 8–12 m Both 41 0, +35 Decrease ?Gunnar 1994 d Event-related potential testing 12 m Both 49 0, +30 ns ?Schmidt 1997 EEG assessment and startle task 4 y Both 61 0, +35 ns ?Corbett 2006 Mock MRI scanner 6–11 y Boys 10 4× Decrease ?Moss 1999 Event-related potential testing 10–12 y Boys 178 0, +35 Decrease ?Hardie 2002 Event-related potential testing 10–12 y Both 189 0, +35 Decrease g a No response to same stressor 24 h later. b Brazelton Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale. c Only for subset where electrodes were placed for heart rate prior to NBAS. d Age groups appear separately in this table or children were also exposed to other stressor tasks described in other tables. e Increase only for infants 11 weeks old and younger. f Returned to baseline by +40 and more rapidly for infants of sensitive mothers. g Sample overlaps with Moss et al. (1999) . Table 8 Blood draws and inoculations. First author Date Stressor Age Sex N Sampling times ?Cortisol Gunnar 1992 Heel lance Newborn Both 18 0, +25 Increase Gunnar 1995 Heel lance Newborn Both 48 0, +25 Increase Keenan 2002 a Heel lance Newborn Both 64 0, +20, +45 Increase Buske-Kirschbaum 2004 Heel lance Newborn Both 20 0, +10, +20 Increase Mantagos 1991 Venipuncture 1–6 m Both 33 0, +30, +60 Increase Lewis 1994 Inoculation 2–6 m Both 62 0, +20 Increase Ramsay 1994 Inoculation 2 m Both 40 0, +20 Increase Lewis 1995a a Inoculation 2 m Both 64 0, +20 Increase Gunnar 1996a a Inoculation 2 m Both 67 0, +25 Increase Ramsay 1996 a Inoculation 2 m Both 9 0, +20 Increase Braarud 2006 Inoculation 3 m Both 37 0, +20 Increase b Ramsay 1994 Inoculation 4 m Both 40 0, +20 Increase Lewis 1995a a Inoculation 4 m Both 64 0, +20 Increase Gunnar 1996a a Inoculation 4 m Both 67 0, +25 Increase Ramsay 1996 a Inoculation 6 m Both 5 0, +20 ns Lewis 1995a a Inoculation 6 m Both 64 0, +20 Increase Gunnar 1996a a Inoculation 6 m Both 67 0, +25 Increase Felt 2000 Inoculation 2–24 m Both 102 4× Increase b Jacobson 1999 Finger stick 13 m Both 64 0, +30 ns Gunnar 1996a a Inoculation 15 m Both 67 0, +25 ns Lewis 1995b a Inoculation 18 m Both 34 0, +20 Increase c Gutteling 2004 Inoculation 4–6 yr Both 24 5× ns Lee 2006 Venipuncture 6–15 yr Both 30 0, +1, +60 ns Susman 1997 Venipuncture 10–15 yr Both 36 0, +20, +40 ns Conte 2003 Venipuncture 7–17 yr Both 16 0, +20–30 ns a Age groups appear separately in this table or children were also exposed to other stressor tasks described in other tables. b Only if mother less supportive. c Data from 2, 4 and 6 months in Lewis and Ramsay (1995b) : 18 month response less than at 6 mo. 