Delirium in Early-Stage Alzheimer’s Disease Enhancing Cognitive Reserve as a Possible Preventive Measure Delirium is a disorder of acute onset with fluctuating symptoms and is characterized by inattention, disorganized thinking, and altered levels of consciousness. The risk for delirium is greatest in individuals with dementia, and the incidence of both is increasing worldwide because of the aging of our population. Although several clinical trials have tested interventions for delirium prevention in individuals without dementia, little is known about the mechanisms for the prevention of delirium in early-stage Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The purpose of this article is to explore ways of preventing delirium and slowing the rate of cognitive decline in early-stage AD by enhancing cognitive reserve. An agenda for future research on interventions to prevent delirium in individuals with early-stage AD is also presented.  IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE NURSING RESEARCH Despite poor outcomes associated with DSD, only a few studies have analyzed the prevention of delirium in individuals with dementia, the results of which have been mixed. No studies have addressed delirium in individuals with early-stage AD. The overall evidence for delirium prevention models in early-stage AD is weak due to a low number of randomized trials with inconsistent results, as well as the exclusion of individuals with dementia in most delirium trials ( Atkins et al., 2004 ). However, the use of cognitive stimulation and recreational activities and the avoidance of CNS-active medications hold great promise to decrease delirium incidence and severity in early-stage AD. This approach requires more testing in rigorous trials. Although most of the current work regarding the enhancement of cognitive reserve has been conducted in populations of individuals with dementia, there is emerging evidence that similar mechanisms may prevent delirium in this population ( Jones et al., 2006 ; Mudge, Giebel, & Cutler, 2008 ; Pompei et al., 1994 ). Delirium is higher in individuals with dementia than any other subgroup of disease, and dynamic models specific to enhancing cognitive reserve and preventing delirium in early-stage AD are urgently needed. Table 2 outlines an agenda for future nursing research in this area.  IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE NURSING RESEARCH Despite poor outcomes associated with DSD, only a few studies have analyzed the prevention of delirium in individuals with dementia, the results of which have been mixed. No studies have addressed delirium in individuals with early-stage AD. The overall evidence for delirium prevention models in early-stage AD is weak due to a low number of randomized trials with inconsistent results, as well as the exclusion of individuals with dementia in most delirium trials ( Atkins et al., 2004 ). However, the use of cognitive stimulation and recreational activities and the avoidance of CNS-active medications hold great promise to decrease delirium incidence and severity in early-stage AD. This approach requires more testing in rigorous trials. Although most of the current work regarding the enhancement of cognitive reserve has been conducted in populations of individuals with dementia, there is emerging evidence that similar mechanisms may prevent delirium in this population ( Jones et al., 2006 ; Mudge, Giebel, & Cutler, 2008 ; Pompei et al., 1994 ). Delirium is higher in individuals with dementia than any other subgroup of disease, and dynamic models specific to enhancing cognitive reserve and preventing delirium in early-stage AD are urgently needed. Table 2 outlines an agenda for future nursing research in this area.  CONCLUSION There are tremendous public health implications for developing a delirium prevention program in early-stage AD, a time when there is still significant potential for rehabilitation ( Yu, Evans, & Sullivan-Marx, 2005 ). Because delirium leads to many poor health outcomes ( Bellelli, Frisoni, et al., 2007 ), prevention of delirium has the potential for significant personal, social, and economic benefits. Prospective studies that test current and future intervention models will aid the understanding of the needs of individuals with dementia across care settings and allow evidence-based guidelines to be developed and implemented for delirium prevention in early-stage AD.  KEYPOINTS As growing numbers of older adults are diagnosed at earlier stages of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related dementias, attention to preventable and treatable problems such as delirium are crucial to the care of individuals with dementia. Delirium and dementia are increasingly known to be closely connected; thus, interventions that are protective for dementia may also help prevent delirium or reduce its severity. One possible mechanism for delirium prevention in early-stage AD is the enhancement of cognitive reserve. Those interventions that have the strongest links to improving cognitive reserve in individuals with dementia include physical activity, social interaction, challenging mental activities, and avoidance of anticholinergic and inappropriate medication use.  Tables TABLE 1 INTERVENTIONS TO ENHANCE COGNITIVE RESERVE Activity Evidence Web Resources Physical and social activities Regular exercise at least twice per week for at least 15 minutes per session Reduced periods of inactivity (such as long periods of watching television), which increase cognitive decline Social networking with children, family, and friends Going to the movies, restaurants, clubs, centers, or sporting events Productive activity such as daily gardening, housework, cooking, and doing volunteer work Laurin et al. (2001) ; Lindstrom et al. (2005) ; Newson & Kemps (2006) ; Rovio et al. (2005) ; Simons et al. (2006) ; Verghese et al. (2003) ; Wang et al. (2002) ; Yang et al. (2008) (delirium specific) AARP: 10 Steps to an Optimal Memory http://www.aarp.org/health/conditions/articles/harvard__improving-memory-understanding-age-related-memory-loss_6.html Alzheimer Society of Canada: Healthy Brain http://www.alzheimer.ca/english/brain/brain_intro.htm Alzheimer’s Association: Brain Health http://www.alz.org/we_can_help_brain_health_maintain_your_brain.asp Cognitive stimulation Leisure activities such as reading books and newspapers, writing for pleasure, doing crosswords and puzzles, playing card and board games, playing musical instruments Pursuing further education in early life to midlife Ball et al. (2002) ; Lyketsos et al. (1999) ; Verghese et al. (2003) ; Wilson et al. (2002) About Memory: Mental Stimulation http://www.memory-key.com/Seniors/stimulation.htm American Geriatrics Society: Aging in the Know http://www.healthinaging.org/agingintheknow/default.asp Hospital Elder Life Program (HELP) http://elderlife.med.yale.edu/public/interventions.php?pageid=01.03.04 Keep Your Brain Alive http://www.neurobics.com/index.html Posit Science http://www.positscience.com Avoiding anticholinergic and potentially inappropriate medication use Providing older adults with a list of medications to avoid because the risks outweigh the benefits, and safer alternatives exist Providing prescribers and health professionals with tools to identify anticholinergic and inappropriate medication use to distribute with patient handouts Fick et al. (2003) ; Hshieh et al. (2008) ; Rudolph et al. (2008) Duke University’s Potentially Inappropriate Medications for the Elderly According to the Revised Beers Criteria http://www.dcri.duke.edu/ccge/curtis/beers.html IPRO’s Decreasing Anticholinergic Drugs in the Elderly Project http://providers.ipro.org/index/pres-drug-plan-prescribers TABLE 2 A NURSING RESEARCH AGENDA FOR INTERVENTIONS TO PREVENT DELIRIUM IN EARLY-STAGE ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE (AD) Diagnosis and evaluation of delirium in early-stage AD. Need to refine and test instruments for delirium in early-stage AD. Issues to consider: Assess overlapping symptoms in delirium and early-stage AD. Determine factors in early nurse/provider recognition of delirium in AD. Identify etiology/risk factors unique to delirium in early-stage AD: Develop models for determining individuals with early-stage AD at highest risk. Determine factors most amenable to interventions across settings. Prevention of delirium through enhancement of cognitive reserve. Challenges to address: Individualization of cognitive activities. Measuring effect of education and other reserve protective effects on training. Defining and measuring cognitive reserve as an active mechanism. Determine components of intervention most effective. Measurement of trajectory of cognitive decline over time with AD/delirium. Assess delirium management strategies most effective in early-stage AD. Evaluate home prevention of delirium. Intervention methodology and design issues to consider: Initiation and maintenance of treatment. Short-term versus long-term effects. Randomizing patients by clusters rather than as individuals using a cluster randomized controlled trial (RCT) design. Dosage and duration of intervention/activities. Use of functional magnetic resonance imaging and biomarkers in assessing outcomes. Ethical issues to address: Identify best methods for promoting autonomy and ensuring protection of research, both in informed consent and in the conduct of the study itself, for participants who are at risk of or are experiencing delirium. Assess decisional capacity of individuals with delirium for both treatment and research consent. Determine measures for obtaining the most appropriate surrogate informed consent, when necessary. Assess participants’ understanding of study risk. Evaluate when and how to notify clinicians of delirium in RCTs. Establish postdelirium recovery information and counseling. Translational considerations for delirium interventions in early-stage AD: Kind of discipline/provider needed to best deliver intervention. Best ways to facilitate adoption of intervention. Use of informatics to deliver or enhance components of intervention. Costing out intervention savings. Financing of intervention. Delivery across care settings. Organizational and leadership characteristics influencing adoption of intervention. 