The host response and molecular pathogenesis associated with respiratory syncytial virus infection Since the isolation of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) in 1956, its significance as an important human pathogen in infants, the elderly and the immunocompromised has been established. Many important mechanisms contributing to RSV infection, replication and disease pathogenesis have been uncovered; however, there is still insufficient knowledge in these and related areas, which must be addressed to facilitate the development of safe and effective vaccines and therapeutic treatments. A better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of RSV infection, particularly the host-cell response and transcription profiles to RSV infection, is required to advance disease intervention strategies. Substantial information is accumulating regarding how RSV proteins modulate molecular signaling and regulation of cytokine and chemokine responses to infection, molecular signals regulating programmed cell death, and innate and adaptive immune responses to infection. This review discusses RSV manipulation of the host response to infection and related disease pathogenesis.  Conclusion Numerous host and several virus components have been connected with disease pathogenesis following RSV infection; however, the importance of a single component against the spectrum of mediators is difficult to identify as being singularly important. It is apparent that RSV causes an atypical host response to infection with attributes of altered innate and inadequate immune memory responses where individuals may be repeatedly infected with the same or different strains of RSV, and where RSV may reinfect despite the presence of specific neutralizing antibodies [ 153 , 236 – 239 ]. Experimental animal models and in vitro studies of RSV infection have helped to identify and differentiate aspects of the host response to infection, and to identify RSV proteins that modulate these responses, however, the features of molecular pathogenesis remain poorly understood. A better understanding of the interplay between RSV and the host response to infection is needed to facilitate vaccine and antiviral drug development, although accumulating evidence suggests that regulating aspects of innate immunity may be more important in controlling disease pathogenesis.  Future perspective Understanding the host response and molecular pathogenesis of RSV infection is critical for the development of vaccines, antivirals and other disease intervention approaches. It is clear that we must understand the problem if we are to prevent or correct it. Fundamental to this understanding is the biology behind RSV infection. RSV first infects respiratory epithelial cells during infection. The host response to infection is sensed by PRRs or TLRs that induce a network of host cell gene products, which profoundly affect the cascade of inflammatory and immune signals and functions. RSV-specific gene products have been shown to modulate the tempo, pattern and magnitude of the signaling cascade in the early elements of innate immunity. These early elements in innate immunity are required to properly orchestrate the adaptive immune response as well as regulate airway inflammation and disease pathogenesis. It is clear that the identification of host pathways affected by RSV proteins will be fundamental to achieving rationally designed antiviral drugs and vaccines. Despite decades of effort toward an efficacious RSV vaccine, there are still no clear contenders on the horizon. It is likely that the vaccine focus will shift from current vaccine approaches toward the development of mucosal RSV vaccine strategies and antiviral drug approaches toward novel strategies that encumber RNA interference or antisense approaches that could be used to specifically target the virus or airway epithelium host genes early after infection. It is likely that interceding in the earliest events following RSV infection may offer a clearer path toward drug-based disease intervention, and generating antibody responses that target RSV proteins more effectively may provide greater efficacy for RSV disease pathogenesis. Executive summary Respiratory syncytial virus ? Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a paramyxovirus. ? Nonsegmented negative-strand RNA virus containing two nonstructural ( NS2 and NS1 ) genes followed, in gene order, by nucleocapsid, phosphoprotein, matrix, small hydrophobic, surface attachment glycoprotein (G), surface fusion glycoprotein (F), a M2 gene encoding two proteins from M2–1/M2–2 and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. ? Transcription of mRNA occurs in a 3? to 5? order from a single promoter near the 3? end resulting in a series of subgenomic mRNAs. ? The level of protein expressed is related to mRNA abundance. ? Virions assemble at the plasma membrane where nucleocapsids localize with the cell membrane containing membrane viral glycoproteins. Regulation of host-cell responses to infection ? RSV primarily infects respiratory epithelial cells lining the nasal passages and respiratory tract. ? Following infection, RSV delays apoptosis by enhancing IEX-1L, several Bcl-2 family members, proteins within the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway, and by inhibiting tumor suppressor p53 and oncogene Akt. ? RSV proteins modulate host-cell responses through pattern recognition receptors and Toll-like receptors (TLRs); RSV F protein interacts with TLR4; G protein potentially with TLR2. ? RSV interferes with the host antiviral cytokine response; NS1 and NS2 are important in type I IFN antagonists. ? RSV induces suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 and SOCS3 negative regulation of type I IFNs. ? RSV infection modulates respiratory epithelial-cell function, surfactant protein (SP)-A and SP-D are decreased, and matrix metalloproteinases are increased. ? RSV G protein contains a CX3C chemokine motif which can bind to the CX3CR1 and impede CX3CR1 responses and CX3CR1-mediated leukocyte chemotaxis. Cytokine responses to RSV infection ? RSV infection of airway epithelial cells results in a cascade of signaling events mediated by NF-?B leading to the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. ? RSV G-protein expression during acute infection in mice has been associated with altered CC and CXC chemokine mRNA expression and Th1/Th2-type cytokines. ? RSV G protein inhibits IFN -? and IFN-stimulated gene-15. Regulation of cellular transcription factors ? RSV infection induces many transcription factors including IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3, IRF7, NF-?B, p38 MAPK and AP-1. ? RSV G protein interferes with Toll IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor molecule-1 or NF-?B activation leading to reduced levels proinflammatory cytokines. ? Interferon antagonism by NS1/NS2 is mediated by inhibiting STAT2 and IRF3 activation. ? NS1 contains elongin-C- and cullin-2-binding sequences that provide ubiquitin E3 ligase activity to target proteins, specifically STAT2, to the proteosome. ? RSV G protein induces SOCS1 and SOCS3 proteins which negatively regulate cytokine signaling cascades, particularly type I IFNs. Innate immunity to RSV infection ? Host cells recognize RSV infection via TLR4, TLR3, TLR2 and retinoic acid-inducible gene-I resulting in the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. ? The balance between conventional dendritic cells (DCs) and plasmacytoid DCs in the lung and lymph nodes is important for driving pulmonary immunity to RSV infection. ? DCs infected with RSV lose their ability to stimulate RSV-specific T cells. ? RSV G protein has a role in modulating natural killer cells and other cell trafficking to the lung through inhibition of cytokines and chemokines. Adaptive humoral & cellular immunity ? RSV F and G surface proteins induce neutralizing antibody production, and these are the major antigenic determinants of protection. ? T-cell responses have an important role in viral clearance. ? RSV F protein may polarize both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses toward a Th1-type response. ? RSV G protein may prime CD4 + T cells toward a Th2-biased response. Disease pathogenesis ? A variety of host factors affect RSV disease pathogenesis; known risk factors for severe disease include the age of infection, congenital heart disease and immune deficiency or suppression. ? The state of immune maturation early in life is important for susceptibility to RSV disease. ? Genetic-association studies indicate that variations in certain genetic loci confer susceptibility to RSV disease. ? Disease pathogenesis is a multifactorial process.  Executive summary Respiratory syncytial virus ? Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a paramyxovirus. ? Nonsegmented negative-strand RNA virus containing two nonstructural ( NS2 and NS1 ) genes followed, in gene order, by nucleocapsid, phosphoprotein, matrix, small hydrophobic, surface attachment glycoprotein (G), surface fusion glycoprotein (F), a M2 gene encoding two proteins from M2–1/M2–2 and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. ? Transcription of mRNA occurs in a 3? to 5? order from a single promoter near the 3? end resulting in a series of subgenomic mRNAs. ? The level of protein expressed is related to mRNA abundance. ? Virions assemble at the plasma membrane where nucleocapsids localize with the cell membrane containing membrane viral glycoproteins. Regulation of host-cell responses to infection ? RSV primarily infects respiratory epithelial cells lining the nasal passages and respiratory tract. ? Following infection, RSV delays apoptosis by enhancing IEX-1L, several Bcl-2 family members, proteins within the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway, and by inhibiting tumor suppressor p53 and oncogene Akt. ? RSV proteins modulate host-cell responses through pattern recognition receptors and Toll-like receptors (TLRs); RSV F protein interacts with TLR4; G protein potentially with TLR2. ? RSV interferes with the host antiviral cytokine response; NS1 and NS2 are important in type I IFN antagonists. ? RSV induces suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 and SOCS3 negative regulation of type I IFNs. ? RSV infection modulates respiratory epithelial-cell function, surfactant protein (SP)-A and SP-D are decreased, and matrix metalloproteinases are increased. ? RSV G protein contains a CX3C chemokine motif which can bind to the CX3CR1 and impede CX3CR1 responses and CX3CR1-mediated leukocyte chemotaxis. Cytokine responses to RSV infection ? RSV infection of airway epithelial cells results in a cascade of signaling events mediated by NF-?B leading to the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. ? RSV G-protein expression during acute infection in mice has been associated with altered CC and CXC chemokine mRNA expression and Th1/Th2-type cytokines. ? RSV G protein inhibits IFN -? and IFN-stimulated gene-15. Regulation of cellular transcription factors ? RSV infection induces many transcription factors including IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3, IRF7, NF-?B, p38 MAPK and AP-1. ? RSV G protein interferes with Toll IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor molecule-1 or NF-?B activation leading to reduced levels proinflammatory cytokines. ? Interferon antagonism by NS1/NS2 is mediated by inhibiting STAT2 and IRF3 activation. ? NS1 contains elongin-C- and cullin-2-binding sequences that provide ubiquitin E3 ligase activity to target proteins, specifically STAT2, to the proteosome. ? RSV G protein induces SOCS1 and SOCS3 proteins which negatively regulate cytokine signaling cascades, particularly type I IFNs. Innate immunity to RSV infection ? Host cells recognize RSV infection via TLR4, TLR3, TLR2 and retinoic acid-inducible gene-I resulting in the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. ? The balance between conventional dendritic cells (DCs) and plasmacytoid DCs in the lung and lymph nodes is important for driving pulmonary immunity to RSV infection. ? DCs infected with RSV lose their ability to stimulate RSV-specific T cells. ? RSV G protein has a role in modulating natural killer cells and other cell trafficking to the lung through inhibition of cytokines and chemokines. Adaptive humoral & cellular immunity ? RSV F and G surface proteins induce neutralizing antibody production, and these are the major antigenic determinants of protection. ? T-cell responses have an important role in viral clearance. ? RSV F protein may polarize both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses toward a Th1-type response. ? RSV G protein may prime CD4 + T cells toward a Th2-biased response. Disease pathogenesis ? A variety of host factors affect RSV disease pathogenesis; known risk factors for severe disease include the age of infection, congenital heart disease and immune deficiency or suppression. ? The state of immune maturation early in life is important for susceptibility to RSV disease. ? Genetic-association studies indicate that variations in certain genetic loci confer susceptibility to RSV disease. ? Disease pathogenesis is a multifactorial process. 