Relation of Obesity to Consummatory and Anticipatory Food Reward This report reviews findings from studies that have investigated whether abnormalities in reward from food intake and anticipated food intake increase risk for obesity. Self-report and behavioral data suggest that obese relative to lean individuals show elevated anticipatory and consumatory food reward. Brain imaging studies suggest that obese relative to lean individuals show greater activation of the gustatory cortex (insula/frontal operculum) and oral somatosensory regions (parietal operculum and Rolandic operculum) in response to anticipated intake and consumption of palatable foods. Yet, data also suggest that obese relative to lean individuals show less activation in the dorsal striatum in response to consumption of palatable foods and reduced striatal D2 dopamine receptor density. Emerging prospective data also suggest that abnormal activation in these brain regions increases risk for future weight gain and that genotypes associated with lowered dopamine signaling amplify these predictive effects. Results imply that individuals who show greater activation in the gustatory cortex and somatosensory regions in response to anticipation and consumption of food, but who show weaker activation in the striatum during food intake, may be at risk for overeating, particularly those at genetic risk for lowered dopamine receptor signaling.  Conclusions and Directions for Future Research In this report we reviewed recent findings from studies that have investigated whether abnormalities in reward from food intake and anticipated food intake correlate with concurrent BMI and future increases in BMI. Overall, the literature suggests that obese versus lean individuals anticipate greater reward from food intake; relatively consistent findings have emerged from studies using brain imaging, self-report and behavioral measures to assess anticipatory food reward. Further, studies using self-report and behavioral measures found that obese relative to lean individuals report greater reward from food intake and that preferences for high-fat and high-sugar foods predict elevated weight gain and increased risk for obesity. Brain imaging studies have likewise found that obese compared to lean individuals show greater activation in the gustatory cortex and somatosensory cortex in response to food receipt, which may imply that consuming food is more pleasurable from a sensory perspective. However, several imaging studies also found that obese showed less activation in the dorsal striatum in response to food intake relative to lean individuals, suggesting blunted activation of reward circuitry. Thus, as noted, extant data do not lend clear support to a simple hyper-responsivity or a simple hypo-responsivity model of obesity. Given this set of affairs, and the evidence from animal studies suggesting that intake of high-fat and high-sugar foods results in down-regulation of D2 receptors, we propose a provisional working conceptual model ( Fig 4 ) in which we posit that people at risk for obesity initially show a hyperfunctioning in the gustatory cortex as well as in the somatosensory cortex that makes consuming food more pleasurable from a sensory perspective, which may lead to greater anticipatory reward from food and increased vulnerability to overeating, resulting in consequent unhealthy weight gain. We hypothesize that this overeating may lead to receptor down-regulation in the striatum secondary to excessive intake of overly rich foods, which may increase the likelihood of further overeating and continued weigh gain. Yet, it is important to note that obese compared to lean showed elevated activation in the dorsal striatum in response to anticipated food intake, suggesting a differential impact on anticipatory and consummatory food reward. A priority for future research will be to test whether abnormalities in brain reward circuitry increase risk for unhealthy weight gain and onset of obesity. Only one prospective study thus far has tested whether abnormalities in brain regions implicated in anticipatory and consummatory food reward increase risk for future weight gain. Specifically, future studies should examine whether somatosensory and striatum disturbances are primary or secondary to a chronic intake of a high-fat, high-sugar diet. It will be important to test key assumptions regarding the interpretation of these findings, such as whether reduced sensitivity of the somatosensory and gustatory regions translates into reduced subjective pleasure during food intake. Future research should also strive to resolve the apparently inconsistent findings suggesting that obese individuals show hyper-responsivity of some brain regions to food intake, but hypo-responsivity of other brain regions, relative to lean individuals. There is a particular need to integrate measurement of dopamine functioning with functional MRI measures of striatal and cortical responses to food. The literature review suggests that dopamine functioning is linked to differences in food reward sensitivity. However, because existing studies in humans have either used functional MRI measures of responses to food, or PET measures of DA binding, but have never measured both in the same participants, it is unclear to what extent food reward sensitivity is dependent on DA mechanisms and whether this explains the differential responsivity in obese versus lean individuals. Thus, studies taking a multimodal imaging approach utilizing both PET and functional MRI would contribute to an improved understanding of the etiologic processes that give rise to obesity. Finally, recent data from brain imaging studies have allowed us to begin exploring how these abnormalities in food reward may interact with certain genetic and environmental factors, such as genes related to reduced dopamine signaling, trait impulsivity, affect regulation expectancies, and an unhealthy food environment. Future research should continue to explore factors that moderate the risk conveyed by abnormalities in reward circuitry in response to food receipt and anticipated receipt to increase risk for unhealthy weight gain.  Figures Fig 1 Coronal section of weaker activation in the caudate (6, 9, 15, z = 2.98, puncorrected = .002) in response to milkshake receipt versus tasteless solution receipt predicting future weight change for each DRD2 allele type with the graph of parameter estimates (PE) from that region. Fig 2 Coronal section of increased activation in the putamen (-15, 6, 3, z = 3.59, puncorrected < .001) in response to appetizing food – unappetizing food as a function of BMI with the graph of parameter estimates (PE) from that region. Fig 3 Axial section of increased activation in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (33, 27, ?12, z = 4.01, puncorrected < .001) in response to appetizing food versus water as a function of BMI with the graph of parameter estimates (PE) of that region. Fig 4 Working conceptual model presenting the relation between abnormalities in food reward and risk for unhealthy weight gain. 