Transgenic Overexpression of Aldehyde Dehydrogenase-2 Rescues Chronic Alcohol Intake-Induced Myocardial Hypertrophy and Contractile Dysfunction Background: Chronic alcoholism leads to the onset and progression of alcoholic cardiomyopathy through toxic mechanisms of ethanol and its metabolite acetaldehyde. This study examined the impact of altered acetaldehyde metabolism through systemic transgenic overexpression of aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2) on chronic alcohol ingestion-induced myocardial damage. Methods and Results: ALDH2 transgenic mice were produced using the chicken ?-actin promoter. Wild-type FVB and ALDH2 mice were placed on a 4% alcohol or control diet for 14 wks. Myocardial and cardiomyocyte contraction, intracellular Ca2+ handling, histology (H&E, Masson trichrome), protein damage and apoptosis were determined. Western blot was used to monitor the expression of NADPH oxidase, calcineurin, apoptosis-stimulated kinase (ASK-1), GSK-3?, GATA4 and cAMP-response element binding (CREB) protein. ALDH2 reduced chronic alcohol ingestion-induced elevation in plasma and tissue acetaldehyde levels. Chronic alcohol consumption led to cardiac hypertrophy, reduced fraction shortening, cell shortening and impaired intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis, the effect of which was alleviated by ALDH2. In addition, ALDH2 transgene significantly attenuated chronic alcohol intake-induced myocardial fibrosis, protein carbonyl formation, apoptosis, enhanced NADPH oxidase p47phox and calcineurin expression as well as phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. Conclusions: Our results suggested that transgenic overexpression of ALDH2 effectively antagonizes chronic alcohol intake-elicited myocardial hypertrophy and contractile defect through a mechanism associated, at least in part, with phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. These data strongly support the notion that acetaldehyde may be an essential contributor to the chronic development of alcoholic cardiomyopathy.  INTRODUCTION Chronic alcohol ingestion often leads to cardiovascular complications including alcoholic cardiomyopathy which is mainly manifested as cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction 1 , 2 . Although several rationales have been speculated for this myopathic change following alcohol intake such as ethanol toxicity and buildup of fatty acid ethyl esters 2 , 3 , the precise mechanism(s) underscoring alcoholic cardiomyopathy still remains elusive. Acetaldehyde, the first oxidized metabolite of ethanol, is far more reactive and toxic than ethanol and may contribute to alcoholic injury 3 , 4 . Clinical evidence suggested that blood acetaldehyde levels may reach low mM range following alcohol ingestion in Asian and African American populations with defective aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 5 , 6 , making them prone to alcoholic tissue injury. We and others have shown that acetaldehyde impairs cardiac excitation-contraction coupling, inhibits sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+ release 7 - 9 and forms protein adducts 10 . The “acetaldehyde toxicity” theory has recently received convincing support from our study where cardiac overexpression of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), which converts ethanol into acetaldehyde, results in an exacerbated cardiac hypertrophy and contractile defect following alcohol exposure 5 , 11 , 12 . To further explore the role of acetaldehyde in alcoholic cardiomyopathy, we produced a transgenic mouse line overexpressing human mitochondrial ALDH type 2 (ALDH2) to examine if facilitated acetaldehyde detoxification affects alcohol intake-induced myocardial tissue damage and contractile function. We also examined the role of glycogen synthase kinase-3? (GSK-3?) and apoptosis signaling regulated kinase-1 (ASK-1), two signaling molecules essential for cardiac hypertrophy and cell survival 13 , 14 . GSK-3?, which belongs to the serine/threonine kinase family, is inactivated by phosphorylation of serine 9 by oxidative stress during hypertrophic conditions. On the other hand, ASK-1 and the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade may contribute to oxidative stress-elicited cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and gene reprogramming 13 , 14 , indicating a role of oxidative stress in GSK-3?- and ASK-1-mediated cardiomyocyte event. More recently, a role of GATA4 and the transcription factor cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) has been revealed in the GSK-3?-regulated cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and gene expression 13 , 15 , 16 . Nonetheless, the role of these signaling molecules in alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy has not been elucidated.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of ALDH2 transgenic mice All animal procedures were approved by the University of Wyoming Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The human ALDH2 gene was amplified by PCR from pT7–7-hpALDH2 (kindly provided by Dr. Henry Weiner from Purdue University, Lafayette, IN) using the following primers: ALDH-F (5?-tcgaattctatgttgcgcgctgccgcccg) and ALDH-R (3?-cacggagtcttcttgagtattcttaaggc). The amplified ALDH2 fragment was digested with EcoRI and cloned into the EcoRI site of vector pBsCAG-2 under the CAG cassette, where ALDH activity was increased using the promoter of the chicken ?-actin gene as we reported previously 17 . This promoter has been widely used to produce high level expression in the liver of transgenic mice 18 . Elevated ALDH activity should reduce circulating acetaldehyde by metabolizing it to acetate. The full length of the promoter portion of the CAG-ALDH gene was sequenced to confirm that no errors were inserted. The transgene can be removed from the plasmid by digestion with Kpn I and Sst I, which was shown to drive expression in many mammalian cells 17 , 19 . The ALDH2 insert was excised and separated from the plasmid by Kpn I/Sst I restriction digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis. The insert was purified on Qiagen 20 columns, followed by spin gel chromatography and filtration through 0.22 ?m filters. A concentration of 1 ?g/?l of the purified transgene insert DNA was microinjected into an one-cell embryo of the inbred strain FVB. Around 20-30 microinjected embryos were implanted into each pseudopregnant female and allowed to come to term. After weaning, mice tail clips were collected for genotype of DNA insertion of ALDH2 (primer sequence provided above, Fig. 1 ). Further breeding was conducted with the same background wild type FVB. All mice were housed in a temperature-controlled room under a 12hr/12hr-light/dark and allowed access to tap water ad libitum . Four month-old adult male FVB and ALDH2 (F8) mice were placed on a nutritionally complete liquid diet (Shake & Pour Bioserv Inc., Frenchtown, NJ) for a one-week acclimation period. The use of a liquid diet is based on the scenario that ethanol self-administration resulted in less nutritional deficiencies and less stress to the animals in comparison to forced-feeding regimens, intravenous administration, or aerosolized inhalation 20 . Upon completion of the acclimation period, half of the FVB and ALDH2 mice were maintained on the regular liquid diet (without ethanol), and the remaining half began a 14-week period of isocaloric 4% (vol/vol) ethanol diet feeding. An isocaloric pair-feeding regimen was employed to eliminate the possibility of nutritional deficits. Control mice were offered the same quantity of diet ethanol-consuming mice drank the previous day. Body weight was monitored weekly 11 . Measurement of blood ethanol and acetaldehyde levels On the last day of diet feeding, mice were sacrificed under anesthesia (ketamine/xylazine: 3:1, 1.32 mg/kg, i.p.). Blood was collected and stored in sealed vials. A volume of 100 ?l plasma from each sample was put into an autosampler vial. Six microliter of n-propanol and 194 ?l H2O were then added to the vial. Following a 20-min incubation at 50°C, 50 ?l aliquot of headspace gas was removed and transferred to an Agilent 6890 Gas Chromatograph (Agilent Technologies, Inc, Wilmington, DE) equipped with a flame ionization detector. Ethanol, n-propanol and other components such as acetaldehyde were separated on a 60 m VOCOL capillary column (Supelco Inc., Bellefonte, PA) with film of 1.8 ?m in thickness and an inner diameter of 320 ?m. The carrier gas was helium at a flow rate of 18.0 ml/min. Quantitation was achieved by calibrating peak areas against those from headspace samples of known ethanol and acetaldehyde standards 21 . Echocardiographic assessment Cardiac geometry and function were evaluated in anesthetized (Avertin 2.5%, 10 ?l/g body weight, i.p.) mice using 2-D guided M-mode echocardiography (Sonos 5500) equipped with a 15-6 MHz linear transducer. Left ventricular (LV) anterior and posterior wall dimensions during diastole and systole were recorded from three consecutive cycles in M-mode using methods adopted by the American Society of Echocardiography. Fractional shortening was calculated from LV end-diastolic (EDD) and end-systolic (ESD) diameters using the equation (EDD-ESD)/EDD. Heart rates were averaged over 10 cardiac cycles 22 . Isolation of cardiomyocytes After ketamine/xylazine sedation, hearts were removed and perfused with Krebs-Henseleit bicarbonate (KHB) buffer containing (in mM): 118 NaCl, 4.7 KCl, 1.2 MgSO4, 1.2 KH2PO4, 25 NaHCO3, 10 HEPES and 11.1 glucose. Hearts were digested with collagenase D for 20 min. Left ventricles were removed and minced before being filtered. Myocyte yield was ? 75% which was not affected by high fat diet or metallothionein. Only rod-shaped myocytes with clear edges were selected for mechanical and intracellular Ca2+ study 11 . Cell shortening/relengthening Mechanical properties of cardiomyocytes were assessed using an IonOptix™ soft-edge system (IonOptix, Milton, MA). Myocytes were placed in a chamber mounted on the stage of an Olympus IX-70 microscope and superfused (?2 ml/min at 25°C) with a KHB buffer containing 1 mmol/l CaCl2. Myocytes were field stimulated at 0.5 Hz unless otherwise stated. Cell shortening and relengthening were assessed including peak shortening (PS), time-to-PS (TPS), time-to-90% relengthening (TR90) and maximal velocities of shortening/relengthening (± dL/dt) 11 . In the case of altering stimulus frequency from 0.1 Hz to 5.0 Hz, the steady state contraction of myocyte was achieved (usually after the first 5-6 beats) before PS was recorded. Intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> transients A cohort of myocytes was loaded with fura-2/AM (0.5 ?M) for 10 min and fluorescence intensity were recorded with a dual-excitation fluorescence photomultiplier system (Ionoptix). Myocytes were placed onto an Olympus IX-70 inverted microscope and imaged through a Fluor x 40 oil objective. Cells were exposed to light emitted by a 75W lamp and passed through either a 360 or a 380 nm filter, while being stimulated to contract at 0.5 Hz. Fluorescence emissions were detected between 480-520 nm and qualitative change in fura-2 fluorescence intensity (FFI) was inferred from FFI ratio at the two wavelengths (360/380). Fluorescence decay time was calculated as an indicator of intracellular Ca2+ clearing 11 . SERCA activity measured by <sup>45</sup>Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake Cardiomyocytes were sonicated and solubilized in a Tris-sucrose homogenization buffer consisting of 30 mM Tris-HCl, 8% sucrose, 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM dithioithreitol, pH 7.1. To determine SERCA-dependent Ca2+ uptake, samples were treated with and without the SERCA inhibitor thapsigargin (10 ?M) for 15 min. The difference between the two readings was deemed the thapsigargin-sensitive uptake through SERCA. Uptake was initiated by the addition of an aliquot of supernatant to a solution consisting of (in mM) 100 KCl, 5 NaN3, 6 MgCl2, 0.15 EGTA, 0.12 CaCl2, 30 Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 10 oxalate, 2 ATP and 1 ?Ci 45CaCl2 at 37°C. Aliquots of samples were injected onto glass filters on a suction manifold and washed 3 times. Filters were then removed from the manifold, placed in scintillation fluid and counted. SERCA activity was expressed as cpm/mg protein 23 . Histological examination Following anesthesia, hearts were excised and immediately placed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin at room temperature for 24 hrs after a brief rinse with PBS. The specimen were embedded in paraffin, cut in 5 ?m sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Cardiomyocyte cross-sectional areas were calculated on a digital microscope (x400) using the Image J (version1.34S) software. The Masson's trichrome staining was used to detect fibrosis in heart sections. The percentage of fibrosis was calculated using the histogram function of the photoshop software. Briefly, 7 random fields (6 mm2) at 200x magnification from each section were assessed for fibrosis. The fraction of the light blue stained area normalized to the total area was used as an indicator of myocardial fibrosis while omitting fibrosis of the perivascular, epicardial and endocardial areas from the study 24 . Protein carbonyl assay To assess cardiac oxidative damage, the tissue protein carbonyl content was determined as described 11 . Briefly, proteins were extracted and minced to prevent proteolytic degradation. Nucleic acids were eliminated by treating the samples with 1% streptomycin sulfate for 15 min, followed by a 10 min centrifugation (11,000 × g). Protein was precipitated by adding an equal volume of 20% TCA to protein (0.5 mg) and centrifuged for 1 min. The TCA solution was removed and the sample resuspended in 10 mM 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (2,4-DNPH) solution. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 15-30 min. Following a 500 ?l of 20% TCA addition, samples were centrifuged for 3 min. The supernatant was discarded, the pellet washed in ethanol:ethyl acetate and allowed to incubate at room temperature for 10 min. The samples were centrifuged again for 3 min and the ethanol:ethyl acetate steps repeated 2 more times. The precipitate was resuspended in 6 M guanidine solution, centrifuged for 3 min and insoluble debris removed. The maximum absorbance (360-390 nm) of the supernatant was read against appropriate blanks (water, 2 M HCl) and the carbonyl content was calculated using the molar absorption coefficient of 22,000 M?1cm?1. Caspase- 3 assay Caspase-3 is an enzyme activated during induction of apoptosis. In brief, 1 ml of PBS was added to flasks containing human cardiac myocytes and the monolayer was scraped and collected in a microfuge tube. The cells were centrifuged at 10,000× g at 4°C for 10 min and cell pellets were lysed in 100 ?l of ice-cold cell lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 0.1% CHAPS, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40). After cells were lysed, 70 ?l of reaction buffer was added to cell lysate (30 ?l) followed by an additional 20 ?l of caspase-3 colorimetric substrate (Ac-DEVD-pNA) and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr, during which time the caspase in the sample was allowed to cleave the chromophore p-NA from the substrate molecule. The samples were then read with a microplate reader at 405 nm. Caspase-3 activity was expressed as picomoles of pNA released per microgram of protein per minute 17 . Western blot analysis The protein was prepared as described 17 . Samples containing equal amount of proteins were separated on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels in a minigel apparatus (Mini-PROTEAN II, Bio-Rad) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5% milk in TBS-T, and were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-ALDH2 (kindly provided by Dr. Henry Weiner, Purdue University Lafayette, IN), anti-p47phox, anti-calcineurin A, anti-ASK-1, anti-pASK-1 (Ser83), anti-GSK-3?, anti-pGSK-3? (Ser9), anti-GATA4, anti-GATA4 (Ser105), anti-CREB and anti-pCREB (Ser133) antibodies. After immunoblotting, the film was scanned and the intensity of immunoblot bands was detected with a Bio-Rad Calibrated Densitometer. ?-Actin was used as the loading control. Data analysis Data were presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance (p < 0.05) for each variable was estimated by analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Tukey's post hoc analysis. The authors had full access to and take full responsibility for the integrity of the data. All authors have read and agree to the manuscript as written.  Generation of ALDH2 transgenic mice All animal procedures were approved by the University of Wyoming Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The human ALDH2 gene was amplified by PCR from pT7–7-hpALDH2 (kindly provided by Dr. Henry Weiner from Purdue University, Lafayette, IN) using the following primers: ALDH-F (5?-tcgaattctatgttgcgcgctgccgcccg) and ALDH-R (3?-cacggagtcttcttgagtattcttaaggc). The amplified ALDH2 fragment was digested with EcoRI and cloned into the EcoRI site of vector pBsCAG-2 under the CAG cassette, where ALDH activity was increased using the promoter of the chicken ?-actin gene as we reported previously 17 . This promoter has been widely used to produce high level expression in the liver of transgenic mice 18 . Elevated ALDH activity should reduce circulating acetaldehyde by metabolizing it to acetate. The full length of the promoter portion of the CAG-ALDH gene was sequenced to confirm that no errors were inserted. The transgene can be removed from the plasmid by digestion with Kpn I and Sst I, which was shown to drive expression in many mammalian cells 17 , 19 . The ALDH2 insert was excised and separated from the plasmid by Kpn I/Sst I restriction digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis. The insert was purified on Qiagen 20 columns, followed by spin gel chromatography and filtration through 0.22 ?m filters. A concentration of 1 ?g/?l of the purified transgene insert DNA was microinjected into an one-cell embryo of the inbred strain FVB. Around 20-30 microinjected embryos were implanted into each pseudopregnant female and allowed to come to term. After weaning, mice tail clips were collected for genotype of DNA insertion of ALDH2 (primer sequence provided above, Fig. 1 ). Further breeding was conducted with the same background wild type FVB. All mice were housed in a temperature-controlled room under a 12hr/12hr-light/dark and allowed access to tap water ad libitum . Four month-old adult male FVB and ALDH2 (F8) mice were placed on a nutritionally complete liquid diet (Shake & Pour Bioserv Inc., Frenchtown, NJ) for a one-week acclimation period. The use of a liquid diet is based on the scenario that ethanol self-administration resulted in less nutritional deficiencies and less stress to the animals in comparison to forced-feeding regimens, intravenous administration, or aerosolized inhalation 20 . Upon completion of the acclimation period, half of the FVB and ALDH2 mice were maintained on the regular liquid diet (without ethanol), and the remaining half began a 14-week period of isocaloric 4% (vol/vol) ethanol diet feeding. An isocaloric pair-feeding regimen was employed to eliminate the possibility of nutritional deficits. Control mice were offered the same quantity of diet ethanol-consuming mice drank the previous day. Body weight was monitored weekly 11 .  Measurement of blood ethanol and acetaldehyde levels On the last day of diet feeding, mice were sacrificed under anesthesia (ketamine/xylazine: 3:1, 1.32 mg/kg, i.p.). Blood was collected and stored in sealed vials. A volume of 100 ?l plasma from each sample was put into an autosampler vial. Six microliter of n-propanol and 194 ?l H2O were then added to the vial. Following a 20-min incubation at 50°C, 50 ?l aliquot of headspace gas was removed and transferred to an Agilent 6890 Gas Chromatograph (Agilent Technologies, Inc, Wilmington, DE) equipped with a flame ionization detector. Ethanol, n-propanol and other components such as acetaldehyde were separated on a 60 m VOCOL capillary column (Supelco Inc., Bellefonte, PA) with film of 1.8 ?m in thickness and an inner diameter of 320 ?m. The carrier gas was helium at a flow rate of 18.0 ml/min. Quantitation was achieved by calibrating peak areas against those from headspace samples of known ethanol and acetaldehyde standards 21 .  Echocardiographic assessment Cardiac geometry and function were evaluated in anesthetized (Avertin 2.5%, 10 ?l/g body weight, i.p.) mice using 2-D guided M-mode echocardiography (Sonos 5500) equipped with a 15-6 MHz linear transducer. Left ventricular (LV) anterior and posterior wall dimensions during diastole and systole were recorded from three consecutive cycles in M-mode using methods adopted by the American Society of Echocardiography. Fractional shortening was calculated from LV end-diastolic (EDD) and end-systolic (ESD) diameters using the equation (EDD-ESD)/EDD. Heart rates were averaged over 10 cardiac cycles 22 .  Isolation of cardiomyocytes After ketamine/xylazine sedation, hearts were removed and perfused with Krebs-Henseleit bicarbonate (KHB) buffer containing (in mM): 118 NaCl, 4.7 KCl, 1.2 MgSO4, 1.2 KH2PO4, 25 NaHCO3, 10 HEPES and 11.1 glucose. Hearts were digested with collagenase D for 20 min. Left ventricles were removed and minced before being filtered. Myocyte yield was ? 75% which was not affected by high fat diet or metallothionein. Only rod-shaped myocytes with clear edges were selected for mechanical and intracellular Ca2+ study 11 .  Cell shortening/relengthening Mechanical properties of cardiomyocytes were assessed using an IonOptix™ soft-edge system (IonOptix, Milton, MA). Myocytes were placed in a chamber mounted on the stage of an Olympus IX-70 microscope and superfused (?2 ml/min at 25°C) with a KHB buffer containing 1 mmol/l CaCl2. Myocytes were field stimulated at 0.5 Hz unless otherwise stated. Cell shortening and relengthening were assessed including peak shortening (PS), time-to-PS (TPS), time-to-90% relengthening (TR90) and maximal velocities of shortening/relengthening (± dL/dt) 11 . In the case of altering stimulus frequency from 0.1 Hz to 5.0 Hz, the steady state contraction of myocyte was achieved (usually after the first 5-6 beats) before PS was recorded.  Intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> transients A cohort of myocytes was loaded with fura-2/AM (0.5 ?M) for 10 min and fluorescence intensity were recorded with a dual-excitation fluorescence photomultiplier system (Ionoptix). Myocytes were placed onto an Olympus IX-70 inverted microscope and imaged through a Fluor x 40 oil objective. Cells were exposed to light emitted by a 75W lamp and passed through either a 360 or a 380 nm filter, while being stimulated to contract at 0.5 Hz. Fluorescence emissions were detected between 480-520 nm and qualitative change in fura-2 fluorescence intensity (FFI) was inferred from FFI ratio at the two wavelengths (360/380). Fluorescence decay time was calculated as an indicator of intracellular Ca2+ clearing 11 .  SERCA activity measured by <sup>45</sup>Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake Cardiomyocytes were sonicated and solubilized in a Tris-sucrose homogenization buffer consisting of 30 mM Tris-HCl, 8% sucrose, 1 mM PMSF and 2 mM dithioithreitol, pH 7.1. To determine SERCA-dependent Ca2+ uptake, samples were treated with and without the SERCA inhibitor thapsigargin (10 ?M) for 15 min. The difference between the two readings was deemed the thapsigargin-sensitive uptake through SERCA. Uptake was initiated by the addition of an aliquot of supernatant to a solution consisting of (in mM) 100 KCl, 5 NaN3, 6 MgCl2, 0.15 EGTA, 0.12 CaCl2, 30 Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 10 oxalate, 2 ATP and 1 ?Ci 45CaCl2 at 37°C. Aliquots of samples were injected onto glass filters on a suction manifold and washed 3 times. Filters were then removed from the manifold, placed in scintillation fluid and counted. SERCA activity was expressed as cpm/mg protein 23 .  Histological examination Following anesthesia, hearts were excised and immediately placed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin at room temperature for 24 hrs after a brief rinse with PBS. The specimen were embedded in paraffin, cut in 5 ?m sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Cardiomyocyte cross-sectional areas were calculated on a digital microscope (x400) using the Image J (version1.34S) software. The Masson's trichrome staining was used to detect fibrosis in heart sections. The percentage of fibrosis was calculated using the histogram function of the photoshop software. Briefly, 7 random fields (6 mm2) at 200x magnification from each section were assessed for fibrosis. The fraction of the light blue stained area normalized to the total area was used as an indicator of myocardial fibrosis while omitting fibrosis of the perivascular, epicardial and endocardial areas from the study 24 .  Protein carbonyl assay To assess cardiac oxidative damage, the tissue protein carbonyl content was determined as described 11 . Briefly, proteins were extracted and minced to prevent proteolytic degradation. Nucleic acids were eliminated by treating the samples with 1% streptomycin sulfate for 15 min, followed by a 10 min centrifugation (11,000 × g). Protein was precipitated by adding an equal volume of 20% TCA to protein (0.5 mg) and centrifuged for 1 min. The TCA solution was removed and the sample resuspended in 10 mM 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (2,4-DNPH) solution. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 15-30 min. Following a 500 ?l of 20% TCA addition, samples were centrifuged for 3 min. The supernatant was discarded, the pellet washed in ethanol:ethyl acetate and allowed to incubate at room temperature for 10 min. The samples were centrifuged again for 3 min and the ethanol:ethyl acetate steps repeated 2 more times. The precipitate was resuspended in 6 M guanidine solution, centrifuged for 3 min and insoluble debris removed. The maximum absorbance (360-390 nm) of the supernatant was read against appropriate blanks (water, 2 M HCl) and the carbonyl content was calculated using the molar absorption coefficient of 22,000 M?1cm?1.  Caspase- 3 assay Caspase-3 is an enzyme activated during induction of apoptosis. In brief, 1 ml of PBS was added to flasks containing human cardiac myocytes and the monolayer was scraped and collected in a microfuge tube. The cells were centrifuged at 10,000× g at 4°C for 10 min and cell pellets were lysed in 100 ?l of ice-cold cell lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 0.1% CHAPS, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40). After cells were lysed, 70 ?l of reaction buffer was added to cell lysate (30 ?l) followed by an additional 20 ?l of caspase-3 colorimetric substrate (Ac-DEVD-pNA) and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr, during which time the caspase in the sample was allowed to cleave the chromophore p-NA from the substrate molecule. The samples were then read with a microplate reader at 405 nm. Caspase-3 activity was expressed as picomoles of pNA released per microgram of protein per minute 17 .  Western blot analysis The protein was prepared as described 17 . Samples containing equal amount of proteins were separated on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gels in a minigel apparatus (Mini-PROTEAN II, Bio-Rad) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5% milk in TBS-T, and were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-ALDH2 (kindly provided by Dr. Henry Weiner, Purdue University Lafayette, IN), anti-p47phox, anti-calcineurin A, anti-ASK-1, anti-pASK-1 (Ser83), anti-GSK-3?, anti-pGSK-3? (Ser9), anti-GATA4, anti-GATA4 (Ser105), anti-CREB and anti-pCREB (Ser133) antibodies. After immunoblotting, the film was scanned and the intensity of immunoblot bands was detected with a Bio-Rad Calibrated Densitometer. ?-Actin was used as the loading control.  Data analysis Data were presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance (p < 0.05) for each variable was estimated by analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Tukey's post hoc analysis. The authors had full access to and take full responsibility for the integrity of the data. All authors have read and agree to the manuscript as written.  RESULTS General features and echocardiographic properties of FVB and ALDH2 mice fed with alcohol Chronic alcohol feeding did not affect body, liver and kidney weights although the heart was significantly enlarged compared with control mice. ALDH2 did not affect body or organ weights although it significantly alleviated alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Blood alcohol levels were significantly elevated equally in alcohol consuming FVB and ALDH2 mice. ALDH2 significantly reduced chronic alcohol ingestion-induced elevation in blood acetaldehyde levels. The levels of blood alcohol and acetaldehyde were either undetectable or minimal in non-alcohol consuming mice ( Table 1 ). Analysis of cardiac tissue acetaldehyde levels further supported the notion that ALDH2 transgene alleviated chronic alcohol ingestion-induced increase in tissue acetaldehyde levels ( Fig. 1 ). Heart rate and LV ESD were comparable among all groups. While LV mass, EDD and fractional shortening were no different between control groups, alcohol intake significantly increased LV EDD, reduced LV wall thickness and enhanced LV mass (absolute or normalized to body weight) while reducing fractional shortening in FVB but not ALDH2 mice. These deleterious changes seen in the FVB-ETOH group indicate cardiac hypertrophy and associated dilated cardiomyopathy ( Table 1 ). Cardiomyocyte contractile and intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> property, <sup>45</sup>Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake and frequency response Consistent with our data of hypertrophied hearts in response to alcohol intake, chronic alcohol intake but not ALDH2 significantly enhanced longitudinal cross-section area. Moreover, chronic alcohol intake significantly reduced PS and ± dL/dt as well as prolonged TR90 without affecting TPS in FVB cardiomyocytes. Importantly, ALDH2 abolished chronic alcohol intake-induced mechanical abnormalities ( Fig. 2 ). In addition, cardiomyocytes from alcohol-fed mice displayed a significantly depressed intracellular Ca2+ rise in response to electrical stimulus (?FFI) and reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay rate associated with an unchanged baseline intracellular Ca2+. The reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay was consistent with the dampened 45Ca2+ uptake, indicating impaired SERCA activity in murine cardiomyocytes following alcohol intake. ALDH2 negated alcohol-induced changes in ?FFI, intracellular Ca2+ decay and 45Ca2+ uptake without eliciting any effect on intracellular Ca2+ properties in the absence of chronic alcohol intake ( Fig. 3A-D ). Mouse hearts beat at high frequencies (> 400/min at 37°C) with sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ store being the primary determinant of the frequency dependent response. We initially stimulated cardiomyocytes to contract at 0.5 Hz for 5 min to ensure steady-state before stepwise altering the frequency from 0.1 Hz to 5 Hz (300 beat/min). All recordings were normalized to the PS obtained at 0.1 Hz of the same cell. Myocytes from alcohol-fed group exhibited significantly exaggerated depression in PS at 1.0 Hz and higher. ALDH2 transgene did not alter the pattern of PS response at all frequencies tested, regardless of alcohol or control diet intake ( Fig. 3E ). Effects of alcohol treatment on myocardial histology To assess the impact ALDH2 on myocardial histology following chronic alcohol ingestion, cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area and interstitial fibrosis were examined. In the H&E staining sections, alcohol ingestion increased the cardiomyocyte transverse cross-section area, consistent with increased ventricular mass in FVB mice. The alcohol-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was significantly attenuated by ALDH2 despite cardiomyocyte areas from the ALDH2+ETOH group were still significantly greater that non-drinking groups. Our further examination using the Masson trichrome staining revealed overt myocardial fibrosis following chronic alcohol ingestion, the effect of which was significantly attenuated by the ALDH2 transgene ( Fig. 4 ). Effects of ALDH2 on alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation To examine the potential mechanism of action behind ALDH2-elicited protection against alcoholic cardiomyopathy, myocardial apoptosis and protein damage were examined in cardiac tissues from FVB and ALDH2 mice consuming control or alcohol diets. Results shown in Fig. 5 indicate that caspase 3 activity and protein carbonyl formation were both significantly elevated in hearts of alcohol-fed FVB mice. Consistent with its mechanical and morphometric response, ALDH2 significantly ameliorated alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein damage. ALDH2 itself displayed minimal effects on apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation in the absence of alcohol intake, indicating that the transgene itself is not innately harmful. Western blot analysis of p47<sup>phox</sup>, calcineurin, activation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB To elucidate the potential mechanism(s) involved in ALDH2-elicited cardiac protection against alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction, we further examined the expression of the NADPH oxidase p47phox and p67 phox subunits, the cardiac hypertrophic gene calcineurin, total and phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. As shown in Fig. 6 , chronic alcohol intake led to upregulated p47phox (but not p67phox, data not shown) and calcineurin A, as well as enhanced phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB in FVB mice. Interestingly, ALDH2 reversed alcohol-induced abnormal upregulation or activation of these proteins without eliciting any effect by itself. Total protein expression of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB was not affected by either chronic alcohol intake or ALDH2 transgene.  RESULTS General features and echocardiographic properties of FVB and ALDH2 mice fed with alcohol Chronic alcohol feeding did not affect body, liver and kidney weights although the heart was significantly enlarged compared with control mice. ALDH2 did not affect body or organ weights although it significantly alleviated alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Blood alcohol levels were significantly elevated equally in alcohol consuming FVB and ALDH2 mice. ALDH2 significantly reduced chronic alcohol ingestion-induced elevation in blood acetaldehyde levels. The levels of blood alcohol and acetaldehyde were either undetectable or minimal in non-alcohol consuming mice ( Table 1 ). Analysis of cardiac tissue acetaldehyde levels further supported the notion that ALDH2 transgene alleviated chronic alcohol ingestion-induced increase in tissue acetaldehyde levels ( Fig. 1 ). Heart rate and LV ESD were comparable among all groups. While LV mass, EDD and fractional shortening were no different between control groups, alcohol intake significantly increased LV EDD, reduced LV wall thickness and enhanced LV mass (absolute or normalized to body weight) while reducing fractional shortening in FVB but not ALDH2 mice. These deleterious changes seen in the FVB-ETOH group indicate cardiac hypertrophy and associated dilated cardiomyopathy ( Table 1 ). Cardiomyocyte contractile and intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> property, <sup>45</sup>Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake and frequency response Consistent with our data of hypertrophied hearts in response to alcohol intake, chronic alcohol intake but not ALDH2 significantly enhanced longitudinal cross-section area. Moreover, chronic alcohol intake significantly reduced PS and ± dL/dt as well as prolonged TR90 without affecting TPS in FVB cardiomyocytes. Importantly, ALDH2 abolished chronic alcohol intake-induced mechanical abnormalities ( Fig. 2 ). In addition, cardiomyocytes from alcohol-fed mice displayed a significantly depressed intracellular Ca2+ rise in response to electrical stimulus (?FFI) and reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay rate associated with an unchanged baseline intracellular Ca2+. The reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay was consistent with the dampened 45Ca2+ uptake, indicating impaired SERCA activity in murine cardiomyocytes following alcohol intake. ALDH2 negated alcohol-induced changes in ?FFI, intracellular Ca2+ decay and 45Ca2+ uptake without eliciting any effect on intracellular Ca2+ properties in the absence of chronic alcohol intake ( Fig. 3A-D ). Mouse hearts beat at high frequencies (> 400/min at 37°C) with sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ store being the primary determinant of the frequency dependent response. We initially stimulated cardiomyocytes to contract at 0.5 Hz for 5 min to ensure steady-state before stepwise altering the frequency from 0.1 Hz to 5 Hz (300 beat/min). All recordings were normalized to the PS obtained at 0.1 Hz of the same cell. Myocytes from alcohol-fed group exhibited significantly exaggerated depression in PS at 1.0 Hz and higher. ALDH2 transgene did not alter the pattern of PS response at all frequencies tested, regardless of alcohol or control diet intake ( Fig. 3E ). Effects of alcohol treatment on myocardial histology To assess the impact ALDH2 on myocardial histology following chronic alcohol ingestion, cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area and interstitial fibrosis were examined. In the H&E staining sections, alcohol ingestion increased the cardiomyocyte transverse cross-section area, consistent with increased ventricular mass in FVB mice. The alcohol-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was significantly attenuated by ALDH2 despite cardiomyocyte areas from the ALDH2+ETOH group were still significantly greater that non-drinking groups. Our further examination using the Masson trichrome staining revealed overt myocardial fibrosis following chronic alcohol ingestion, the effect of which was significantly attenuated by the ALDH2 transgene ( Fig. 4 ). Effects of ALDH2 on alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation To examine the potential mechanism of action behind ALDH2-elicited protection against alcoholic cardiomyopathy, myocardial apoptosis and protein damage were examined in cardiac tissues from FVB and ALDH2 mice consuming control or alcohol diets. Results shown in Fig. 5 indicate that caspase 3 activity and protein carbonyl formation were both significantly elevated in hearts of alcohol-fed FVB mice. Consistent with its mechanical and morphometric response, ALDH2 significantly ameliorated alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein damage. ALDH2 itself displayed minimal effects on apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation in the absence of alcohol intake, indicating that the transgene itself is not innately harmful. Western blot analysis of p47<sup>phox</sup>, calcineurin, activation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB To elucidate the potential mechanism(s) involved in ALDH2-elicited cardiac protection against alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction, we further examined the expression of the NADPH oxidase p47phox and p67 phox subunits, the cardiac hypertrophic gene calcineurin, total and phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. As shown in Fig. 6 , chronic alcohol intake led to upregulated p47phox (but not p67phox, data not shown) and calcineurin A, as well as enhanced phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB in FVB mice. Interestingly, ALDH2 reversed alcohol-induced abnormal upregulation or activation of these proteins without eliciting any effect by itself. Total protein expression of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB was not affected by either chronic alcohol intake or ALDH2 transgene.  General features and echocardiographic properties of FVB and ALDH2 mice fed with alcohol Chronic alcohol feeding did not affect body, liver and kidney weights although the heart was significantly enlarged compared with control mice. ALDH2 did not affect body or organ weights although it significantly alleviated alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Blood alcohol levels were significantly elevated equally in alcohol consuming FVB and ALDH2 mice. ALDH2 significantly reduced chronic alcohol ingestion-induced elevation in blood acetaldehyde levels. The levels of blood alcohol and acetaldehyde were either undetectable or minimal in non-alcohol consuming mice ( Table 1 ). Analysis of cardiac tissue acetaldehyde levels further supported the notion that ALDH2 transgene alleviated chronic alcohol ingestion-induced increase in tissue acetaldehyde levels ( Fig. 1 ). Heart rate and LV ESD were comparable among all groups. While LV mass, EDD and fractional shortening were no different between control groups, alcohol intake significantly increased LV EDD, reduced LV wall thickness and enhanced LV mass (absolute or normalized to body weight) while reducing fractional shortening in FVB but not ALDH2 mice. These deleterious changes seen in the FVB-ETOH group indicate cardiac hypertrophy and associated dilated cardiomyopathy ( Table 1 ).  General features and echocardiographic properties of FVB and ALDH2 mice fed with alcohol Chronic alcohol feeding did not affect body, liver and kidney weights although the heart was significantly enlarged compared with control mice. ALDH2 did not affect body or organ weights although it significantly alleviated alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Blood alcohol levels were significantly elevated equally in alcohol consuming FVB and ALDH2 mice. ALDH2 significantly reduced chronic alcohol ingestion-induced elevation in blood acetaldehyde levels. The levels of blood alcohol and acetaldehyde were either undetectable or minimal in non-alcohol consuming mice ( Table 1 ). Analysis of cardiac tissue acetaldehyde levels further supported the notion that ALDH2 transgene alleviated chronic alcohol ingestion-induced increase in tissue acetaldehyde levels ( Fig. 1 ). Heart rate and LV ESD were comparable among all groups. While LV mass, EDD and fractional shortening were no different between control groups, alcohol intake significantly increased LV EDD, reduced LV wall thickness and enhanced LV mass (absolute or normalized to body weight) while reducing fractional shortening in FVB but not ALDH2 mice. These deleterious changes seen in the FVB-ETOH group indicate cardiac hypertrophy and associated dilated cardiomyopathy ( Table 1 ).  Cardiomyocyte contractile and intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> property, <sup>45</sup>Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake and frequency response Consistent with our data of hypertrophied hearts in response to alcohol intake, chronic alcohol intake but not ALDH2 significantly enhanced longitudinal cross-section area. Moreover, chronic alcohol intake significantly reduced PS and ± dL/dt as well as prolonged TR90 without affecting TPS in FVB cardiomyocytes. Importantly, ALDH2 abolished chronic alcohol intake-induced mechanical abnormalities ( Fig. 2 ). In addition, cardiomyocytes from alcohol-fed mice displayed a significantly depressed intracellular Ca2+ rise in response to electrical stimulus (?FFI) and reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay rate associated with an unchanged baseline intracellular Ca2+. The reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay was consistent with the dampened 45Ca2+ uptake, indicating impaired SERCA activity in murine cardiomyocytes following alcohol intake. ALDH2 negated alcohol-induced changes in ?FFI, intracellular Ca2+ decay and 45Ca2+ uptake without eliciting any effect on intracellular Ca2+ properties in the absence of chronic alcohol intake ( Fig. 3A-D ). Mouse hearts beat at high frequencies (> 400/min at 37°C) with sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ store being the primary determinant of the frequency dependent response. We initially stimulated cardiomyocytes to contract at 0.5 Hz for 5 min to ensure steady-state before stepwise altering the frequency from 0.1 Hz to 5 Hz (300 beat/min). All recordings were normalized to the PS obtained at 0.1 Hz of the same cell. Myocytes from alcohol-fed group exhibited significantly exaggerated depression in PS at 1.0 Hz and higher. ALDH2 transgene did not alter the pattern of PS response at all frequencies tested, regardless of alcohol or control diet intake ( Fig. 3E ).  Cardiomyocyte contractile and intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> property, <sup>45</sup>Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake and frequency response Consistent with our data of hypertrophied hearts in response to alcohol intake, chronic alcohol intake but not ALDH2 significantly enhanced longitudinal cross-section area. Moreover, chronic alcohol intake significantly reduced PS and ± dL/dt as well as prolonged TR90 without affecting TPS in FVB cardiomyocytes. Importantly, ALDH2 abolished chronic alcohol intake-induced mechanical abnormalities ( Fig. 2 ). In addition, cardiomyocytes from alcohol-fed mice displayed a significantly depressed intracellular Ca2+ rise in response to electrical stimulus (?FFI) and reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay rate associated with an unchanged baseline intracellular Ca2+. The reduced intracellular Ca2+ decay was consistent with the dampened 45Ca2+ uptake, indicating impaired SERCA activity in murine cardiomyocytes following alcohol intake. ALDH2 negated alcohol-induced changes in ?FFI, intracellular Ca2+ decay and 45Ca2+ uptake without eliciting any effect on intracellular Ca2+ properties in the absence of chronic alcohol intake ( Fig. 3A-D ). Mouse hearts beat at high frequencies (> 400/min at 37°C) with sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ store being the primary determinant of the frequency dependent response. We initially stimulated cardiomyocytes to contract at 0.5 Hz for 5 min to ensure steady-state before stepwise altering the frequency from 0.1 Hz to 5 Hz (300 beat/min). All recordings were normalized to the PS obtained at 0.1 Hz of the same cell. Myocytes from alcohol-fed group exhibited significantly exaggerated depression in PS at 1.0 Hz and higher. ALDH2 transgene did not alter the pattern of PS response at all frequencies tested, regardless of alcohol or control diet intake ( Fig. 3E ).  Effects of alcohol treatment on myocardial histology To assess the impact ALDH2 on myocardial histology following chronic alcohol ingestion, cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area and interstitial fibrosis were examined. In the H&E staining sections, alcohol ingestion increased the cardiomyocyte transverse cross-section area, consistent with increased ventricular mass in FVB mice. The alcohol-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was significantly attenuated by ALDH2 despite cardiomyocyte areas from the ALDH2+ETOH group were still significantly greater that non-drinking groups. Our further examination using the Masson trichrome staining revealed overt myocardial fibrosis following chronic alcohol ingestion, the effect of which was significantly attenuated by the ALDH2 transgene ( Fig. 4 ).  Effects of alcohol treatment on myocardial histology To assess the impact ALDH2 on myocardial histology following chronic alcohol ingestion, cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area and interstitial fibrosis were examined. In the H&E staining sections, alcohol ingestion increased the cardiomyocyte transverse cross-section area, consistent with increased ventricular mass in FVB mice. The alcohol-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was significantly attenuated by ALDH2 despite cardiomyocyte areas from the ALDH2+ETOH group were still significantly greater that non-drinking groups. Our further examination using the Masson trichrome staining revealed overt myocardial fibrosis following chronic alcohol ingestion, the effect of which was significantly attenuated by the ALDH2 transgene ( Fig. 4 ).  Effects of ALDH2 on alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation To examine the potential mechanism of action behind ALDH2-elicited protection against alcoholic cardiomyopathy, myocardial apoptosis and protein damage were examined in cardiac tissues from FVB and ALDH2 mice consuming control or alcohol diets. Results shown in Fig. 5 indicate that caspase 3 activity and protein carbonyl formation were both significantly elevated in hearts of alcohol-fed FVB mice. Consistent with its mechanical and morphometric response, ALDH2 significantly ameliorated alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein damage. ALDH2 itself displayed minimal effects on apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation in the absence of alcohol intake, indicating that the transgene itself is not innately harmful.  Effects of ALDH2 on alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation To examine the potential mechanism of action behind ALDH2-elicited protection against alcoholic cardiomyopathy, myocardial apoptosis and protein damage were examined in cardiac tissues from FVB and ALDH2 mice consuming control or alcohol diets. Results shown in Fig. 5 indicate that caspase 3 activity and protein carbonyl formation were both significantly elevated in hearts of alcohol-fed FVB mice. Consistent with its mechanical and morphometric response, ALDH2 significantly ameliorated alcohol-induced apoptosis and protein damage. ALDH2 itself displayed minimal effects on apoptosis and protein carbonyl formation in the absence of alcohol intake, indicating that the transgene itself is not innately harmful.  Western blot analysis of p47<sup>phox</sup>, calcineurin, activation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB To elucidate the potential mechanism(s) involved in ALDH2-elicited cardiac protection against alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction, we further examined the expression of the NADPH oxidase p47phox and p67 phox subunits, the cardiac hypertrophic gene calcineurin, total and phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. As shown in Fig. 6 , chronic alcohol intake led to upregulated p47phox (but not p67phox, data not shown) and calcineurin A, as well as enhanced phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB in FVB mice. Interestingly, ALDH2 reversed alcohol-induced abnormal upregulation or activation of these proteins without eliciting any effect by itself. Total protein expression of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB was not affected by either chronic alcohol intake or ALDH2 transgene.  Western blot analysis of p47<sup>phox</sup>, calcineurin, activation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB To elucidate the potential mechanism(s) involved in ALDH2-elicited cardiac protection against alcohol-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction, we further examined the expression of the NADPH oxidase p47phox and p67 phox subunits, the cardiac hypertrophic gene calcineurin, total and phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. As shown in Fig. 6 , chronic alcohol intake led to upregulated p47phox (but not p67phox, data not shown) and calcineurin A, as well as enhanced phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB in FVB mice. Interestingly, ALDH2 reversed alcohol-induced abnormal upregulation or activation of these proteins without eliciting any effect by itself. Total protein expression of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB was not affected by either chronic alcohol intake or ALDH2 transgene.  DISCUSSION The myocardial morphometric and functional observation from our study demonstrated that ALDH2 transgene significantly attenuated or ablated chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction. Our data further revealed that ALDH2 significantly ameliorated chronic alcohol intake-induced myocardial fibrosis, protein carbonyl formation, apoptosis, enhanced NADPH oxidase p47phox and calcineurin expression as well as hyperactivation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB, indicating a role of these signaling molecules in chronic alcohol ingestion-induced cardiac functional and morphometric abnormalities. These data strongly support the notion that acetaldehyde may be an essential player in the pathogenesis of alcoholic cardiomyopathy and suggest a therapeutic potential of ALDH2 and acetaldehyde detoxification in the management of chronic alcoholism-associated complications. The ALDH2 transgene, along with ADH, are useful to artificially alter acetaldehyde and/or ethanol metabolism 5 , 12 . The availability of both transgenes has made it possible to evaluate the role of acetaldehyde in the pathogenesis of alcoholic cardiomyopathy. Although ethanol toxicity, oxidative damage, lipid peroxidation and altered membrane integrity have been speculated to contribute to alcohol-induced tissue injury 25 , 26 , none of these hypotheses has been fully validated experimentally or clinically. The acetaldehyde theory received some recent attention since many of alcohol-elicited cell damages such as ROS production and peroxidation of lipid, protein and DNA may be mimicked by acetaldehyde 5 , 11 , 25 , 26 . Evidence from our laboratory indicated that transgene mice with cardiac overexpression of ADH manifested exaggerated cardiac hypertrophy, contractile dysfunction, oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation and ER stress following chronic alcohol intake, associated with significantly elevated cardiac acetaldehyde levels 5 , 11 , 12 , 27 . Several ROS or stress signaling pathways including the ethanol-inducible CYP2E1 isoform of cytochrome P-450, xanthine oxidase and aldehyde oxidase have been implicated in the acetaldehyde-induced cellular toxicity. Metabolism of acetaldehyde through these enzymatic pathways promotes free radical generation en route to cell oxidant stress and apoptosis 28 - 31 . Acetaldehyde may also facilitate depletion of cellular glutathione and promote protein-adduct formation between acetaldehyde and the glutathione precursor, L-cysteine, which contributes to glutathione depletion and peroxidative reaction 5 , 28 , 31 . The ability of acetaldehyde to promote myocardial fibrosis, oxidative stress and apoptosis is consistent with our current observation of the enhanced Masson trichrome staining, protein carbonyl formation and caspase 3 activity in chronic alcohol-fed FVB but less likely ALDH2 mice. Results from immunoblotting analysis indicated that chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction is associated, at least in part, with upregulated NADPH oxidase p47 subunit and calcineurin A, hyper-phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. ALDH2 transgene ameliorates chronic alcohol intake-induced hyper-phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB, suggesting a possible role of these molecules in the cytoprotection of ALDH2. Inactivation of GSK-3? by phosphorylation at serine 9 plays an essential role in the regulation of the GSK-3? downstream signaling molecules GATA4 and calcineurin, and cardiac hypertrophy 13 , 15 . In this study, we showed that ALDH2 transgene prevented chronic alcohol consumption-induced cardiac hypertrophy as evidenced by heart weight/body weight ratio, LV mass and histological examination. Acetaldehyde has been shown to trigger oxidative stress and apoptosis via activation of stress signaling, which may in turn induce myocardial hypertrophy 2 , 32 , 33 . This is consistent with our observation of enhanced NADPH oxidase and ASK-1 phosphorylation following alcohol intake. The NADPH oxidase (‘Nox’) enzymes are a particularly important source of ROS that plays a critical role in ASK-1 activation, cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction 34 . Our observation that ALDH2 reversed chronic alcohol intake-induced phosphorylation of GATA4 and CREB also indicated a role of GATA4 and CREB in the regulation of cardiac hypertrophy. With the upregulated calcineurin, inhibition of GSK-3? (by its phosphorylation) and activated GATA4 may facilitate nuclear translocation of NFAT, thereby stimulating cardiac hypertrophy 13 . Nonetheless, the precise interplay among ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB is essentially unclear which warrants further investigation to elucidate the precise mechanism behind ALDH2-elicited protection against chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac injury. In summary, our present study provides evidence that overexpression of ALDH2 transgene rescues chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction. Our data indicated that activation of calcineurin, ASK-1, GATA4 and CREB associated with inhibition of GSK-3? are intimately involved in acetaldehyde and ALDH2-elicted cardiac remodeling. Given that activation of ALDH2 enzyme is capable of offering myocardial protection against ischemic damage independent of alcohol metabolism 35 , our data using the novel ALDH2 transgenic model further suggest the potential of ALDH2 enzyme as a therapeutic target clinically in alcoholic and other cardiac myopathic complications.  DISCUSSION The myocardial morphometric and functional observation from our study demonstrated that ALDH2 transgene significantly attenuated or ablated chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction. Our data further revealed that ALDH2 significantly ameliorated chronic alcohol intake-induced myocardial fibrosis, protein carbonyl formation, apoptosis, enhanced NADPH oxidase p47phox and calcineurin expression as well as hyperactivation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB, indicating a role of these signaling molecules in chronic alcohol ingestion-induced cardiac functional and morphometric abnormalities. These data strongly support the notion that acetaldehyde may be an essential player in the pathogenesis of alcoholic cardiomyopathy and suggest a therapeutic potential of ALDH2 and acetaldehyde detoxification in the management of chronic alcoholism-associated complications. The ALDH2 transgene, along with ADH, are useful to artificially alter acetaldehyde and/or ethanol metabolism 5 , 12 . The availability of both transgenes has made it possible to evaluate the role of acetaldehyde in the pathogenesis of alcoholic cardiomyopathy. Although ethanol toxicity, oxidative damage, lipid peroxidation and altered membrane integrity have been speculated to contribute to alcohol-induced tissue injury 25 , 26 , none of these hypotheses has been fully validated experimentally or clinically. The acetaldehyde theory received some recent attention since many of alcohol-elicited cell damages such as ROS production and peroxidation of lipid, protein and DNA may be mimicked by acetaldehyde 5 , 11 , 25 , 26 . Evidence from our laboratory indicated that transgene mice with cardiac overexpression of ADH manifested exaggerated cardiac hypertrophy, contractile dysfunction, oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation and ER stress following chronic alcohol intake, associated with significantly elevated cardiac acetaldehyde levels 5 , 11 , 12 , 27 . Several ROS or stress signaling pathways including the ethanol-inducible CYP2E1 isoform of cytochrome P-450, xanthine oxidase and aldehyde oxidase have been implicated in the acetaldehyde-induced cellular toxicity. Metabolism of acetaldehyde through these enzymatic pathways promotes free radical generation en route to cell oxidant stress and apoptosis 28 - 31 . Acetaldehyde may also facilitate depletion of cellular glutathione and promote protein-adduct formation between acetaldehyde and the glutathione precursor, L-cysteine, which contributes to glutathione depletion and peroxidative reaction 5 , 28 , 31 . The ability of acetaldehyde to promote myocardial fibrosis, oxidative stress and apoptosis is consistent with our current observation of the enhanced Masson trichrome staining, protein carbonyl formation and caspase 3 activity in chronic alcohol-fed FVB but less likely ALDH2 mice. Results from immunoblotting analysis indicated that chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction is associated, at least in part, with upregulated NADPH oxidase p47 subunit and calcineurin A, hyper-phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB. ALDH2 transgene ameliorates chronic alcohol intake-induced hyper-phosphorylation of ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB, suggesting a possible role of these molecules in the cytoprotection of ALDH2. Inactivation of GSK-3? by phosphorylation at serine 9 plays an essential role in the regulation of the GSK-3? downstream signaling molecules GATA4 and calcineurin, and cardiac hypertrophy 13 , 15 . In this study, we showed that ALDH2 transgene prevented chronic alcohol consumption-induced cardiac hypertrophy as evidenced by heart weight/body weight ratio, LV mass and histological examination. Acetaldehyde has been shown to trigger oxidative stress and apoptosis via activation of stress signaling, which may in turn induce myocardial hypertrophy 2 , 32 , 33 . This is consistent with our observation of enhanced NADPH oxidase and ASK-1 phosphorylation following alcohol intake. The NADPH oxidase (‘Nox’) enzymes are a particularly important source of ROS that plays a critical role in ASK-1 activation, cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction 34 . Our observation that ALDH2 reversed chronic alcohol intake-induced phosphorylation of GATA4 and CREB also indicated a role of GATA4 and CREB in the regulation of cardiac hypertrophy. With the upregulated calcineurin, inhibition of GSK-3? (by its phosphorylation) and activated GATA4 may facilitate nuclear translocation of NFAT, thereby stimulating cardiac hypertrophy 13 . Nonetheless, the precise interplay among ASK-1, GSK-3?, GATA4 and CREB is essentially unclear which warrants further investigation to elucidate the precise mechanism behind ALDH2-elicited protection against chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac injury. In summary, our present study provides evidence that overexpression of ALDH2 transgene rescues chronic alcohol intake-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile dysfunction. Our data indicated that activation of calcineurin, ASK-1, GATA4 and CREB associated with inhibition of GSK-3? are intimately involved in acetaldehyde and ALDH2-elicted cardiac remodeling. Given that activation of ALDH2 enzyme is capable of offering myocardial protection against ischemic damage independent of alcohol metabolism 35 , our data using the novel ALDH2 transgenic model further suggest the potential of ALDH2 enzyme as a therapeutic target clinically in alcoholic and other cardiac myopathic complications.  Figures and Table Fig. 1 (A): Identification of ALDH2 transgenic mice. Genomic DNA was isolated from 2-cm tail clips from 1-month-old mice and ALDH2 gene was identified by PCR. Lanes 1 and 4 are negative and the rest are positive for ALDH2 gene. M: marker; (B). Myocardial tissue acetaldehyde levels from FVB and ALDH2 transgenic mice consuming ethanol or control diets for 14 weeks. (C). ALDH2 expression in the liver, kidney, brain and heart from FVB and ALDH2 transgenic mice. Inset: Representative gel blots depicting ALDH2 and ?-actin protein expression using specific antibodies. Mean ± SEM, n = 6-7 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 2 Effect of ALDH2 transgene on chronic ethanol (ETOH) intake-induced cardiomyocyte contractile defects. A: Representative traces depicting cell shortening; B: Cross-sectional area (longitudinal); C: Peak shortening (PS); D: Maximal velocity of shortening/relengthening (± dL/dt); E: Time-to-PS (TPS) and F: Time-to-90% relengthening (TR90). Mean ± SEM, n = 160 – 161 cells from 8 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 3 Effect of ALDH2 transgene on chronic ethanol (ETOH) intake-induced intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis, SERCA activity and SR Ca2+ store evaluated by frequency (0.1 – 5.0 Hz)-dependent shortening response in murine cardiomyocytes. A: Resting fura-2 fluorescence intensity (FFI); B: Electrically-stimulated rise in FFI (?FFI); C: Intracellular Ca2+ decay rate; D: SERCA activity evaluated by 45Ca2+ uptake; and E: Frequency response. Each point represents PS normalized to that of baseline value at 0.1 Hz from the same cell. Mean ± SEM, n = 86 – 87 cells (A-C) and 6 mice (D) or given in parenthesis, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 4 Histological analyses hearts from FVB and ALDH2 mice with or without chronic alcohol intake for 14 weeks. A: Representative H&E staining micrographs showing transverse sections of left ventricular myocardium (x 400); B: Quantitative analysis of cardiomyocyte cross-sectional (transverse) area using measurements of ? 200 cardiomyocytes from 3-5 mice per group; C: Representative Masson trichrome staining micrographs showing longitudinal sections of left ventricular myocardium (x 200); and D: Quantitative analysis of fibrotic area (Masson trichrome stained area in light blue color normalized to the total myocardial area). Data were obtained from 3-5 mice per group, *p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs. FVB+ETOH. Fig. 5 Caspase 3 assay (panel A) and protein carbonyl formation (panel B) in myocardium from FVB and ALDH2 mice administrated with control or ethanol (ETOH) liquid diet for 14 weeks. Mean ± SEM, n = 5 – 7 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 6 Effect of ALDH2 on chronic alcohol (ETOH) intake-induced change in p47phox NADPH oxidase (panel A), calcineurin A (panel B), ASK-1 phosphorylation (normalized to total ASK-1, panel C), GSK-3? phosphorylation (normalized to total GSK-3?, panel D), GATA4 phosphorylation (normalized to total GATA4, panel E) and CREB phosphorylation (normalized to total CREB, panel F). Inset: representative gels using specific antibodies. ?-Actin was used as the loading control. Mean ± SEM, n = 5 – 7 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Table 1 Biometric and echocardiographic parameters of mice fed an alcohol diet (4%) for 14 weeks Parameter FVB FVB-ETOH ALDH ALDH-ETOH Body Weight (g) 27.8 ± 0.6 28.1 ± 0.5 28.7 ± 0.7 27.9 ± 0.5 Heart Weight (mg) 179 ± 8 208 ± 7 * 182 ± 8 181 ± 6 # Heart/Body Weight (mg/g) 6.45 ± 0.29 7.36 ± 0.20 * 6.62 ± 0.27 6.50 ± 0.19 # Liver Weight (g) 1.39 ± 0.05 1.44 ± 0.04 1.41 ± 0.05 1.40 ± 0.04 Liver/Body Weight (mg/g) 50.3 ± 2.1 50.9 ± 1.5 51.0 ± 2.4 50.1 ± 1.2 Kidney Weight (g) 0.37 ± 0.01 0.41 ± 0.02 0.36 ± 0.02 0.40 ± 0.02 Kidney/Body Weight (mg/g) 13.3 ± 0.4 14.2 ± 0.4 13.3 ± 0.7 14.3 ± 0.4 Blood Alcohol (mg/dl) Undetectable 55.1 ± 10.3 * Undetectable 51.9 ± 21.6 * Blood Acetaldehyde (?M) 2.39 ± 1.93 70.95 ± 8.68 * 1.75 ± 1.42 38.14 ± 6.68 * # Heart Rate (bpm) 475 ± 30 508 ± 24 497 ± 23 499 ± 25 Wall Thickness (mm) 0.84 ± 0.04 0.74 ± 0.04 * 0.84 ± 0.05 0.78 ± 0.05 EDD (mm) 2.57 ± 0.07 2.89 ± 0.08 * 2.57 ± 0.14 2.42 ± 0.12 # ESD (mm) 1.32 ± 0.12 1.49 ± 0.09 1.40 ± 0.11 1.30 ± 0.08 LV Mass (mg) 59.6 ± 4.0 71.0 ± 3.0 * 60.6 ± 3.1 58.9 ± 5.3 # Normalized LV Mass (mg/g) 2.24 ± 0.15 2.58 ± 0.11 * 2.00 ± 0.16 2.18 ± 0.20 # Fraction Shortening (%) 49.0 ± 4.2 38.9 ± 2.6 * 45.8 ± 1.8 48.1 ± 2.7 # ETOH = alcohol consuming; EDD = end diastolic diameter; ESD = end systolic diameter; LV = left ventricular. Mean ± SEM, n = 24 - 26 mice per group * p < 0.05 vs. FVB group # p < 0.05 vs. FVB-ETOH group  Figures and Table Fig. 1 (A): Identification of ALDH2 transgenic mice. Genomic DNA was isolated from 2-cm tail clips from 1-month-old mice and ALDH2 gene was identified by PCR. Lanes 1 and 4 are negative and the rest are positive for ALDH2 gene. M: marker; (B). Myocardial tissue acetaldehyde levels from FVB and ALDH2 transgenic mice consuming ethanol or control diets for 14 weeks. (C). ALDH2 expression in the liver, kidney, brain and heart from FVB and ALDH2 transgenic mice. Inset: Representative gel blots depicting ALDH2 and ?-actin protein expression using specific antibodies. Mean ± SEM, n = 6-7 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 2 Effect of ALDH2 transgene on chronic ethanol (ETOH) intake-induced cardiomyocyte contractile defects. A: Representative traces depicting cell shortening; B: Cross-sectional area (longitudinal); C: Peak shortening (PS); D: Maximal velocity of shortening/relengthening (± dL/dt); E: Time-to-PS (TPS) and F: Time-to-90% relengthening (TR90). Mean ± SEM, n = 160 – 161 cells from 8 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 3 Effect of ALDH2 transgene on chronic ethanol (ETOH) intake-induced intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis, SERCA activity and SR Ca2+ store evaluated by frequency (0.1 – 5.0 Hz)-dependent shortening response in murine cardiomyocytes. A: Resting fura-2 fluorescence intensity (FFI); B: Electrically-stimulated rise in FFI (?FFI); C: Intracellular Ca2+ decay rate; D: SERCA activity evaluated by 45Ca2+ uptake; and E: Frequency response. Each point represents PS normalized to that of baseline value at 0.1 Hz from the same cell. Mean ± SEM, n = 86 – 87 cells (A-C) and 6 mice (D) or given in parenthesis, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 4 Histological analyses hearts from FVB and ALDH2 mice with or without chronic alcohol intake for 14 weeks. A: Representative H&E staining micrographs showing transverse sections of left ventricular myocardium (x 400); B: Quantitative analysis of cardiomyocyte cross-sectional (transverse) area using measurements of ? 200 cardiomyocytes from 3-5 mice per group; C: Representative Masson trichrome staining micrographs showing longitudinal sections of left ventricular myocardium (x 200); and D: Quantitative analysis of fibrotic area (Masson trichrome stained area in light blue color normalized to the total myocardial area). Data were obtained from 3-5 mice per group, *p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs. FVB+ETOH. Fig. 5 Caspase 3 assay (panel A) and protein carbonyl formation (panel B) in myocardium from FVB and ALDH2 mice administrated with control or ethanol (ETOH) liquid diet for 14 weeks. Mean ± SEM, n = 5 – 7 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Fig. 6 Effect of ALDH2 on chronic alcohol (ETOH) intake-induced change in p47phox NADPH oxidase (panel A), calcineurin A (panel B), ASK-1 phosphorylation (normalized to total ASK-1, panel C), GSK-3? phosphorylation (normalized to total GSK-3?, panel D), GATA4 phosphorylation (normalized to total GATA4, panel E) and CREB phosphorylation (normalized to total CREB, panel F). Inset: representative gels using specific antibodies. ?-Actin was used as the loading control. Mean ± SEM, n = 5 – 7 mice per group, * p < 0.05 vs. FVB, # p < 0.05 vs . FVB+ETOH. Table 1 Biometric and echocardiographic parameters of mice fed an alcohol diet (4%) for 14 weeks Parameter FVB FVB-ETOH ALDH ALDH-ETOH Body Weight (g) 27.8 ± 0.6 28.1 ± 0.5 28.7 ± 0.7 27.9 ± 0.5 Heart Weight (mg) 179 ± 8 208 ± 7 * 182 ± 8 181 ± 6 # Heart/Body Weight (mg/g) 6.45 ± 0.29 7.36 ± 0.20 * 6.62 ± 0.27 6.50 ± 0.19 # Liver Weight (g) 1.39 ± 0.05 1.44 ± 0.04 1.41 ± 0.05 1.40 ± 0.04 Liver/Body Weight (mg/g) 50.3 ± 2.1 50.9 ± 1.5 51.0 ± 2.4 50.1 ± 1.2 Kidney Weight (g) 0.37 ± 0.01 0.41 ± 0.02 0.36 ± 0.02 0.40 ± 0.02 Kidney/Body Weight (mg/g) 13.3 ± 0.4 14.2 ± 0.4 13.3 ± 0.7 14.3 ± 0.4 Blood Alcohol (mg/dl) Undetectable 55.1 ± 10.3 * Undetectable 51.9 ± 21.6 * Blood Acetaldehyde (?M) 2.39 ± 1.93 70.95 ± 8.68 * 1.75 ± 1.42 38.14 ± 6.68 * # Heart Rate (bpm) 475 ± 30 508 ± 24 497 ± 23 499 ± 25 Wall Thickness (mm) 0.84 ± 0.04 0.74 ± 0.04 * 0.84 ± 0.05 0.78 ± 0.05 EDD (mm) 2.57 ± 0.07 2.89 ± 0.08 * 2.57 ± 0.14 2.42 ± 0.12 # ESD (mm) 1.32 ± 0.12 1.49 ± 0.09 1.40 ± 0.11 1.30 ± 0.08 LV Mass (mg) 59.6 ± 4.0 71.0 ± 3.0 * 60.6 ± 3.1 58.9 ± 5.3 # Normalized LV Mass (mg/g) 2.24 ± 0.15 2.58 ± 0.11 * 2.00 ± 0.16 2.18 ± 0.20 # Fraction Shortening (%) 49.0 ± 4.2 38.9 ± 2.6 * 45.8 ± 1.8 48.1 ± 2.7 # ETOH = alcohol consuming; EDD = end diastolic diameter; ESD = end systolic diameter; LV = left ventricular. Mean ± SEM, n = 24 - 26 mice per group * p < 0.05 vs. FVB group # p < 0.05 vs. FVB-ETOH group 