Ketogenic Diets: Evidence for Short and Long-term Efficacy The use of dietary treatments for epilepsy (ketogenic, modified Atkins, and low glycemic index diets) has been in continuous use since 1921. These treatments have been well-studied in the short-term, with approximately 50% of children having at least a 50% reduction in seizures after 6 months. Approximately one-third will have >90% reduction in their seizures as well. Animal studies confirm these findings, with broad evidence demonstrating the diet's acute anticonvulsant effects. In addition, the diet appears to maintain its efficacy in humans when provided continuously for several years. Interestingly, benefits may be seen long-term even when the diet is discontinued after only a few months of use, suggesting neuroprotective effects. This potential anti-epileptogenic activity has been recently demonstrated in some animal studies as well. This review will discuss the animal and human evidence for both short and long-term benefits of dietary therapies.  Introduction As compared to most of the other nonpharmacologic therapies which were discussed at the Dublin conference, and subsequently described in this supplement, the use of dietary therapy for epilepsy is certainly “low-tech”. Additionally, it has been in continuous use for nearly 90 years, supported by hundreds of publications examining its potential benefits. 1 Although primarily used for children, diets may have a significant role in the future for adults and have benefits for neurologic conditions other than epilepsy. What are the primary dietary therapies for epilepsy? At this time, these therapies include the traditional ketogenic diet (KD), the modified Atkins diet (MAD), and the low glycemic index treatment (LGIT). All three diets have been studied and are currently being used for both children and adults worldwide. The KD, first introduced in 1921, 2 is a high fat, adequate protein (1 gram/kg/day), and low carbohydrate diet that induces high levels of serum beta-hydroxybutyrate (and urinary acetoacetate). It is calorie and fluid restricted and traditionally started in the hospital following a 1-2 day fasting period. 3 The KD can be provided as the “classic” diet with predominantly long-chain triglycerides or the “MCT diet” using gradually increasing percentages of medium-chain triglycerides. The MAD was introduced in 2003 and mimics the KD in composition but without calorie, protein, or fluid restriction. 4 Carbohydrates are restricted to 10-15 grams per day and this diet is started on an outpatient basis without a fasting period. Similarly, the low glycemic index treatment (LGIT) is an outpatient-initiated therapy without restrictions on calories, protein, or fluid. 5 Unlike the modified Atkins diet, however, the LGIT limits specific carbohydrates to those with glycemic indices less than 50 (and 40-60 g/day). Do these diets reduce seizure frequency? There is an abundance of data in both animals and humans that dietary manipulations of metabolism can positively affect seizure activity, both in the short and long-term. In addition, there is evidence that diets can modify disease progression and have neuroprotective properties. Certainly, some of the metabolic substrates elaborated by these diets have been shown in the laboratory to exert profound neuroprotective effects. This article will discuss the evidence base for short and long-term benefits of dietary therapies for epilepsy.  Short-Term Benefits <sec id="S4"> <title>Animal evidence Ever since its clinical introduction in the 1920's, the KD has evoked fascination amongst investigators seeking to determine its underlying mechanisms of action. Indeed, it should not be surprising that the earliest animal studies involving the KD focused on the acute effects of ketone bodies. Keith 6 was the first to demonstrate that in rabbits, acetoacetate (ACA) was protective against seizures induced by thujone, a convulsant constituent found in many essential oils and an antagonist of GABAA receptors. 7 This intriguing observation was confirmed decades later by Likhodii and colleagues, 8 who found that both ACA and acetone blocked seizure activity induced by maximal electroshock and pentylenetetrazole in rats. Acetone itself was also effective against chemically evoked atypical absence seizures. These investigators also demonstrated that acetone, when injected intraperitoneally, yielded plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations consistent with doses used to suppress seizures, supporting the unusual possibility that this volatile agent might mediate the clinical effects of the KD. Further evidence of ACA's acute anticonvulsant effects was provided in an audiogenic seizure-susceptible mouse model which has been employed in the screening for investigational compounds for the treatment of epilepsy. 9 Curiously, however, while such experiments have demonstrated the acute anticonvulsant properties of ACA and acetone in vivo , there are no studies indicating that the major ketone body, ?-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), can exert similar effects. Furthermore, in vitro experiments appear to support the notion that BHB is not an anticonvulsant compound, like the medications used in clinical practice to treat epilepsy patients. Thio and colleagues 10 found that acute application of BHB did not affect standard measures of synaptic transmission in hippocampus. BHB, over a wide concentration range (300 ?M -10 mM), did not affect GABAA receptors, ionotropic glutamate receptors, or voltage-gated sodium channels. Surprisingly, despite clear in vivo effects, ACA also did not affect synaptic transmission in their hands. This negative study may in part be a consequence of: (1) the fact that ketone bodies were infused acutely (not chronically); (2) experiments were conducted in normal, not epileptic, brain; and (3) both culture and perfusion media contained glucose, which might be expected to counter a “ketotic” environment. Taken together, the experimental evidence for whether ketone bodies exert direct anticonvulsant actions remains unclear. Much of the existing animal literature pertaining to the KD involves studies where various high-fat treatments are implemented prior to acute provocation with either electrical stimulation or chemoconvulsant administration in rodents. Most animal diets have modeled the classic long-chain triglyceride (LCT) diet originally formulated by Wilder, 1 and conform closely to either a 4:1 or approximately 6:1 ketogenic ratio of fats to carbohydrates plus protein (by weight). In general, irrespective of precise dietary formulation – as long as ketosis is seen, and thus reflecting a shift from primarily glycolysis to intermediary metabolism – anticonvulsant effects have been observed. Thus, whether seizures are provoked by corneal electroshock, hydration electroshock, maximal electroshock, pentylenetetrazol, bicuculline, semicarbizide, kainate, fluorothyl, or 6 Hz stimulation chronic pre-treatment with a KD appears to render anticonvulsant effects. 11 - 22 However, historical observations in mouse models reflecting anticonvulsant efficacy of 4:1 or 6:1 KDs may be confounded by the fact that they did not control for intake of vitamins, minerals and antioxidants. When a balanced KD is utilized in acute seizure models, anticonvulsant efficacy was not actually seen in mouse PTZ, kainate or fluorothyl models. 23 With all of these studies, a number of experimental problems have precluded a greater understanding of the KD at a mechanistic level. Most of these relate to variable methodologies (e.g., use of calorie restriction, age at initiation and duration of therapy, dietary ratios and formulations, timing of treatment, mode of seizure induction, etc.) such that cross-comparisons have been impossible to make. 24 , 25 And, once again emphasizing the controversy surrounding the effects of ketone bodies, even in the face of prominent ketosis (i.e., > 4 mM), protection against acutely induced seizure activity in animal models is not universally seen. Thavendiranathan and colleagues 26 examined the effects of a medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) diet against maximal electroshock (MES) and pentylenetetrazol (PTZ)-induced seizures, despite the fact that ketonemia was equivalent to or substantially higher than that observed with administration of a LCT diet. Moreover, they found that the MCT diet was proconvulsant in the MES and maximal PTZ models. The above studies, in attempting to mirror the clinical experience, suggest that dietary effects in controlling excitability in the brain extend beyond species boundaries, but they do little to enhance our knowledge of underlying mechanisms of action. Rather, they raise more issues and highlight the necessity of developing and studying a more clinically relevant model. One critical limitation is that these laboratory investigations have been conducted in normal, not epileptic, rodent brain. What is required is a chronic model of the KD, employing an animal with early-onset, medically refractory epilepsy, and a responsivity to a particular formulation of a high-fat diet that best recapitulates all of the essential elements of the human experience ( Table 1 ). One could reasonably argue that a direct translation of clinical protocols to the rodent may not yield similar features, but this would be at least represent a good beginning.  <sec id="S4"> <title>Animal evidence Ever since its clinical introduction in the 1920's, the KD has evoked fascination amongst investigators seeking to determine its underlying mechanisms of action. Indeed, it should not be surprising that the earliest animal studies involving the KD focused on the acute effects of ketone bodies. Keith 6 was the first to demonstrate that in rabbits, acetoacetate (ACA) was protective against seizures induced by thujone, a convulsant constituent found in many essential oils and an antagonist of GABAA receptors. 7 This intriguing observation was confirmed decades later by Likhodii and colleagues, 8 who found that both ACA and acetone blocked seizure activity induced by maximal electroshock and pentylenetetrazole in rats. Acetone itself was also effective against chemically evoked atypical absence seizures. These investigators also demonstrated that acetone, when injected intraperitoneally, yielded plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations consistent with doses used to suppress seizures, supporting the unusual possibility that this volatile agent might mediate the clinical effects of the KD. Further evidence of ACA's acute anticonvulsant effects was provided in an audiogenic seizure-susceptible mouse model which has been employed in the screening for investigational compounds for the treatment of epilepsy. 9 Curiously, however, while such experiments have demonstrated the acute anticonvulsant properties of ACA and acetone in vivo , there are no studies indicating that the major ketone body, ?-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), can exert similar effects. Furthermore, in vitro experiments appear to support the notion that BHB is not an anticonvulsant compound, like the medications used in clinical practice to treat epilepsy patients. Thio and colleagues 10 found that acute application of BHB did not affect standard measures of synaptic transmission in hippocampus. BHB, over a wide concentration range (300 ?M -10 mM), did not affect GABAA receptors, ionotropic glutamate receptors, or voltage-gated sodium channels. Surprisingly, despite clear in vivo effects, ACA also did not affect synaptic transmission in their hands. This negative study may in part be a consequence of: (1) the fact that ketone bodies were infused acutely (not chronically); (2) experiments were conducted in normal, not epileptic, brain; and (3) both culture and perfusion media contained glucose, which might be expected to counter a “ketotic” environment. Taken together, the experimental evidence for whether ketone bodies exert direct anticonvulsant actions remains unclear. Much of the existing animal literature pertaining to the KD involves studies where various high-fat treatments are implemented prior to acute provocation with either electrical stimulation or chemoconvulsant administration in rodents. Most animal diets have modeled the classic long-chain triglyceride (LCT) diet originally formulated by Wilder, 1 and conform closely to either a 4:1 or approximately 6:1 ketogenic ratio of fats to carbohydrates plus protein (by weight). In general, irrespective of precise dietary formulation – as long as ketosis is seen, and thus reflecting a shift from primarily glycolysis to intermediary metabolism – anticonvulsant effects have been observed. Thus, whether seizures are provoked by corneal electroshock, hydration electroshock, maximal electroshock, pentylenetetrazol, bicuculline, semicarbizide, kainate, fluorothyl, or 6 Hz stimulation chronic pre-treatment with a KD appears to render anticonvulsant effects. 11 - 22 However, historical observations in mouse models reflecting anticonvulsant efficacy of 4:1 or 6:1 KDs may be confounded by the fact that they did not control for intake of vitamins, minerals and antioxidants. When a balanced KD is utilized in acute seizure models, anticonvulsant efficacy was not actually seen in mouse PTZ, kainate or fluorothyl models. 23 With all of these studies, a number of experimental problems have precluded a greater understanding of the KD at a mechanistic level. Most of these relate to variable methodologies (e.g., use of calorie restriction, age at initiation and duration of therapy, dietary ratios and formulations, timing of treatment, mode of seizure induction, etc.) such that cross-comparisons have been impossible to make. 24 , 25 And, once again emphasizing the controversy surrounding the effects of ketone bodies, even in the face of prominent ketosis (i.e., > 4 mM), protection against acutely induced seizure activity in animal models is not universally seen. Thavendiranathan and colleagues 26 examined the effects of a medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) diet against maximal electroshock (MES) and pentylenetetrazol (PTZ)-induced seizures, despite the fact that ketonemia was equivalent to or substantially higher than that observed with administration of a LCT diet. Moreover, they found that the MCT diet was proconvulsant in the MES and maximal PTZ models. The above studies, in attempting to mirror the clinical experience, suggest that dietary effects in controlling excitability in the brain extend beyond species boundaries, but they do little to enhance our knowledge of underlying mechanisms of action. Rather, they raise more issues and highlight the necessity of developing and studying a more clinically relevant model. One critical limitation is that these laboratory investigations have been conducted in normal, not epileptic, rodent brain. What is required is a chronic model of the KD, employing an animal with early-onset, medically refractory epilepsy, and a responsivity to a particular formulation of a high-fat diet that best recapitulates all of the essential elements of the human experience ( Table 1 ). One could reasonably argue that a direct translation of clinical protocols to the rodent may not yield similar features, but this would be at least represent a good beginning.  3-6 month data One of the largest prospective studies was reported in 1998, evaluating the outcomes of 150 consecutive children started on the KD at Johns Hopkins Hospital from 1996-1998. 31 At 6 months, 71% remained on the diet. Fifty-one percent had a >50% improvement and 32% had a >90% reduction. No specific seizure type preferentially improved, but the KD was somewhat less effective in children older than eight years of age. The strong evidence for short-term efficacy in multiple retrospective and prospective studies was recently summarized in a meta-analysis by Henderson and colleagues in 2006. 1 In this review, 50% of children had at least a 50% reduction in seizures by 6 months with 20% having a >90% reduction. Although none of these studies had a control group, the evidence was interpreted as compelling for the benefits of the KD. Since 2006, there have been several large studies worthy of note that have further demonstrated the short-term effectiveness of the KD, including some with control groups. 29 , 32 In the 2008 study from London, 32 children were randomly assigned to receive either the KD after 4 weeks (treatment group) or 16 weeks (control) (Neal 2008). Thirty-eight percent of those receiving the diet had a >50% reduction in seizures, compared to 6% of controls, p<0.0001. 32 Perhaps even more dramatic, there was a 38% decrease in the mean number of seizures with the diet compared to a 37% increase in the control group. A double-blinded study of children with Lennox Gastaut syndrome compared a treatment (saccharin solution) to a placebo (glucose solution) arm during the first 12 days of the diet following fasting periods. 29 Clinical seizures were reduced by 1.5 seizures per day with the saccharin solution, but this finding only approached statistical significance (p=0.07). 29 When analyzing all large studies (greater than 20 subjects) just over the past decade, the results are quite similar to those reviewed by Henderson in 2006 ( Table 2 ). After 6 months, 56% of 1,335 patients have had a >50% seizure reduction and 24% had a >90% seizure improvement.  Human evidence Rapidity of response For years, anecdotal evidence has described the occasional “miracle” response to the KD within hours of its initiation. It has been described that fasting, even before actual ketogenic food is provided, can lead to a rapid improvement in seizures. 27 More recent evidence has confirmed that the KD works quickly as an anticonvulsant. In a dual-center study of 99 children who responded to the KD, the median time parents reported significant seizure reduction was after 5 days (range, 1-65 days). 28 Children who were fasted and improved did so more quickly, by a median of 9 days (p<0.01). 28 This rapidity of response was also seen in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design study of the KD. 29 In 20 children, the KD was provided with two fasting periods over just a 12-day period, resulted in a median reduction of 34 seizures per day, with 65% having a >50% improvement. 29 Similarly, the MAD also appears to work very quickly. In both children and adults, improvement is seen in most patients within a 14-day period. 4 The data for the LGIT in 20 children also indicates that an acute effect is present. 30 3-6 month data One of the largest prospective studies was reported in 1998, evaluating the outcomes of 150 consecutive children started on the KD at Johns Hopkins Hospital from 1996-1998. 31 At 6 months, 71% remained on the diet. Fifty-one percent had a >50% improvement and 32% had a >90% reduction. No specific seizure type preferentially improved, but the KD was somewhat less effective in children older than eight years of age. The strong evidence for short-term efficacy in multiple retrospective and prospective studies was recently summarized in a meta-analysis by Henderson and colleagues in 2006. 1 In this review, 50% of children had at least a 50% reduction in seizures by 6 months with 20% having a >90% reduction. Although none of these studies had a control group, the evidence was interpreted as compelling for the benefits of the KD. Since 2006, there have been several large studies worthy of note that have further demonstrated the short-term effectiveness of the KD, including some with control groups. 29 , 32 In the 2008 study from London, 32 children were randomly assigned to receive either the KD after 4 weeks (treatment group) or 16 weeks (control) (Neal 2008). Thirty-eight percent of those receiving the diet had a >50% reduction in seizures, compared to 6% of controls, p<0.0001. 32 Perhaps even more dramatic, there was a 38% decrease in the mean number of seizures with the diet compared to a 37% increase in the control group. A double-blinded study of children with Lennox Gastaut syndrome compared a treatment (saccharin solution) to a placebo (glucose solution) arm during the first 12 days of the diet following fasting periods. 29 Clinical seizures were reduced by 1.5 seizures per day with the saccharin solution, but this finding only approached statistical significance (p=0.07). 29 When analyzing all large studies (greater than 20 subjects) just over the past decade, the results are quite similar to those reviewed by Henderson in 2006 ( Table 2 ). After 6 months, 56% of 1,335 patients have had a >50% seizure reduction and 24% had a >90% seizure improvement. Results from alternative diets The MAD and LGIT have only recently appeared on the clinical stage, and as such definitive evidence of clinical effectiveness has not yet been forthcoming. All studies of these diets to date report efficacy results in the short-term only, and are limited to 6 months. However, the results are promising and quite similar to the traditional KD. The first prospective study of the MAD in children aged 3-16 years was reported in 2006. 33 Thirteen of the 20 children (65%) had a >50% seizure reduction, seven of whom (35%) exhibited a >90% improvement, and four (20%) who became seizure-free; nine children were successfully able to reduce anticonvulsant medications. 33 Now after 6 years of continuous use in 100 published children and adults, the numbers remain surprisingly similar, with 45 (45%) of patients with intractable epilepsy having at least a 50% reduction in their seizure frequency and 28 (28%) with >90% reduction. 4 A study from Massachusetts General Hospital in 2005 described an even less restrictive diet, the “low glycemic index treatment”. 30 In this study, 10 of 20 children had a >90% seizure reduction despite an absence of urinary and only low levels of serum ketones. A recent review from the same center reported now 60 patients, with a 38% responder rate after 1 month. 5 Diet “indications” Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1) and pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (PDHD) are now clearly indications for use of the KD, and can be life-saving. However, as the majority of uses of the KD have been for epilepsy, understanding which epilepsy syndromes are more likely to respond than others remains a very important question. The past decade has witnessed a strong interest in finding these ideal epileptic disorders in which the KD may show higher seizure reduction rates than the 3-6 month efficacy data discussed earlier in this review. These “indications” have been recently summarized in an international consensus statement on the KD, 34 and include infantile spasms, tuberous sclerosis complex, myoclonic-astatic epilepsy, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (Dravet syndrome), and Rett syndrome. In addition, children in certain clinical situations appear to do remarkably well. These situations include those with gastrostomy tubes, infants formula-fed only, and those with concurrent vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) therapy. 34  Human evidence Rapidity of response For years, anecdotal evidence has described the occasional “miracle” response to the KD within hours of its initiation. It has been described that fasting, even before actual ketogenic food is provided, can lead to a rapid improvement in seizures. 27 More recent evidence has confirmed that the KD works quickly as an anticonvulsant. In a dual-center study of 99 children who responded to the KD, the median time parents reported significant seizure reduction was after 5 days (range, 1-65 days). 28 Children who were fasted and improved did so more quickly, by a median of 9 days (p<0.01). 28 This rapidity of response was also seen in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design study of the KD. 29 In 20 children, the KD was provided with two fasting periods over just a 12-day period, resulted in a median reduction of 34 seizures per day, with 65% having a >50% improvement. 29 Similarly, the MAD also appears to work very quickly. In both children and adults, improvement is seen in most patients within a 14-day period. 4 The data for the LGIT in 20 children also indicates that an acute effect is present. 30 3-6 month data One of the largest prospective studies was reported in 1998, evaluating the outcomes of 150 consecutive children started on the KD at Johns Hopkins Hospital from 1996-1998. 31 At 6 months, 71% remained on the diet. Fifty-one percent had a >50% improvement and 32% had a >90% reduction. No specific seizure type preferentially improved, but the KD was somewhat less effective in children older than eight years of age. The strong evidence for short-term efficacy in multiple retrospective and prospective studies was recently summarized in a meta-analysis by Henderson and colleagues in 2006. 1 In this review, 50% of children had at least a 50% reduction in seizures by 6 months with 20% having a >90% reduction. Although none of these studies had a control group, the evidence was interpreted as compelling for the benefits of the KD. Since 2006, there have been several large studies worthy of note that have further demonstrated the short-term effectiveness of the KD, including some with control groups. 29 , 32 In the 2008 study from London, 32 children were randomly assigned to receive either the KD after 4 weeks (treatment group) or 16 weeks (control) (Neal 2008). Thirty-eight percent of those receiving the diet had a >50% reduction in seizures, compared to 6% of controls, p<0.0001. 32 Perhaps even more dramatic, there was a 38% decrease in the mean number of seizures with the diet compared to a 37% increase in the control group. A double-blinded study of children with Lennox Gastaut syndrome compared a treatment (saccharin solution) to a placebo (glucose solution) arm during the first 12 days of the diet following fasting periods. 29 Clinical seizures were reduced by 1.5 seizures per day with the saccharin solution, but this finding only approached statistical significance (p=0.07). 29 When analyzing all large studies (greater than 20 subjects) just over the past decade, the results are quite similar to those reviewed by Henderson in 2006 ( Table 2 ). After 6 months, 56% of 1,335 patients have had a >50% seizure reduction and 24% had a >90% seizure improvement. Results from alternative diets The MAD and LGIT have only recently appeared on the clinical stage, and as such definitive evidence of clinical effectiveness has not yet been forthcoming. All studies of these diets to date report efficacy results in the short-term only, and are limited to 6 months. However, the results are promising and quite similar to the traditional KD. The first prospective study of the MAD in children aged 3-16 years was reported in 2006. 33 Thirteen of the 20 children (65%) had a >50% seizure reduction, seven of whom (35%) exhibited a >90% improvement, and four (20%) who became seizure-free; nine children were successfully able to reduce anticonvulsant medications. 33 Now after 6 years of continuous use in 100 published children and adults, the numbers remain surprisingly similar, with 45 (45%) of patients with intractable epilepsy having at least a 50% reduction in their seizure frequency and 28 (28%) with >90% reduction. 4 A study from Massachusetts General Hospital in 2005 described an even less restrictive diet, the “low glycemic index treatment”. 30 In this study, 10 of 20 children had a >90% seizure reduction despite an absence of urinary and only low levels of serum ketones. A recent review from the same center reported now 60 patients, with a 38% responder rate after 1 month. 5 Diet “indications” Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1) and pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (PDHD) are now clearly indications for use of the KD, and can be life-saving. However, as the majority of uses of the KD have been for epilepsy, understanding which epilepsy syndromes are more likely to respond than others remains a very important question. The past decade has witnessed a strong interest in finding these ideal epileptic disorders in which the KD may show higher seizure reduction rates than the 3-6 month efficacy data discussed earlier in this review. These “indications” have been recently summarized in an international consensus statement on the KD, 34 and include infantile spasms, tuberous sclerosis complex, myoclonic-astatic epilepsy, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (Dravet syndrome), and Rett syndrome. In addition, children in certain clinical situations appear to do remarkably well. These situations include those with gastrostomy tubes, infants formula-fed only, and those with concurrent vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) therapy. 34  Rapidity of response For years, anecdotal evidence has described the occasional “miracle” response to the KD within hours of its initiation. It has been described that fasting, even before actual ketogenic food is provided, can lead to a rapid improvement in seizures. 27 More recent evidence has confirmed that the KD works quickly as an anticonvulsant. In a dual-center study of 99 children who responded to the KD, the median time parents reported significant seizure reduction was after 5 days (range, 1-65 days). 28 Children who were fasted and improved did so more quickly, by a median of 9 days (p<0.01). 28 This rapidity of response was also seen in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design study of the KD. 29 In 20 children, the KD was provided with two fasting periods over just a 12-day period, resulted in a median reduction of 34 seizures per day, with 65% having a >50% improvement. 29 Similarly, the MAD also appears to work very quickly. In both children and adults, improvement is seen in most patients within a 14-day period. 4 The data for the LGIT in 20 children also indicates that an acute effect is present. 30  Rapidity of response For years, anecdotal evidence has described the occasional “miracle” response to the KD within hours of its initiation. It has been described that fasting, even before actual ketogenic food is provided, can lead to a rapid improvement in seizures. 27 More recent evidence has confirmed that the KD works quickly as an anticonvulsant. In a dual-center study of 99 children who responded to the KD, the median time parents reported significant seizure reduction was after 5 days (range, 1-65 days). 28 Children who were fasted and improved did so more quickly, by a median of 9 days (p<0.01). 28 This rapidity of response was also seen in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design study of the KD. 29 In 20 children, the KD was provided with two fasting periods over just a 12-day period, resulted in a median reduction of 34 seizures per day, with 65% having a >50% improvement. 29 Similarly, the MAD also appears to work very quickly. In both children and adults, improvement is seen in most patients within a 14-day period. 4 The data for the LGIT in 20 children also indicates that an acute effect is present. 30  Results from alternative diets The MAD and LGIT have only recently appeared on the clinical stage, and as such definitive evidence of clinical effectiveness has not yet been forthcoming. All studies of these diets to date report efficacy results in the short-term only, and are limited to 6 months. However, the results are promising and quite similar to the traditional KD. The first prospective study of the MAD in children aged 3-16 years was reported in 2006. 33 Thirteen of the 20 children (65%) had a >50% seizure reduction, seven of whom (35%) exhibited a >90% improvement, and four (20%) who became seizure-free; nine children were successfully able to reduce anticonvulsant medications. 33 Now after 6 years of continuous use in 100 published children and adults, the numbers remain surprisingly similar, with 45 (45%) of patients with intractable epilepsy having at least a 50% reduction in their seizure frequency and 28 (28%) with >90% reduction. 4 A study from Massachusetts General Hospital in 2005 described an even less restrictive diet, the “low glycemic index treatment”. 30 In this study, 10 of 20 children had a >90% seizure reduction despite an absence of urinary and only low levels of serum ketones. A recent review from the same center reported now 60 patients, with a 38% responder rate after 1 month. 5  Results from alternative diets The MAD and LGIT have only recently appeared on the clinical stage, and as such definitive evidence of clinical effectiveness has not yet been forthcoming. All studies of these diets to date report efficacy results in the short-term only, and are limited to 6 months. However, the results are promising and quite similar to the traditional KD. The first prospective study of the MAD in children aged 3-16 years was reported in 2006. 33 Thirteen of the 20 children (65%) had a >50% seizure reduction, seven of whom (35%) exhibited a >90% improvement, and four (20%) who became seizure-free; nine children were successfully able to reduce anticonvulsant medications. 33 Now after 6 years of continuous use in 100 published children and adults, the numbers remain surprisingly similar, with 45 (45%) of patients with intractable epilepsy having at least a 50% reduction in their seizure frequency and 28 (28%) with >90% reduction. 4 A study from Massachusetts General Hospital in 2005 described an even less restrictive diet, the “low glycemic index treatment”. 30 In this study, 10 of 20 children had a >90% seizure reduction despite an absence of urinary and only low levels of serum ketones. A recent review from the same center reported now 60 patients, with a 38% responder rate after 1 month. 5  Diet “indications” Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1) and pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (PDHD) are now clearly indications for use of the KD, and can be life-saving. However, as the majority of uses of the KD have been for epilepsy, understanding which epilepsy syndromes are more likely to respond than others remains a very important question. The past decade has witnessed a strong interest in finding these ideal epileptic disorders in which the KD may show higher seizure reduction rates than the 3-6 month efficacy data discussed earlier in this review. These “indications” have been recently summarized in an international consensus statement on the KD, 34 and include infantile spasms, tuberous sclerosis complex, myoclonic-astatic epilepsy, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (Dravet syndrome), and Rett syndrome. In addition, children in certain clinical situations appear to do remarkably well. These situations include those with gastrostomy tubes, infants formula-fed only, and those with concurrent vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) therapy. 34  Diet “indications” Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1) and pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (PDHD) are now clearly indications for use of the KD, and can be life-saving. However, as the majority of uses of the KD have been for epilepsy, understanding which epilepsy syndromes are more likely to respond than others remains a very important question. The past decade has witnessed a strong interest in finding these ideal epileptic disorders in which the KD may show higher seizure reduction rates than the 3-6 month efficacy data discussed earlier in this review. These “indications” have been recently summarized in an international consensus statement on the KD, 34 and include infantile spasms, tuberous sclerosis complex, myoclonic-astatic epilepsy, severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (Dravet syndrome), and Rett syndrome. In addition, children in certain clinical situations appear to do remarkably well. These situations include those with gastrostomy tubes, infants formula-fed only, and those with concurrent vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) therapy. 34  Long-Term Benefits Animal evidence Neuroprotection and Anti-Epileptogenesis In approximately 20% of patients, anticonvulsant medications can be successfully discontinued without recrudescence of seizures. It is this observation that forms the basis for the intriguing hypothesis that a KD may possess neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic properties. While several anecdotal accounts of an enduring effect of the KD exist, recent clinical studies more strongly suggest a potential anti-epileptogenic effect of the KD. 35 , 36 However, it is difficult to determine whether patients who remain seizure-free after cessation of a KD have had spontaneous remission of their epilepsy or have experienced a true direct anti-epileptogenic (or disease-modifying) effect. Moreover, it is not possible to account for the effects of blocking seizure activity over a prolonged duration. To date, other than anecdotal reports, there exist no controlled studies indicating whether the KD is in fact neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic. In considering such specific effects, it should be noted that epilepsy can develop without overt evidence of neuronal injury, 37 and neuronal damage does not necessarily lead to epilepsy. 38 Hence, the terms “neuroprotection” and “anti-epileptogenesis” are not necessarily synonymous. Despite the lack of clinical data, there are a growing number of animal and in vitro studies supporting both neuroprotective and anti-epileptogenic effects of the KD. Hori and colleagues 39 were the first to demonstrate the long-term effects of a KD in a chronic epilepsy model. In this study, adult male rats were first subjected to electrical kindling, and ten days after being fully kindled, these animals were treated with either a 4:1 KD or standard rodent chow. For 5 weeks, after-discharge threshold and duration (ADT, ADD) and stage 5 seizure threshold and duration (ST, SD) were assessed on a weekly basis. Additionally, during the third week, these investigators studied the impact of a KD on learning and memory, employing the standard Morris water-maze and open-field tests. KD-fed animals exhibited an elevated ADT and ST relative to controls, but this effect was transient, lasting only two weeks. Interestingly, this loss of protection occurred despite the maintenance of ketonemia. Further, KD treatment did not adversely affect performance on either the water-maze or open-field tests. This latter observation contrasts with a more recent study indicating that, after lithium-pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus, KD treatment significantly impaired visual-spatial learning and memory compared with rats that were fed a regular diet. 40 Moreover, animals fed a KD exhibited significant impairment in brain growth. Whether this is due to the use of a much higher ketogenic ratio (8.6:1) than is standard practice and the long-term consequences of impaired food intake remains unclear. 41 The jury is out whether the KD preserves, enhances or disturbs cognitive functioning in rodent models. The first evidence that a KD can retard epileptogenesis in an animal model was demonstrated by Muller-Schwarze and colleagues. 20 In this study, rats were first subjected to kainate-induced status epilepticus, and then treated with a KD. After the latent period, spontaneous recurrent seizures were recorded, and routine hippocampal histology and Timm histochemistry (to label zinc-containing mossy fiber terminals in the dentate gyrus) were conducted on animals after an 8-week treatment period. Seizure frequency and duration were both significantly lower in the KD-treated group compared to controls. And although the KD did not appear to alter the degree of neuronal damage in both CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus, there was a substantial reduction in the extent of Timm labeling (indicative of mossy fiber sprouting) in the KD group. In contrast, preliminary reports addressing the effects of a KD in the rat kainic acid model yielded somewhat opposing results. Bough et al 42 treated adult Sprague-Dawley rats with a KD prior to treatment with kainic acid (administered either subcutaneously or intraperitoneally). Rats fed a KD experienced more severe seizures and greater mortality than control animals, and this exacerbation of kainic acid-induced seizures was seen irrespective of route of administration. Similarly, in immature (P20) Sprague-Dawley rats, Ko et al 43 found that a 2-week period of KD pre-treatment exacerbated hippocampal neuronal damage in the CA1 and CA3 subfields 72 hours after kainic acid injection, and no significant differences in seizure latencies were observed between the two groups. The seemingly conflicting results of the aforementioned studies may be explained in part on the timing of KD initiation. In the Muller-Schwarze et al study, 20 the KD was initiated after spontaneous recurrent seizures manifested, whereas in the report by Bough et al, 42 the KD was administered prior to induction of acute seizures with kainic acid. In the case of KD treatment prior to kainic acid exposure in immature rats, 43 there may be developmental differences as well. The contrasting results of KD treatment in rat models of status epilepticus have not been observed in studies involving mice. Noh et al 21 examined the effects of a KD on kainate-induced hippocampal cell death in mice. Male Institute for Cancer Research (ICR) (otherwise known as Caesarean Derived-1 or CD-1) mice, an outbred strain of Swiss mice, were administered kainate (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) after a 4-week treatment with a 4:1 KD formulation. Histological assessment of injury, using routine cresyl violet staining, in situ DNA nick-end (i.e., TUNEL) labeling, and pro-apoptotic caspase-3 immunoreactivity, was made two days following kainate treatment. KD-fed mice exhibited significantly prolonged seizure latency to kainate, but no changes in behavioral seizure severity were reported as compared to control animals. The kainate-treated group demonstrated typical cellular loss and pyknosis in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampal subfields, and there was marked TUNEL-positivity in these regions. In contrast, KD treatment prevented cell loss and increase in DNA nick-end labeling; notably, there was a striking decrease in caspase 3 immunoreactivity in KD-fed animals. Taken together, these results indicated that pre-treatment with a KD protected against kainate-induced neuronal death in mice. In contrast to induced models, what are the effects of a KD in genetically-determined epilepsy models? The seizure-susceptible EL mouse is an inbred strain that has been extensively described as a model of multifactorial idiopathic partial epilepsy with secondary generalization (Seyfried et al, 1992). 44 Generalized seizures generally manifest by the second postnatal month and persist throughout later life, but it is well known that environmental stimulation such as repetitive handling can induce seizures and facilitate epileptogenesis beginning at P30. 45 Todorova et al 46 treated male EL mice with a 4.75:1 ketogenic formula, and over a 10-week period, mice were tested weekly for seizure activity induced by handling. Seizure susceptibility scores in the KD group were significantly lower than in the control mice after 3 weeks, but this difference disappeared by week 7. Overall, KD treatment delayed seizure onset in young EL mice by one month, and similar to what had been reported by Hori et al 39 in the kindling model, seizure protection was transient. More recently, Fenoglio and colleagues 47 have reported that a 6.3:1 KD reduced seizure frequency in Kcna1 -null mice lacking the gene encoding the delayed rectifier potassium channel ? subunit, Kv1.1, which is important in regulating neuronal membrane excitability. This observation may be of particular interest due to the facts that: (1) Kcna1 -null mice exhibit similar progressive histological changes in the hippocampus of that have been observed both in human epileptic tissue and in many animal models 48 of temporal lobe epilepsy; and (2) the Kcna1 gene is one of only two epilepsy genes in a developmental animal model that has a homologue in a human epileptic condition. 49 Potential Neuroprotective Mechanisms Ketone bodies and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (metabolic substrates that are both elevated in epileptic patients treated with the KD 50 , 51 ) have been shown to exert neuroprotective activity in neurodegenerative conditions associated with impaired mitochondrial function. 52 - 57 To date, in acute seizure or chronic epilepsy models, it is unknown whether PUFAs can exert protective effects. Willis and colleagues 58 administered the PUFAs eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) adjunctively with standard chow to normal mice, and evaluated the effects of such PUFA supplementation against acute provocation fluorothyl, PTZ, 6 Hz, and kainate models. They found that neither DHA nor EPA feeding demonstrated anticonvulsant or neuroprotective activity, despite significant alterations in the fatty acid profile in both plasma and brain. What remains unclear is whether chronic administration of PUFAs to epileptic animals would produce an altogether different effect. Some of the salient mechanisms of neuroprotection likely involve a reduction in mitochondrial free radical production, which would decrease oxidative stress, and potentially neuronal injury. 57 , 59 - 61 While it remains unclear how the KD specifically produces an anticonvulsant action, the neuroprotective properties of both the KD and of ketone bodies suggest that enhanced ATP synthesis, 62 , 63 increased mitochondrial uncoupling, 64 suppression of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production 59 , 60 ; and elevated glutathione levels 61 may prevent epileptogenesis and likely as a consequence, recurrent seizure activity. 65 Another hypothesis for the anticonvulsant action of the KD posits that increased ATP synthesis should produce a positive bioenergetic balance, allowing stabilization of the resting membrane potential via enhanced Na+-K+-ATPase activity. 66 Several decades ago, De Vivo and colleagues 63 reported that the KD increased the total quantity of bioenergetic substrates (such as ATP and phosphocreatine) and elevated the energy charge in rat brain. These changes were thought to stabilize the cell membrane, especially in the face of excessive excitation and energy demand. Consistent with these observations, a subsequent human study utilizing magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques indicated that patients with epilepsy fed a KD had elevated phosphocreatine to creatine levels in the brain. 67 Recent animal studies have further supported the bioenergetic theory of ketoenic diet action. Using cDNA microarray technology, increased expression of the mitochondrial ATP synthase ?,D subunit was reported after KD treatment in mice. 68 And in the most comprehensive study of this kind to date, the KD was found to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and significantly increase the number of transcripts encoding energy metabolism genes in rats. 62 This increase in bioenergetic capacity enabled hippocampal slices from these animals to better withstand metabolic challenge from low glucose exposure. Taken together, the prevailing notion has been that increased energy production and reserve capacity enable greater resistance to neuronal hyperexcitability and injury. Other Mechanistic Considerations Glucose restriction has long been implicated in the mechanisms of KD action, 57 , 66 , 69 following the clinical observation of mild glucopenia in treated epilepsy patients. Thus, it is of considerable interest that Garriga-Canut and colleagues 70 demonstrated that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) (an inhibitor of phosphoglucose isomerase) potently inhibited seizure progression in the rat kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, and decreased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its principal receptor, TrkB. These effects were linked to the induction of the transcription factor NRSF (neuron restrictive silencing factor), a master negative regulator of neuronal genes. Stafstrom and colleagues 71 evaluated the effects of 2-DG in multiple in vitro and in vivo models, and found that 2-DG exerted acute anticonvulsant and chronic antiepileptic actions with a novel pattern of effectiveness in preclinical screening models Along a related vein, Lian and colleagues 72 demonstrated that fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-BP), a metabolite that shifts the metabolism of glucose from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate pathway, exhibits potent anticonvulsant activity in several rat models of acute seizures (i.e., pilocarpine, kainic acid, and pentylenetetrazole), and efficacy in these models exceeded that of 2-DG and KD treatment. Collectively, emerging data indicate that the overall strategy of limiting glycolytic flux may be a powerful way of preventing acute seizures and perhaps epileptogenesis as well. Whether glucose restriction allows for a compensatory increase in fatty acid oxidation leading to elevated ketone body production, or to enhanced flux of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates (e.g., by administering anaplerotic substrates that can replenish a depleted TCA pool; K. Borges, personal communication) remains to be firmly established. Collectively, the evidence to date strongly suggests that metabolic regulation is a potential therapeutic strategy for seizure suppression and modulation of epileptogenesis. Human evidence 3-6 years A common misconception is that the KD not only needs to be discontinued after 2 years due to side effects, but also that efficacy will wane over time. This does not appear to be true based on recent studies that examined the long-term efficacy of the KD after periods longer than 6-12 months. In the largest long-term study to date, children from the original 150 patient cohort first reported in 1998 31 were contacted again after 3-6 years. 35 Using an intent-to-treat analysis, 65 (43%) had a >50% seizure reduction when followed, including many who were now off the KD. 35 For those who remained on the diet over 4 years, 13 of 15 (87%) had >50% reduction in seizures. These benefits were noted not only in those who remained on the KD for extended periods of time. Of these original 150 children, 28 discontinued the KD before 6 months of use (most due to KD inefficacy) and were then analyzed separately. 36 Although one would expect that they would be doing poorly 3-6 years later, 12 (43%) were >50% improved, which was similar to the overall population. 36 Five of these children had surgery to improve their epilepsy, but surprisingly, seven did not. 6-12 years The KD appears to be effective even after periods longer than 3-6 years. At Johns Hopkins, of approximately 600 children who have been started on the diet since 1994, 28 children have been continuously on the KD for over 6 years (range, 6-12 years) when analyzed in 2006. 73 The majority of these children remained on the KD due to dramatic seizure reduction, but not to the level of seizure freedom and therefore the KD was maintained. Even after these extended periods, all children maintained large urinary ketosis and control was also stable with only periodic breakthrough seizures. Of these 28 children, 24 (86%) were reported as having >90% seizure reduction. 73 Beyond Two Decades Although anecdotal cases of continuous KD use for decades exist in children treated prior to 1965, no reports as such exist in the medical literature. This changed in 2008, after a case report of a 29-year man with tuberous sclerosis complex who started the KD at age 6 years of age. 74 This patient's family had continuously provided the KD for nearly a decade without neurologist or dietitian supervision. To date, he remains on a 3:1 KD with large ketosis and >90% seizure reduction (approximately 1-2 seizures per year). His parents provide his KD, which he brings daily to work, and he does not appear to have tolerability issues. Results from this study and the others discussed in this review suggest that the benefits of the KD can be seen long-term and do not diminish over time. They may even persist years after the KD is stopped. Recognizing the potential side effects of the KD from extended use (e.g., kidney stones, bone fractures, decreased linear growth 73 ), should it prove useful and be necessary long-term, it may be reasonable to consider changing these patients to the MAD or LGIT after several years. However, at this time, due to their only recent introduction, we do not yet know the long-term side effect (or efficacy) profile of these new alternative diets and whether they truly have fewer long-term side effects.  Long-Term Benefits Animal evidence Neuroprotection and Anti-Epileptogenesis In approximately 20% of patients, anticonvulsant medications can be successfully discontinued without recrudescence of seizures. It is this observation that forms the basis for the intriguing hypothesis that a KD may possess neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic properties. While several anecdotal accounts of an enduring effect of the KD exist, recent clinical studies more strongly suggest a potential anti-epileptogenic effect of the KD. 35 , 36 However, it is difficult to determine whether patients who remain seizure-free after cessation of a KD have had spontaneous remission of their epilepsy or have experienced a true direct anti-epileptogenic (or disease-modifying) effect. Moreover, it is not possible to account for the effects of blocking seizure activity over a prolonged duration. To date, other than anecdotal reports, there exist no controlled studies indicating whether the KD is in fact neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic. In considering such specific effects, it should be noted that epilepsy can develop without overt evidence of neuronal injury, 37 and neuronal damage does not necessarily lead to epilepsy. 38 Hence, the terms “neuroprotection” and “anti-epileptogenesis” are not necessarily synonymous. Despite the lack of clinical data, there are a growing number of animal and in vitro studies supporting both neuroprotective and anti-epileptogenic effects of the KD. Hori and colleagues 39 were the first to demonstrate the long-term effects of a KD in a chronic epilepsy model. In this study, adult male rats were first subjected to electrical kindling, and ten days after being fully kindled, these animals were treated with either a 4:1 KD or standard rodent chow. For 5 weeks, after-discharge threshold and duration (ADT, ADD) and stage 5 seizure threshold and duration (ST, SD) were assessed on a weekly basis. Additionally, during the third week, these investigators studied the impact of a KD on learning and memory, employing the standard Morris water-maze and open-field tests. KD-fed animals exhibited an elevated ADT and ST relative to controls, but this effect was transient, lasting only two weeks. Interestingly, this loss of protection occurred despite the maintenance of ketonemia. Further, KD treatment did not adversely affect performance on either the water-maze or open-field tests. This latter observation contrasts with a more recent study indicating that, after lithium-pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus, KD treatment significantly impaired visual-spatial learning and memory compared with rats that were fed a regular diet. 40 Moreover, animals fed a KD exhibited significant impairment in brain growth. Whether this is due to the use of a much higher ketogenic ratio (8.6:1) than is standard practice and the long-term consequences of impaired food intake remains unclear. 41 The jury is out whether the KD preserves, enhances or disturbs cognitive functioning in rodent models. The first evidence that a KD can retard epileptogenesis in an animal model was demonstrated by Muller-Schwarze and colleagues. 20 In this study, rats were first subjected to kainate-induced status epilepticus, and then treated with a KD. After the latent period, spontaneous recurrent seizures were recorded, and routine hippocampal histology and Timm histochemistry (to label zinc-containing mossy fiber terminals in the dentate gyrus) were conducted on animals after an 8-week treatment period. Seizure frequency and duration were both significantly lower in the KD-treated group compared to controls. And although the KD did not appear to alter the degree of neuronal damage in both CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus, there was a substantial reduction in the extent of Timm labeling (indicative of mossy fiber sprouting) in the KD group. In contrast, preliminary reports addressing the effects of a KD in the rat kainic acid model yielded somewhat opposing results. Bough et al 42 treated adult Sprague-Dawley rats with a KD prior to treatment with kainic acid (administered either subcutaneously or intraperitoneally). Rats fed a KD experienced more severe seizures and greater mortality than control animals, and this exacerbation of kainic acid-induced seizures was seen irrespective of route of administration. Similarly, in immature (P20) Sprague-Dawley rats, Ko et al 43 found that a 2-week period of KD pre-treatment exacerbated hippocampal neuronal damage in the CA1 and CA3 subfields 72 hours after kainic acid injection, and no significant differences in seizure latencies were observed between the two groups. The seemingly conflicting results of the aforementioned studies may be explained in part on the timing of KD initiation. In the Muller-Schwarze et al study, 20 the KD was initiated after spontaneous recurrent seizures manifested, whereas in the report by Bough et al, 42 the KD was administered prior to induction of acute seizures with kainic acid. In the case of KD treatment prior to kainic acid exposure in immature rats, 43 there may be developmental differences as well. The contrasting results of KD treatment in rat models of status epilepticus have not been observed in studies involving mice. Noh et al 21 examined the effects of a KD on kainate-induced hippocampal cell death in mice. Male Institute for Cancer Research (ICR) (otherwise known as Caesarean Derived-1 or CD-1) mice, an outbred strain of Swiss mice, were administered kainate (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) after a 4-week treatment with a 4:1 KD formulation. Histological assessment of injury, using routine cresyl violet staining, in situ DNA nick-end (i.e., TUNEL) labeling, and pro-apoptotic caspase-3 immunoreactivity, was made two days following kainate treatment. KD-fed mice exhibited significantly prolonged seizure latency to kainate, but no changes in behavioral seizure severity were reported as compared to control animals. The kainate-treated group demonstrated typical cellular loss and pyknosis in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampal subfields, and there was marked TUNEL-positivity in these regions. In contrast, KD treatment prevented cell loss and increase in DNA nick-end labeling; notably, there was a striking decrease in caspase 3 immunoreactivity in KD-fed animals. Taken together, these results indicated that pre-treatment with a KD protected against kainate-induced neuronal death in mice. In contrast to induced models, what are the effects of a KD in genetically-determined epilepsy models? The seizure-susceptible EL mouse is an inbred strain that has been extensively described as a model of multifactorial idiopathic partial epilepsy with secondary generalization (Seyfried et al, 1992). 44 Generalized seizures generally manifest by the second postnatal month and persist throughout later life, but it is well known that environmental stimulation such as repetitive handling can induce seizures and facilitate epileptogenesis beginning at P30. 45 Todorova et al 46 treated male EL mice with a 4.75:1 ketogenic formula, and over a 10-week period, mice were tested weekly for seizure activity induced by handling. Seizure susceptibility scores in the KD group were significantly lower than in the control mice after 3 weeks, but this difference disappeared by week 7. Overall, KD treatment delayed seizure onset in young EL mice by one month, and similar to what had been reported by Hori et al 39 in the kindling model, seizure protection was transient. More recently, Fenoglio and colleagues 47 have reported that a 6.3:1 KD reduced seizure frequency in Kcna1 -null mice lacking the gene encoding the delayed rectifier potassium channel ? subunit, Kv1.1, which is important in regulating neuronal membrane excitability. This observation may be of particular interest due to the facts that: (1) Kcna1 -null mice exhibit similar progressive histological changes in the hippocampus of that have been observed both in human epileptic tissue and in many animal models 48 of temporal lobe epilepsy; and (2) the Kcna1 gene is one of only two epilepsy genes in a developmental animal model that has a homologue in a human epileptic condition. 49 Potential Neuroprotective Mechanisms Ketone bodies and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (metabolic substrates that are both elevated in epileptic patients treated with the KD 50 , 51 ) have been shown to exert neuroprotective activity in neurodegenerative conditions associated with impaired mitochondrial function. 52 - 57 To date, in acute seizure or chronic epilepsy models, it is unknown whether PUFAs can exert protective effects. Willis and colleagues 58 administered the PUFAs eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) adjunctively with standard chow to normal mice, and evaluated the effects of such PUFA supplementation against acute provocation fluorothyl, PTZ, 6 Hz, and kainate models. They found that neither DHA nor EPA feeding demonstrated anticonvulsant or neuroprotective activity, despite significant alterations in the fatty acid profile in both plasma and brain. What remains unclear is whether chronic administration of PUFAs to epileptic animals would produce an altogether different effect. Some of the salient mechanisms of neuroprotection likely involve a reduction in mitochondrial free radical production, which would decrease oxidative stress, and potentially neuronal injury. 57 , 59 - 61 While it remains unclear how the KD specifically produces an anticonvulsant action, the neuroprotective properties of both the KD and of ketone bodies suggest that enhanced ATP synthesis, 62 , 63 increased mitochondrial uncoupling, 64 suppression of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production 59 , 60 ; and elevated glutathione levels 61 may prevent epileptogenesis and likely as a consequence, recurrent seizure activity. 65 Another hypothesis for the anticonvulsant action of the KD posits that increased ATP synthesis should produce a positive bioenergetic balance, allowing stabilization of the resting membrane potential via enhanced Na+-K+-ATPase activity. 66 Several decades ago, De Vivo and colleagues 63 reported that the KD increased the total quantity of bioenergetic substrates (such as ATP and phosphocreatine) and elevated the energy charge in rat brain. These changes were thought to stabilize the cell membrane, especially in the face of excessive excitation and energy demand. Consistent with these observations, a subsequent human study utilizing magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques indicated that patients with epilepsy fed a KD had elevated phosphocreatine to creatine levels in the brain. 67 Recent animal studies have further supported the bioenergetic theory of ketoenic diet action. Using cDNA microarray technology, increased expression of the mitochondrial ATP synthase ?,D subunit was reported after KD treatment in mice. 68 And in the most comprehensive study of this kind to date, the KD was found to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and significantly increase the number of transcripts encoding energy metabolism genes in rats. 62 This increase in bioenergetic capacity enabled hippocampal slices from these animals to better withstand metabolic challenge from low glucose exposure. Taken together, the prevailing notion has been that increased energy production and reserve capacity enable greater resistance to neuronal hyperexcitability and injury. Other Mechanistic Considerations Glucose restriction has long been implicated in the mechanisms of KD action, 57 , 66 , 69 following the clinical observation of mild glucopenia in treated epilepsy patients. Thus, it is of considerable interest that Garriga-Canut and colleagues 70 demonstrated that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) (an inhibitor of phosphoglucose isomerase) potently inhibited seizure progression in the rat kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, and decreased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its principal receptor, TrkB. These effects were linked to the induction of the transcription factor NRSF (neuron restrictive silencing factor), a master negative regulator of neuronal genes. Stafstrom and colleagues 71 evaluated the effects of 2-DG in multiple in vitro and in vivo models, and found that 2-DG exerted acute anticonvulsant and chronic antiepileptic actions with a novel pattern of effectiveness in preclinical screening models Along a related vein, Lian and colleagues 72 demonstrated that fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-BP), a metabolite that shifts the metabolism of glucose from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate pathway, exhibits potent anticonvulsant activity in several rat models of acute seizures (i.e., pilocarpine, kainic acid, and pentylenetetrazole), and efficacy in these models exceeded that of 2-DG and KD treatment. Collectively, emerging data indicate that the overall strategy of limiting glycolytic flux may be a powerful way of preventing acute seizures and perhaps epileptogenesis as well. Whether glucose restriction allows for a compensatory increase in fatty acid oxidation leading to elevated ketone body production, or to enhanced flux of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates (e.g., by administering anaplerotic substrates that can replenish a depleted TCA pool; K. Borges, personal communication) remains to be firmly established. Collectively, the evidence to date strongly suggests that metabolic regulation is a potential therapeutic strategy for seizure suppression and modulation of epileptogenesis. Human evidence 3-6 years A common misconception is that the KD not only needs to be discontinued after 2 years due to side effects, but also that efficacy will wane over time. This does not appear to be true based on recent studies that examined the long-term efficacy of the KD after periods longer than 6-12 months. In the largest long-term study to date, children from the original 150 patient cohort first reported in 1998 31 were contacted again after 3-6 years. 35 Using an intent-to-treat analysis, 65 (43%) had a >50% seizure reduction when followed, including many who were now off the KD. 35 For those who remained on the diet over 4 years, 13 of 15 (87%) had >50% reduction in seizures. These benefits were noted not only in those who remained on the KD for extended periods of time. Of these original 150 children, 28 discontinued the KD before 6 months of use (most due to KD inefficacy) and were then analyzed separately. 36 Although one would expect that they would be doing poorly 3-6 years later, 12 (43%) were >50% improved, which was similar to the overall population. 36 Five of these children had surgery to improve their epilepsy, but surprisingly, seven did not. 6-12 years The KD appears to be effective even after periods longer than 3-6 years. At Johns Hopkins, of approximately 600 children who have been started on the diet since 1994, 28 children have been continuously on the KD for over 6 years (range, 6-12 years) when analyzed in 2006. 73 The majority of these children remained on the KD due to dramatic seizure reduction, but not to the level of seizure freedom and therefore the KD was maintained. Even after these extended periods, all children maintained large urinary ketosis and control was also stable with only periodic breakthrough seizures. Of these 28 children, 24 (86%) were reported as having >90% seizure reduction. 73 Beyond Two Decades Although anecdotal cases of continuous KD use for decades exist in children treated prior to 1965, no reports as such exist in the medical literature. This changed in 2008, after a case report of a 29-year man with tuberous sclerosis complex who started the KD at age 6 years of age. 74 This patient's family had continuously provided the KD for nearly a decade without neurologist or dietitian supervision. To date, he remains on a 3:1 KD with large ketosis and >90% seizure reduction (approximately 1-2 seizures per year). His parents provide his KD, which he brings daily to work, and he does not appear to have tolerability issues. Results from this study and the others discussed in this review suggest that the benefits of the KD can be seen long-term and do not diminish over time. They may even persist years after the KD is stopped. Recognizing the potential side effects of the KD from extended use (e.g., kidney stones, bone fractures, decreased linear growth 73 ), should it prove useful and be necessary long-term, it may be reasonable to consider changing these patients to the MAD or LGIT after several years. However, at this time, due to their only recent introduction, we do not yet know the long-term side effect (or efficacy) profile of these new alternative diets and whether they truly have fewer long-term side effects.  Animal evidence Neuroprotection and Anti-Epileptogenesis In approximately 20% of patients, anticonvulsant medications can be successfully discontinued without recrudescence of seizures. It is this observation that forms the basis for the intriguing hypothesis that a KD may possess neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic properties. While several anecdotal accounts of an enduring effect of the KD exist, recent clinical studies more strongly suggest a potential anti-epileptogenic effect of the KD. 35 , 36 However, it is difficult to determine whether patients who remain seizure-free after cessation of a KD have had spontaneous remission of their epilepsy or have experienced a true direct anti-epileptogenic (or disease-modifying) effect. Moreover, it is not possible to account for the effects of blocking seizure activity over a prolonged duration. To date, other than anecdotal reports, there exist no controlled studies indicating whether the KD is in fact neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic. In considering such specific effects, it should be noted that epilepsy can develop without overt evidence of neuronal injury, 37 and neuronal damage does not necessarily lead to epilepsy. 38 Hence, the terms “neuroprotection” and “anti-epileptogenesis” are not necessarily synonymous. Despite the lack of clinical data, there are a growing number of animal and in vitro studies supporting both neuroprotective and anti-epileptogenic effects of the KD. Hori and colleagues 39 were the first to demonstrate the long-term effects of a KD in a chronic epilepsy model. In this study, adult male rats were first subjected to electrical kindling, and ten days after being fully kindled, these animals were treated with either a 4:1 KD or standard rodent chow. For 5 weeks, after-discharge threshold and duration (ADT, ADD) and stage 5 seizure threshold and duration (ST, SD) were assessed on a weekly basis. Additionally, during the third week, these investigators studied the impact of a KD on learning and memory, employing the standard Morris water-maze and open-field tests. KD-fed animals exhibited an elevated ADT and ST relative to controls, but this effect was transient, lasting only two weeks. Interestingly, this loss of protection occurred despite the maintenance of ketonemia. Further, KD treatment did not adversely affect performance on either the water-maze or open-field tests. This latter observation contrasts with a more recent study indicating that, after lithium-pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus, KD treatment significantly impaired visual-spatial learning and memory compared with rats that were fed a regular diet. 40 Moreover, animals fed a KD exhibited significant impairment in brain growth. Whether this is due to the use of a much higher ketogenic ratio (8.6:1) than is standard practice and the long-term consequences of impaired food intake remains unclear. 41 The jury is out whether the KD preserves, enhances or disturbs cognitive functioning in rodent models. The first evidence that a KD can retard epileptogenesis in an animal model was demonstrated by Muller-Schwarze and colleagues. 20 In this study, rats were first subjected to kainate-induced status epilepticus, and then treated with a KD. After the latent period, spontaneous recurrent seizures were recorded, and routine hippocampal histology and Timm histochemistry (to label zinc-containing mossy fiber terminals in the dentate gyrus) were conducted on animals after an 8-week treatment period. Seizure frequency and duration were both significantly lower in the KD-treated group compared to controls. And although the KD did not appear to alter the degree of neuronal damage in both CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus, there was a substantial reduction in the extent of Timm labeling (indicative of mossy fiber sprouting) in the KD group. In contrast, preliminary reports addressing the effects of a KD in the rat kainic acid model yielded somewhat opposing results. Bough et al 42 treated adult Sprague-Dawley rats with a KD prior to treatment with kainic acid (administered either subcutaneously or intraperitoneally). Rats fed a KD experienced more severe seizures and greater mortality than control animals, and this exacerbation of kainic acid-induced seizures was seen irrespective of route of administration. Similarly, in immature (P20) Sprague-Dawley rats, Ko et al 43 found that a 2-week period of KD pre-treatment exacerbated hippocampal neuronal damage in the CA1 and CA3 subfields 72 hours after kainic acid injection, and no significant differences in seizure latencies were observed between the two groups. The seemingly conflicting results of the aforementioned studies may be explained in part on the timing of KD initiation. In the Muller-Schwarze et al study, 20 the KD was initiated after spontaneous recurrent seizures manifested, whereas in the report by Bough et al, 42 the KD was administered prior to induction of acute seizures with kainic acid. In the case of KD treatment prior to kainic acid exposure in immature rats, 43 there may be developmental differences as well. The contrasting results of KD treatment in rat models of status epilepticus have not been observed in studies involving mice. Noh et al 21 examined the effects of a KD on kainate-induced hippocampal cell death in mice. Male Institute for Cancer Research (ICR) (otherwise known as Caesarean Derived-1 or CD-1) mice, an outbred strain of Swiss mice, were administered kainate (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) after a 4-week treatment with a 4:1 KD formulation. Histological assessment of injury, using routine cresyl violet staining, in situ DNA nick-end (i.e., TUNEL) labeling, and pro-apoptotic caspase-3 immunoreactivity, was made two days following kainate treatment. KD-fed mice exhibited significantly prolonged seizure latency to kainate, but no changes in behavioral seizure severity were reported as compared to control animals. The kainate-treated group demonstrated typical cellular loss and pyknosis in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampal subfields, and there was marked TUNEL-positivity in these regions. In contrast, KD treatment prevented cell loss and increase in DNA nick-end labeling; notably, there was a striking decrease in caspase 3 immunoreactivity in KD-fed animals. Taken together, these results indicated that pre-treatment with a KD protected against kainate-induced neuronal death in mice. In contrast to induced models, what are the effects of a KD in genetically-determined epilepsy models? The seizure-susceptible EL mouse is an inbred strain that has been extensively described as a model of multifactorial idiopathic partial epilepsy with secondary generalization (Seyfried et al, 1992). 44 Generalized seizures generally manifest by the second postnatal month and persist throughout later life, but it is well known that environmental stimulation such as repetitive handling can induce seizures and facilitate epileptogenesis beginning at P30. 45 Todorova et al 46 treated male EL mice with a 4.75:1 ketogenic formula, and over a 10-week period, mice were tested weekly for seizure activity induced by handling. Seizure susceptibility scores in the KD group were significantly lower than in the control mice after 3 weeks, but this difference disappeared by week 7. Overall, KD treatment delayed seizure onset in young EL mice by one month, and similar to what had been reported by Hori et al 39 in the kindling model, seizure protection was transient. More recently, Fenoglio and colleagues 47 have reported that a 6.3:1 KD reduced seizure frequency in Kcna1 -null mice lacking the gene encoding the delayed rectifier potassium channel ? subunit, Kv1.1, which is important in regulating neuronal membrane excitability. This observation may be of particular interest due to the facts that: (1) Kcna1 -null mice exhibit similar progressive histological changes in the hippocampus of that have been observed both in human epileptic tissue and in many animal models 48 of temporal lobe epilepsy; and (2) the Kcna1 gene is one of only two epilepsy genes in a developmental animal model that has a homologue in a human epileptic condition. 49 Potential Neuroprotective Mechanisms Ketone bodies and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (metabolic substrates that are both elevated in epileptic patients treated with the KD 50 , 51 ) have been shown to exert neuroprotective activity in neurodegenerative conditions associated with impaired mitochondrial function. 52 - 57 To date, in acute seizure or chronic epilepsy models, it is unknown whether PUFAs can exert protective effects. Willis and colleagues 58 administered the PUFAs eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) adjunctively with standard chow to normal mice, and evaluated the effects of such PUFA supplementation against acute provocation fluorothyl, PTZ, 6 Hz, and kainate models. They found that neither DHA nor EPA feeding demonstrated anticonvulsant or neuroprotective activity, despite significant alterations in the fatty acid profile in both plasma and brain. What remains unclear is whether chronic administration of PUFAs to epileptic animals would produce an altogether different effect. Some of the salient mechanisms of neuroprotection likely involve a reduction in mitochondrial free radical production, which would decrease oxidative stress, and potentially neuronal injury. 57 , 59 - 61 While it remains unclear how the KD specifically produces an anticonvulsant action, the neuroprotective properties of both the KD and of ketone bodies suggest that enhanced ATP synthesis, 62 , 63 increased mitochondrial uncoupling, 64 suppression of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production 59 , 60 ; and elevated glutathione levels 61 may prevent epileptogenesis and likely as a consequence, recurrent seizure activity. 65 Another hypothesis for the anticonvulsant action of the KD posits that increased ATP synthesis should produce a positive bioenergetic balance, allowing stabilization of the resting membrane potential via enhanced Na+-K+-ATPase activity. 66 Several decades ago, De Vivo and colleagues 63 reported that the KD increased the total quantity of bioenergetic substrates (such as ATP and phosphocreatine) and elevated the energy charge in rat brain. These changes were thought to stabilize the cell membrane, especially in the face of excessive excitation and energy demand. Consistent with these observations, a subsequent human study utilizing magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques indicated that patients with epilepsy fed a KD had elevated phosphocreatine to creatine levels in the brain. 67 Recent animal studies have further supported the bioenergetic theory of ketoenic diet action. Using cDNA microarray technology, increased expression of the mitochondrial ATP synthase ?,D subunit was reported after KD treatment in mice. 68 And in the most comprehensive study of this kind to date, the KD was found to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and significantly increase the number of transcripts encoding energy metabolism genes in rats. 62 This increase in bioenergetic capacity enabled hippocampal slices from these animals to better withstand metabolic challenge from low glucose exposure. Taken together, the prevailing notion has been that increased energy production and reserve capacity enable greater resistance to neuronal hyperexcitability and injury. Other Mechanistic Considerations Glucose restriction has long been implicated in the mechanisms of KD action, 57 , 66 , 69 following the clinical observation of mild glucopenia in treated epilepsy patients. Thus, it is of considerable interest that Garriga-Canut and colleagues 70 demonstrated that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) (an inhibitor of phosphoglucose isomerase) potently inhibited seizure progression in the rat kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, and decreased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its principal receptor, TrkB. These effects were linked to the induction of the transcription factor NRSF (neuron restrictive silencing factor), a master negative regulator of neuronal genes. Stafstrom and colleagues 71 evaluated the effects of 2-DG in multiple in vitro and in vivo models, and found that 2-DG exerted acute anticonvulsant and chronic antiepileptic actions with a novel pattern of effectiveness in preclinical screening models Along a related vein, Lian and colleagues 72 demonstrated that fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-BP), a metabolite that shifts the metabolism of glucose from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate pathway, exhibits potent anticonvulsant activity in several rat models of acute seizures (i.e., pilocarpine, kainic acid, and pentylenetetrazole), and efficacy in these models exceeded that of 2-DG and KD treatment. Collectively, emerging data indicate that the overall strategy of limiting glycolytic flux may be a powerful way of preventing acute seizures and perhaps epileptogenesis as well. Whether glucose restriction allows for a compensatory increase in fatty acid oxidation leading to elevated ketone body production, or to enhanced flux of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates (e.g., by administering anaplerotic substrates that can replenish a depleted TCA pool; K. Borges, personal communication) remains to be firmly established. Collectively, the evidence to date strongly suggests that metabolic regulation is a potential therapeutic strategy for seizure suppression and modulation of epileptogenesis.  Animal evidence Neuroprotection and Anti-Epileptogenesis In approximately 20% of patients, anticonvulsant medications can be successfully discontinued without recrudescence of seizures. It is this observation that forms the basis for the intriguing hypothesis that a KD may possess neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic properties. While several anecdotal accounts of an enduring effect of the KD exist, recent clinical studies more strongly suggest a potential anti-epileptogenic effect of the KD. 35 , 36 However, it is difficult to determine whether patients who remain seizure-free after cessation of a KD have had spontaneous remission of their epilepsy or have experienced a true direct anti-epileptogenic (or disease-modifying) effect. Moreover, it is not possible to account for the effects of blocking seizure activity over a prolonged duration. To date, other than anecdotal reports, there exist no controlled studies indicating whether the KD is in fact neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic. In considering such specific effects, it should be noted that epilepsy can develop without overt evidence of neuronal injury, 37 and neuronal damage does not necessarily lead to epilepsy. 38 Hence, the terms “neuroprotection” and “anti-epileptogenesis” are not necessarily synonymous. Despite the lack of clinical data, there are a growing number of animal and in vitro studies supporting both neuroprotective and anti-epileptogenic effects of the KD. Hori and colleagues 39 were the first to demonstrate the long-term effects of a KD in a chronic epilepsy model. In this study, adult male rats were first subjected to electrical kindling, and ten days after being fully kindled, these animals were treated with either a 4:1 KD or standard rodent chow. For 5 weeks, after-discharge threshold and duration (ADT, ADD) and stage 5 seizure threshold and duration (ST, SD) were assessed on a weekly basis. Additionally, during the third week, these investigators studied the impact of a KD on learning and memory, employing the standard Morris water-maze and open-field tests. KD-fed animals exhibited an elevated ADT and ST relative to controls, but this effect was transient, lasting only two weeks. Interestingly, this loss of protection occurred despite the maintenance of ketonemia. Further, KD treatment did not adversely affect performance on either the water-maze or open-field tests. This latter observation contrasts with a more recent study indicating that, after lithium-pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus, KD treatment significantly impaired visual-spatial learning and memory compared with rats that were fed a regular diet. 40 Moreover, animals fed a KD exhibited significant impairment in brain growth. Whether this is due to the use of a much higher ketogenic ratio (8.6:1) than is standard practice and the long-term consequences of impaired food intake remains unclear. 41 The jury is out whether the KD preserves, enhances or disturbs cognitive functioning in rodent models. The first evidence that a KD can retard epileptogenesis in an animal model was demonstrated by Muller-Schwarze and colleagues. 20 In this study, rats were first subjected to kainate-induced status epilepticus, and then treated with a KD. After the latent period, spontaneous recurrent seizures were recorded, and routine hippocampal histology and Timm histochemistry (to label zinc-containing mossy fiber terminals in the dentate gyrus) were conducted on animals after an 8-week treatment period. Seizure frequency and duration were both significantly lower in the KD-treated group compared to controls. And although the KD did not appear to alter the degree of neuronal damage in both CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus, there was a substantial reduction in the extent of Timm labeling (indicative of mossy fiber sprouting) in the KD group. In contrast, preliminary reports addressing the effects of a KD in the rat kainic acid model yielded somewhat opposing results. Bough et al 42 treated adult Sprague-Dawley rats with a KD prior to treatment with kainic acid (administered either subcutaneously or intraperitoneally). Rats fed a KD experienced more severe seizures and greater mortality than control animals, and this exacerbation of kainic acid-induced seizures was seen irrespective of route of administration. Similarly, in immature (P20) Sprague-Dawley rats, Ko et al 43 found that a 2-week period of KD pre-treatment exacerbated hippocampal neuronal damage in the CA1 and CA3 subfields 72 hours after kainic acid injection, and no significant differences in seizure latencies were observed between the two groups. The seemingly conflicting results of the aforementioned studies may be explained in part on the timing of KD initiation. In the Muller-Schwarze et al study, 20 the KD was initiated after spontaneous recurrent seizures manifested, whereas in the report by Bough et al, 42 the KD was administered prior to induction of acute seizures with kainic acid. In the case of KD treatment prior to kainic acid exposure in immature rats, 43 there may be developmental differences as well. The contrasting results of KD treatment in rat models of status epilepticus have not been observed in studies involving mice. Noh et al 21 examined the effects of a KD on kainate-induced hippocampal cell death in mice. Male Institute for Cancer Research (ICR) (otherwise known as Caesarean Derived-1 or CD-1) mice, an outbred strain of Swiss mice, were administered kainate (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) after a 4-week treatment with a 4:1 KD formulation. Histological assessment of injury, using routine cresyl violet staining, in situ DNA nick-end (i.e., TUNEL) labeling, and pro-apoptotic caspase-3 immunoreactivity, was made two days following kainate treatment. KD-fed mice exhibited significantly prolonged seizure latency to kainate, but no changes in behavioral seizure severity were reported as compared to control animals. The kainate-treated group demonstrated typical cellular loss and pyknosis in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampal subfields, and there was marked TUNEL-positivity in these regions. In contrast, KD treatment prevented cell loss and increase in DNA nick-end labeling; notably, there was a striking decrease in caspase 3 immunoreactivity in KD-fed animals. Taken together, these results indicated that pre-treatment with a KD protected against kainate-induced neuronal death in mice. In contrast to induced models, what are the effects of a KD in genetically-determined epilepsy models? The seizure-susceptible EL mouse is an inbred strain that has been extensively described as a model of multifactorial idiopathic partial epilepsy with secondary generalization (Seyfried et al, 1992). 44 Generalized seizures generally manifest by the second postnatal month and persist throughout later life, but it is well known that environmental stimulation such as repetitive handling can induce seizures and facilitate epileptogenesis beginning at P30. 45 Todorova et al 46 treated male EL mice with a 4.75:1 ketogenic formula, and over a 10-week period, mice were tested weekly for seizure activity induced by handling. Seizure susceptibility scores in the KD group were significantly lower than in the control mice after 3 weeks, but this difference disappeared by week 7. Overall, KD treatment delayed seizure onset in young EL mice by one month, and similar to what had been reported by Hori et al 39 in the kindling model, seizure protection was transient. More recently, Fenoglio and colleagues 47 have reported that a 6.3:1 KD reduced seizure frequency in Kcna1 -null mice lacking the gene encoding the delayed rectifier potassium channel ? subunit, Kv1.1, which is important in regulating neuronal membrane excitability. This observation may be of particular interest due to the facts that: (1) Kcna1 -null mice exhibit similar progressive histological changes in the hippocampus of that have been observed both in human epileptic tissue and in many animal models 48 of temporal lobe epilepsy; and (2) the Kcna1 gene is one of only two epilepsy genes in a developmental animal model that has a homologue in a human epileptic condition. 49 Potential Neuroprotective Mechanisms Ketone bodies and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (metabolic substrates that are both elevated in epileptic patients treated with the KD 50 , 51 ) have been shown to exert neuroprotective activity in neurodegenerative conditions associated with impaired mitochondrial function. 52 - 57 To date, in acute seizure or chronic epilepsy models, it is unknown whether PUFAs can exert protective effects. Willis and colleagues 58 administered the PUFAs eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) adjunctively with standard chow to normal mice, and evaluated the effects of such PUFA supplementation against acute provocation fluorothyl, PTZ, 6 Hz, and kainate models. They found that neither DHA nor EPA feeding demonstrated anticonvulsant or neuroprotective activity, despite significant alterations in the fatty acid profile in both plasma and brain. What remains unclear is whether chronic administration of PUFAs to epileptic animals would produce an altogether different effect. Some of the salient mechanisms of neuroprotection likely involve a reduction in mitochondrial free radical production, which would decrease oxidative stress, and potentially neuronal injury. 57 , 59 - 61 While it remains unclear how the KD specifically produces an anticonvulsant action, the neuroprotective properties of both the KD and of ketone bodies suggest that enhanced ATP synthesis, 62 , 63 increased mitochondrial uncoupling, 64 suppression of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production 59 , 60 ; and elevated glutathione levels 61 may prevent epileptogenesis and likely as a consequence, recurrent seizure activity. 65 Another hypothesis for the anticonvulsant action of the KD posits that increased ATP synthesis should produce a positive bioenergetic balance, allowing stabilization of the resting membrane potential via enhanced Na+-K+-ATPase activity. 66 Several decades ago, De Vivo and colleagues 63 reported that the KD increased the total quantity of bioenergetic substrates (such as ATP and phosphocreatine) and elevated the energy charge in rat brain. These changes were thought to stabilize the cell membrane, especially in the face of excessive excitation and energy demand. Consistent with these observations, a subsequent human study utilizing magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques indicated that patients with epilepsy fed a KD had elevated phosphocreatine to creatine levels in the brain. 67 Recent animal studies have further supported the bioenergetic theory of ketoenic diet action. Using cDNA microarray technology, increased expression of the mitochondrial ATP synthase ?,D subunit was reported after KD treatment in mice. 68 And in the most comprehensive study of this kind to date, the KD was found to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and significantly increase the number of transcripts encoding energy metabolism genes in rats. 62 This increase in bioenergetic capacity enabled hippocampal slices from these animals to better withstand metabolic challenge from low glucose exposure. Taken together, the prevailing notion has been that increased energy production and reserve capacity enable greater resistance to neuronal hyperexcitability and injury. Other Mechanistic Considerations Glucose restriction has long been implicated in the mechanisms of KD action, 57 , 66 , 69 following the clinical observation of mild glucopenia in treated epilepsy patients. Thus, it is of considerable interest that Garriga-Canut and colleagues 70 demonstrated that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) (an inhibitor of phosphoglucose isomerase) potently inhibited seizure progression in the rat kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, and decreased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its principal receptor, TrkB. These effects were linked to the induction of the transcription factor NRSF (neuron restrictive silencing factor), a master negative regulator of neuronal genes. Stafstrom and colleagues 71 evaluated the effects of 2-DG in multiple in vitro and in vivo models, and found that 2-DG exerted acute anticonvulsant and chronic antiepileptic actions with a novel pattern of effectiveness in preclinical screening models Along a related vein, Lian and colleagues 72 demonstrated that fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-BP), a metabolite that shifts the metabolism of glucose from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate pathway, exhibits potent anticonvulsant activity in several rat models of acute seizures (i.e., pilocarpine, kainic acid, and pentylenetetrazole), and efficacy in these models exceeded that of 2-DG and KD treatment. Collectively, emerging data indicate that the overall strategy of limiting glycolytic flux may be a powerful way of preventing acute seizures and perhaps epileptogenesis as well. Whether glucose restriction allows for a compensatory increase in fatty acid oxidation leading to elevated ketone body production, or to enhanced flux of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates (e.g., by administering anaplerotic substrates that can replenish a depleted TCA pool; K. Borges, personal communication) remains to be firmly established. Collectively, the evidence to date strongly suggests that metabolic regulation is a potential therapeutic strategy for seizure suppression and modulation of epileptogenesis.  Neuroprotection and Anti-Epileptogenesis In approximately 20% of patients, anticonvulsant medications can be successfully discontinued without recrudescence of seizures. It is this observation that forms the basis for the intriguing hypothesis that a KD may possess neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic properties. While several anecdotal accounts of an enduring effect of the KD exist, recent clinical studies more strongly suggest a potential anti-epileptogenic effect of the KD. 35 , 36 However, it is difficult to determine whether patients who remain seizure-free after cessation of a KD have had spontaneous remission of their epilepsy or have experienced a true direct anti-epileptogenic (or disease-modifying) effect. Moreover, it is not possible to account for the effects of blocking seizure activity over a prolonged duration. To date, other than anecdotal reports, there exist no controlled studies indicating whether the KD is in fact neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic. In considering such specific effects, it should be noted that epilepsy can develop without overt evidence of neuronal injury, 37 and neuronal damage does not necessarily lead to epilepsy. 38 Hence, the terms “neuroprotection” and “anti-epileptogenesis” are not necessarily synonymous. Despite the lack of clinical data, there are a growing number of animal and in vitro studies supporting both neuroprotective and anti-epileptogenic effects of the KD. Hori and colleagues 39 were the first to demonstrate the long-term effects of a KD in a chronic epilepsy model. In this study, adult male rats were first subjected to electrical kindling, and ten days after being fully kindled, these animals were treated with either a 4:1 KD or standard rodent chow. For 5 weeks, after-discharge threshold and duration (ADT, ADD) and stage 5 seizure threshold and duration (ST, SD) were assessed on a weekly basis. Additionally, during the third week, these investigators studied the impact of a KD on learning and memory, employing the standard Morris water-maze and open-field tests. KD-fed animals exhibited an elevated ADT and ST relative to controls, but this effect was transient, lasting only two weeks. Interestingly, this loss of protection occurred despite the maintenance of ketonemia. Further, KD treatment did not adversely affect performance on either the water-maze or open-field tests. This latter observation contrasts with a more recent study indicating that, after lithium-pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus, KD treatment significantly impaired visual-spatial learning and memory compared with rats that were fed a regular diet. 40 Moreover, animals fed a KD exhibited significant impairment in brain growth. Whether this is due to the use of a much higher ketogenic ratio (8.6:1) than is standard practice and the long-term consequences of impaired food intake remains unclear. 41 The jury is out whether the KD preserves, enhances or disturbs cognitive functioning in rodent models. The first evidence that a KD can retard epileptogenesis in an animal model was demonstrated by Muller-Schwarze and colleagues. 20 In this study, rats were first subjected to kainate-induced status epilepticus, and then treated with a KD. After the latent period, spontaneous recurrent seizures were recorded, and routine hippocampal histology and Timm histochemistry (to label zinc-containing mossy fiber terminals in the dentate gyrus) were conducted on animals after an 8-week treatment period. Seizure frequency and duration were both significantly lower in the KD-treated group compared to controls. And although the KD did not appear to alter the degree of neuronal damage in both CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus, there was a substantial reduction in the extent of Timm labeling (indicative of mossy fiber sprouting) in the KD group. In contrast, preliminary reports addressing the effects of a KD in the rat kainic acid model yielded somewhat opposing results. Bough et al 42 treated adult Sprague-Dawley rats with a KD prior to treatment with kainic acid (administered either subcutaneously or intraperitoneally). Rats fed a KD experienced more severe seizures and greater mortality than control animals, and this exacerbation of kainic acid-induced seizures was seen irrespective of route of administration. Similarly, in immature (P20) Sprague-Dawley rats, Ko et al 43 found that a 2-week period of KD pre-treatment exacerbated hippocampal neuronal damage in the CA1 and CA3 subfields 72 hours after kainic acid injection, and no significant differences in seizure latencies were observed between the two groups. The seemingly conflicting results of the aforementioned studies may be explained in part on the timing of KD initiation. In the Muller-Schwarze et al study, 20 the KD was initiated after spontaneous recurrent seizures manifested, whereas in the report by Bough et al, 42 the KD was administered prior to induction of acute seizures with kainic acid. In the case of KD treatment prior to kainic acid exposure in immature rats, 43 there may be developmental differences as well. The contrasting results of KD treatment in rat models of status epilepticus have not been observed in studies involving mice. Noh et al 21 examined the effects of a KD on kainate-induced hippocampal cell death in mice. Male Institute for Cancer Research (ICR) (otherwise known as Caesarean Derived-1 or CD-1) mice, an outbred strain of Swiss mice, were administered kainate (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) after a 4-week treatment with a 4:1 KD formulation. Histological assessment of injury, using routine cresyl violet staining, in situ DNA nick-end (i.e., TUNEL) labeling, and pro-apoptotic caspase-3 immunoreactivity, was made two days following kainate treatment. KD-fed mice exhibited significantly prolonged seizure latency to kainate, but no changes in behavioral seizure severity were reported as compared to control animals. The kainate-treated group demonstrated typical cellular loss and pyknosis in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampal subfields, and there was marked TUNEL-positivity in these regions. In contrast, KD treatment prevented cell loss and increase in DNA nick-end labeling; notably, there was a striking decrease in caspase 3 immunoreactivity in KD-fed animals. Taken together, these results indicated that pre-treatment with a KD protected against kainate-induced neuronal death in mice. In contrast to induced models, what are the effects of a KD in genetically-determined epilepsy models? The seizure-susceptible EL mouse is an inbred strain that has been extensively described as a model of multifactorial idiopathic partial epilepsy with secondary generalization (Seyfried et al, 1992). 44 Generalized seizures generally manifest by the second postnatal month and persist throughout later life, but it is well known that environmental stimulation such as repetitive handling can induce seizures and facilitate epileptogenesis beginning at P30. 45 Todorova et al 46 treated male EL mice with a 4.75:1 ketogenic formula, and over a 10-week period, mice were tested weekly for seizure activity induced by handling. Seizure susceptibility scores in the KD group were significantly lower than in the control mice after 3 weeks, but this difference disappeared by week 7. Overall, KD treatment delayed seizure onset in young EL mice by one month, and similar to what had been reported by Hori et al 39 in the kindling model, seizure protection was transient. More recently, Fenoglio and colleagues 47 have reported that a 6.3:1 KD reduced seizure frequency in Kcna1 -null mice lacking the gene encoding the delayed rectifier potassium channel ? subunit, Kv1.1, which is important in regulating neuronal membrane excitability. This observation may be of particular interest due to the facts that: (1) Kcna1 -null mice exhibit similar progressive histological changes in the hippocampus of that have been observed both in human epileptic tissue and in many animal models 48 of temporal lobe epilepsy; and (2) the Kcna1 gene is one of only two epilepsy genes in a developmental animal model that has a homologue in a human epileptic condition. 49  Neuroprotection and Anti-Epileptogenesis In approximately 20% of patients, anticonvulsant medications can be successfully discontinued without recrudescence of seizures. It is this observation that forms the basis for the intriguing hypothesis that a KD may possess neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic properties. While several anecdotal accounts of an enduring effect of the KD exist, recent clinical studies more strongly suggest a potential anti-epileptogenic effect of the KD. 35 , 36 However, it is difficult to determine whether patients who remain seizure-free after cessation of a KD have had spontaneous remission of their epilepsy or have experienced a true direct anti-epileptogenic (or disease-modifying) effect. Moreover, it is not possible to account for the effects of blocking seizure activity over a prolonged duration. To date, other than anecdotal reports, there exist no controlled studies indicating whether the KD is in fact neuroprotective and/or anti-epileptogenic. In considering such specific effects, it should be noted that epilepsy can develop without overt evidence of neuronal injury, 37 and neuronal damage does not necessarily lead to epilepsy. 38 Hence, the terms “neuroprotection” and “anti-epileptogenesis” are not necessarily synonymous. Despite the lack of clinical data, there are a growing number of animal and in vitro studies supporting both neuroprotective and anti-epileptogenic effects of the KD. Hori and colleagues 39 were the first to demonstrate the long-term effects of a KD in a chronic epilepsy model. In this study, adult male rats were first subjected to electrical kindling, and ten days after being fully kindled, these animals were treated with either a 4:1 KD or standard rodent chow. For 5 weeks, after-discharge threshold and duration (ADT, ADD) and stage 5 seizure threshold and duration (ST, SD) were assessed on a weekly basis. Additionally, during the third week, these investigators studied the impact of a KD on learning and memory, employing the standard Morris water-maze and open-field tests. KD-fed animals exhibited an elevated ADT and ST relative to controls, but this effect was transient, lasting only two weeks. Interestingly, this loss of protection occurred despite the maintenance of ketonemia. Further, KD treatment did not adversely affect performance on either the water-maze or open-field tests. This latter observation contrasts with a more recent study indicating that, after lithium-pilocarpine-induced status epilepticus, KD treatment significantly impaired visual-spatial learning and memory compared with rats that were fed a regular diet. 40 Moreover, animals fed a KD exhibited significant impairment in brain growth. Whether this is due to the use of a much higher ketogenic ratio (8.6:1) than is standard practice and the long-term consequences of impaired food intake remains unclear. 41 The jury is out whether the KD preserves, enhances or disturbs cognitive functioning in rodent models. The first evidence that a KD can retard epileptogenesis in an animal model was demonstrated by Muller-Schwarze and colleagues. 20 In this study, rats were first subjected to kainate-induced status epilepticus, and then treated with a KD. After the latent period, spontaneous recurrent seizures were recorded, and routine hippocampal histology and Timm histochemistry (to label zinc-containing mossy fiber terminals in the dentate gyrus) were conducted on animals after an 8-week treatment period. Seizure frequency and duration were both significantly lower in the KD-treated group compared to controls. And although the KD did not appear to alter the degree of neuronal damage in both CA1 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus, there was a substantial reduction in the extent of Timm labeling (indicative of mossy fiber sprouting) in the KD group. In contrast, preliminary reports addressing the effects of a KD in the rat kainic acid model yielded somewhat opposing results. Bough et al 42 treated adult Sprague-Dawley rats with a KD prior to treatment with kainic acid (administered either subcutaneously or intraperitoneally). Rats fed a KD experienced more severe seizures and greater mortality than control animals, and this exacerbation of kainic acid-induced seizures was seen irrespective of route of administration. Similarly, in immature (P20) Sprague-Dawley rats, Ko et al 43 found that a 2-week period of KD pre-treatment exacerbated hippocampal neuronal damage in the CA1 and CA3 subfields 72 hours after kainic acid injection, and no significant differences in seizure latencies were observed between the two groups. The seemingly conflicting results of the aforementioned studies may be explained in part on the timing of KD initiation. In the Muller-Schwarze et al study, 20 the KD was initiated after spontaneous recurrent seizures manifested, whereas in the report by Bough et al, 42 the KD was administered prior to induction of acute seizures with kainic acid. In the case of KD treatment prior to kainic acid exposure in immature rats, 43 there may be developmental differences as well. The contrasting results of KD treatment in rat models of status epilepticus have not been observed in studies involving mice. Noh et al 21 examined the effects of a KD on kainate-induced hippocampal cell death in mice. Male Institute for Cancer Research (ICR) (otherwise known as Caesarean Derived-1 or CD-1) mice, an outbred strain of Swiss mice, were administered kainate (25 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) after a 4-week treatment with a 4:1 KD formulation. Histological assessment of injury, using routine cresyl violet staining, in situ DNA nick-end (i.e., TUNEL) labeling, and pro-apoptotic caspase-3 immunoreactivity, was made two days following kainate treatment. KD-fed mice exhibited significantly prolonged seizure latency to kainate, but no changes in behavioral seizure severity were reported as compared to control animals. The kainate-treated group demonstrated typical cellular loss and pyknosis in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampal subfields, and there was marked TUNEL-positivity in these regions. In contrast, KD treatment prevented cell loss and increase in DNA nick-end labeling; notably, there was a striking decrease in caspase 3 immunoreactivity in KD-fed animals. Taken together, these results indicated that pre-treatment with a KD protected against kainate-induced neuronal death in mice. In contrast to induced models, what are the effects of a KD in genetically-determined epilepsy models? The seizure-susceptible EL mouse is an inbred strain that has been extensively described as a model of multifactorial idiopathic partial epilepsy with secondary generalization (Seyfried et al, 1992). 44 Generalized seizures generally manifest by the second postnatal month and persist throughout later life, but it is well known that environmental stimulation such as repetitive handling can induce seizures and facilitate epileptogenesis beginning at P30. 45 Todorova et al 46 treated male EL mice with a 4.75:1 ketogenic formula, and over a 10-week period, mice were tested weekly for seizure activity induced by handling. Seizure susceptibility scores in the KD group were significantly lower than in the control mice after 3 weeks, but this difference disappeared by week 7. Overall, KD treatment delayed seizure onset in young EL mice by one month, and similar to what had been reported by Hori et al 39 in the kindling model, seizure protection was transient. More recently, Fenoglio and colleagues 47 have reported that a 6.3:1 KD reduced seizure frequency in Kcna1 -null mice lacking the gene encoding the delayed rectifier potassium channel ? subunit, Kv1.1, which is important in regulating neuronal membrane excitability. This observation may be of particular interest due to the facts that: (1) Kcna1 -null mice exhibit similar progressive histological changes in the hippocampus of that have been observed both in human epileptic tissue and in many animal models 48 of temporal lobe epilepsy; and (2) the Kcna1 gene is one of only two epilepsy genes in a developmental animal model that has a homologue in a human epileptic condition. 49  Potential Neuroprotective Mechanisms Ketone bodies and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (metabolic substrates that are both elevated in epileptic patients treated with the KD 50 , 51 ) have been shown to exert neuroprotective activity in neurodegenerative conditions associated with impaired mitochondrial function. 52 - 57 To date, in acute seizure or chronic epilepsy models, it is unknown whether PUFAs can exert protective effects. Willis and colleagues 58 administered the PUFAs eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) adjunctively with standard chow to normal mice, and evaluated the effects of such PUFA supplementation against acute provocation fluorothyl, PTZ, 6 Hz, and kainate models. They found that neither DHA nor EPA feeding demonstrated anticonvulsant or neuroprotective activity, despite significant alterations in the fatty acid profile in both plasma and brain. What remains unclear is whether chronic administration of PUFAs to epileptic animals would produce an altogether different effect. Some of the salient mechanisms of neuroprotection likely involve a reduction in mitochondrial free radical production, which would decrease oxidative stress, and potentially neuronal injury. 57 , 59 - 61 While it remains unclear how the KD specifically produces an anticonvulsant action, the neuroprotective properties of both the KD and of ketone bodies suggest that enhanced ATP synthesis, 62 , 63 increased mitochondrial uncoupling, 64 suppression of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production 59 , 60 ; and elevated glutathione levels 61 may prevent epileptogenesis and likely as a consequence, recurrent seizure activity. 65 Another hypothesis for the anticonvulsant action of the KD posits that increased ATP synthesis should produce a positive bioenergetic balance, allowing stabilization of the resting membrane potential via enhanced Na+-K+-ATPase activity. 66 Several decades ago, De Vivo and colleagues 63 reported that the KD increased the total quantity of bioenergetic substrates (such as ATP and phosphocreatine) and elevated the energy charge in rat brain. These changes were thought to stabilize the cell membrane, especially in the face of excessive excitation and energy demand. Consistent with these observations, a subsequent human study utilizing magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques indicated that patients with epilepsy fed a KD had elevated phosphocreatine to creatine levels in the brain. 67 Recent animal studies have further supported the bioenergetic theory of ketoenic diet action. Using cDNA microarray technology, increased expression of the mitochondrial ATP synthase ?,D subunit was reported after KD treatment in mice. 68 And in the most comprehensive study of this kind to date, the KD was found to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and significantly increase the number of transcripts encoding energy metabolism genes in rats. 62 This increase in bioenergetic capacity enabled hippocampal slices from these animals to better withstand metabolic challenge from low glucose exposure. Taken together, the prevailing notion has been that increased energy production and reserve capacity enable greater resistance to neuronal hyperexcitability and injury.  Potential Neuroprotective Mechanisms Ketone bodies and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (metabolic substrates that are both elevated in epileptic patients treated with the KD 50 , 51 ) have been shown to exert neuroprotective activity in neurodegenerative conditions associated with impaired mitochondrial function. 52 - 57 To date, in acute seizure or chronic epilepsy models, it is unknown whether PUFAs can exert protective effects. Willis and colleagues 58 administered the PUFAs eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) adjunctively with standard chow to normal mice, and evaluated the effects of such PUFA supplementation against acute provocation fluorothyl, PTZ, 6 Hz, and kainate models. They found that neither DHA nor EPA feeding demonstrated anticonvulsant or neuroprotective activity, despite significant alterations in the fatty acid profile in both plasma and brain. What remains unclear is whether chronic administration of PUFAs to epileptic animals would produce an altogether different effect. Some of the salient mechanisms of neuroprotection likely involve a reduction in mitochondrial free radical production, which would decrease oxidative stress, and potentially neuronal injury. 57 , 59 - 61 While it remains unclear how the KD specifically produces an anticonvulsant action, the neuroprotective properties of both the KD and of ketone bodies suggest that enhanced ATP synthesis, 62 , 63 increased mitochondrial uncoupling, 64 suppression of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production 59 , 60 ; and elevated glutathione levels 61 may prevent epileptogenesis and likely as a consequence, recurrent seizure activity. 65 Another hypothesis for the anticonvulsant action of the KD posits that increased ATP synthesis should produce a positive bioenergetic balance, allowing stabilization of the resting membrane potential via enhanced Na+-K+-ATPase activity. 66 Several decades ago, De Vivo and colleagues 63 reported that the KD increased the total quantity of bioenergetic substrates (such as ATP and phosphocreatine) and elevated the energy charge in rat brain. These changes were thought to stabilize the cell membrane, especially in the face of excessive excitation and energy demand. Consistent with these observations, a subsequent human study utilizing magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques indicated that patients with epilepsy fed a KD had elevated phosphocreatine to creatine levels in the brain. 67 Recent animal studies have further supported the bioenergetic theory of ketoenic diet action. Using cDNA microarray technology, increased expression of the mitochondrial ATP synthase ?,D subunit was reported after KD treatment in mice. 68 And in the most comprehensive study of this kind to date, the KD was found to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and significantly increase the number of transcripts encoding energy metabolism genes in rats. 62 This increase in bioenergetic capacity enabled hippocampal slices from these animals to better withstand metabolic challenge from low glucose exposure. Taken together, the prevailing notion has been that increased energy production and reserve capacity enable greater resistance to neuronal hyperexcitability and injury.  Other Mechanistic Considerations Glucose restriction has long been implicated in the mechanisms of KD action, 57 , 66 , 69 following the clinical observation of mild glucopenia in treated epilepsy patients. Thus, it is of considerable interest that Garriga-Canut and colleagues 70 demonstrated that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) (an inhibitor of phosphoglucose isomerase) potently inhibited seizure progression in the rat kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, and decreased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its principal receptor, TrkB. These effects were linked to the induction of the transcription factor NRSF (neuron restrictive silencing factor), a master negative regulator of neuronal genes. Stafstrom and colleagues 71 evaluated the effects of 2-DG in multiple in vitro and in vivo models, and found that 2-DG exerted acute anticonvulsant and chronic antiepileptic actions with a novel pattern of effectiveness in preclinical screening models Along a related vein, Lian and colleagues 72 demonstrated that fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-BP), a metabolite that shifts the metabolism of glucose from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate pathway, exhibits potent anticonvulsant activity in several rat models of acute seizures (i.e., pilocarpine, kainic acid, and pentylenetetrazole), and efficacy in these models exceeded that of 2-DG and KD treatment. Collectively, emerging data indicate that the overall strategy of limiting glycolytic flux may be a powerful way of preventing acute seizures and perhaps epileptogenesis as well. Whether glucose restriction allows for a compensatory increase in fatty acid oxidation leading to elevated ketone body production, or to enhanced flux of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates (e.g., by administering anaplerotic substrates that can replenish a depleted TCA pool; K. Borges, personal communication) remains to be firmly established. Collectively, the evidence to date strongly suggests that metabolic regulation is a potential therapeutic strategy for seizure suppression and modulation of epileptogenesis.  Other Mechanistic Considerations Glucose restriction has long been implicated in the mechanisms of KD action, 57 , 66 , 69 following the clinical observation of mild glucopenia in treated epilepsy patients. Thus, it is of considerable interest that Garriga-Canut and colleagues 70 demonstrated that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) (an inhibitor of phosphoglucose isomerase) potently inhibited seizure progression in the rat kindling model of temporal lobe epilepsy, and decreased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its principal receptor, TrkB. These effects were linked to the induction of the transcription factor NRSF (neuron restrictive silencing factor), a master negative regulator of neuronal genes. Stafstrom and colleagues 71 evaluated the effects of 2-DG in multiple in vitro and in vivo models, and found that 2-DG exerted acute anticonvulsant and chronic antiepileptic actions with a novel pattern of effectiveness in preclinical screening models Along a related vein, Lian and colleagues 72 demonstrated that fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-BP), a metabolite that shifts the metabolism of glucose from glycolysis to the pentose phosphate pathway, exhibits potent anticonvulsant activity in several rat models of acute seizures (i.e., pilocarpine, kainic acid, and pentylenetetrazole), and efficacy in these models exceeded that of 2-DG and KD treatment. Collectively, emerging data indicate that the overall strategy of limiting glycolytic flux may be a powerful way of preventing acute seizures and perhaps epileptogenesis as well. Whether glucose restriction allows for a compensatory increase in fatty acid oxidation leading to elevated ketone body production, or to enhanced flux of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) intermediates (e.g., by administering anaplerotic substrates that can replenish a depleted TCA pool; K. Borges, personal communication) remains to be firmly established. Collectively, the evidence to date strongly suggests that metabolic regulation is a potential therapeutic strategy for seizure suppression and modulation of epileptogenesis.  Human evidence 3-6 years A common misconception is that the KD not only needs to be discontinued after 2 years due to side effects, but also that efficacy will wane over time. This does not appear to be true based on recent studies that examined the long-term efficacy of the KD after periods longer than 6-12 months. In the largest long-term study to date, children from the original 150 patient cohort first reported in 1998 31 were contacted again after 3-6 years. 35 Using an intent-to-treat analysis, 65 (43%) had a >50% seizure reduction when followed, including many who were now off the KD. 35 For those who remained on the diet over 4 years, 13 of 15 (87%) had >50% reduction in seizures. These benefits were noted not only in those who remained on the KD for extended periods of time. Of these original 150 children, 28 discontinued the KD before 6 months of use (most due to KD inefficacy) and were then analyzed separately. 36 Although one would expect that they would be doing poorly 3-6 years later, 12 (43%) were >50% improved, which was similar to the overall population. 36 Five of these children had surgery to improve their epilepsy, but surprisingly, seven did not. 6-12 years The KD appears to be effective even after periods longer than 3-6 years. At Johns Hopkins, of approximately 600 children who have been started on the diet since 1994, 28 children have been continuously on the KD for over 6 years (range, 6-12 years) when analyzed in 2006. 73 The majority of these children remained on the KD due to dramatic seizure reduction, but not to the level of seizure freedom and therefore the KD was maintained. Even after these extended periods, all children maintained large urinary ketosis and control was also stable with only periodic breakthrough seizures. Of these 28 children, 24 (86%) were reported as having >90% seizure reduction. 73 Beyond Two Decades Although anecdotal cases of continuous KD use for decades exist in children treated prior to 1965, no reports as such exist in the medical literature. This changed in 2008, after a case report of a 29-year man with tuberous sclerosis complex who started the KD at age 6 years of age. 74 This patient's family had continuously provided the KD for nearly a decade without neurologist or dietitian supervision. To date, he remains on a 3:1 KD with large ketosis and >90% seizure reduction (approximately 1-2 seizures per year). His parents provide his KD, which he brings daily to work, and he does not appear to have tolerability issues. Results from this study and the others discussed in this review suggest that the benefits of the KD can be seen long-term and do not diminish over time. They may even persist years after the KD is stopped. Recognizing the potential side effects of the KD from extended use (e.g., kidney stones, bone fractures, decreased linear growth 73 ), should it prove useful and be necessary long-term, it may be reasonable to consider changing these patients to the MAD or LGIT after several years. However, at this time, due to their only recent introduction, we do not yet know the long-term side effect (or efficacy) profile of these new alternative diets and whether they truly have fewer long-term side effects.  Human evidence 3-6 years A common misconception is that the KD not only needs to be discontinued after 2 years due to side effects, but also that efficacy will wane over time. This does not appear to be true based on recent studies that examined the long-term efficacy of the KD after periods longer than 6-12 months. In the largest long-term study to date, children from the original 150 patient cohort first reported in 1998 31 were contacted again after 3-6 years. 35 Using an intent-to-treat analysis, 65 (43%) had a >50% seizure reduction when followed, including many who were now off the KD. 35 For those who remained on the diet over 4 years, 13 of 15 (87%) had >50% reduction in seizures. These benefits were noted not only in those who remained on the KD for extended periods of time. Of these original 150 children, 28 discontinued the KD before 6 months of use (most due to KD inefficacy) and were then analyzed separately. 36 Although one would expect that they would be doing poorly 3-6 years later, 12 (43%) were >50% improved, which was similar to the overall population. 36 Five of these children had surgery to improve their epilepsy, but surprisingly, seven did not. 6-12 years The KD appears to be effective even after periods longer than 3-6 years. At Johns Hopkins, of approximately 600 children who have been started on the diet since 1994, 28 children have been continuously on the KD for over 6 years (range, 6-12 years) when analyzed in 2006. 73 The majority of these children remained on the KD due to dramatic seizure reduction, but not to the level of seizure freedom and therefore the KD was maintained. Even after these extended periods, all children maintained large urinary ketosis and control was also stable with only periodic breakthrough seizures. Of these 28 children, 24 (86%) were reported as having >90% seizure reduction. 73 Beyond Two Decades Although anecdotal cases of continuous KD use for decades exist in children treated prior to 1965, no reports as such exist in the medical literature. This changed in 2008, after a case report of a 29-year man with tuberous sclerosis complex who started the KD at age 6 years of age. 74 This patient's family had continuously provided the KD for nearly a decade without neurologist or dietitian supervision. To date, he remains on a 3:1 KD with large ketosis and >90% seizure reduction (approximately 1-2 seizures per year). His parents provide his KD, which he brings daily to work, and he does not appear to have tolerability issues. Results from this study and the others discussed in this review suggest that the benefits of the KD can be seen long-term and do not diminish over time. They may even persist years after the KD is stopped. Recognizing the potential side effects of the KD from extended use (e.g., kidney stones, bone fractures, decreased linear growth 73 ), should it prove useful and be necessary long-term, it may be reasonable to consider changing these patients to the MAD or LGIT after several years. However, at this time, due to their only recent introduction, we do not yet know the long-term side effect (or efficacy) profile of these new alternative diets and whether they truly have fewer long-term side effects.  3-6 years A common misconception is that the KD not only needs to be discontinued after 2 years due to side effects, but also that efficacy will wane over time. This does not appear to be true based on recent studies that examined the long-term efficacy of the KD after periods longer than 6-12 months. In the largest long-term study to date, children from the original 150 patient cohort first reported in 1998 31 were contacted again after 3-6 years. 35 Using an intent-to-treat analysis, 65 (43%) had a >50% seizure reduction when followed, including many who were now off the KD. 35 For those who remained on the diet over 4 years, 13 of 15 (87%) had >50% reduction in seizures. These benefits were noted not only in those who remained on the KD for extended periods of time. Of these original 150 children, 28 discontinued the KD before 6 months of use (most due to KD inefficacy) and were then analyzed separately. 36 Although one would expect that they would be doing poorly 3-6 years later, 12 (43%) were >50% improved, which was similar to the overall population. 36 Five of these children had surgery to improve their epilepsy, but surprisingly, seven did not.  3-6 years A common misconception is that the KD not only needs to be discontinued after 2 years due to side effects, but also that efficacy will wane over time. This does not appear to be true based on recent studies that examined the long-term efficacy of the KD after periods longer than 6-12 months. In the largest long-term study to date, children from the original 150 patient cohort first reported in 1998 31 were contacted again after 3-6 years. 35 Using an intent-to-treat analysis, 65 (43%) had a >50% seizure reduction when followed, including many who were now off the KD. 35 For those who remained on the diet over 4 years, 13 of 15 (87%) had >50% reduction in seizures. These benefits were noted not only in those who remained on the KD for extended periods of time. Of these original 150 children, 28 discontinued the KD before 6 months of use (most due to KD inefficacy) and were then analyzed separately. 36 Although one would expect that they would be doing poorly 3-6 years later, 12 (43%) were >50% improved, which was similar to the overall population. 36 Five of these children had surgery to improve their epilepsy, but surprisingly, seven did not.  6-12 years The KD appears to be effective even after periods longer than 3-6 years. At Johns Hopkins, of approximately 600 children who have been started on the diet since 1994, 28 children have been continuously on the KD for over 6 years (range, 6-12 years) when analyzed in 2006. 73 The majority of these children remained on the KD due to dramatic seizure reduction, but not to the level of seizure freedom and therefore the KD was maintained. Even after these extended periods, all children maintained large urinary ketosis and control was also stable with only periodic breakthrough seizures. Of these 28 children, 24 (86%) were reported as having >90% seizure reduction. 73  6-12 years The KD appears to be effective even after periods longer than 3-6 years. At Johns Hopkins, of approximately 600 children who have been started on the diet since 1994, 28 children have been continuously on the KD for over 6 years (range, 6-12 years) when analyzed in 2006. 73 The majority of these children remained on the KD due to dramatic seizure reduction, but not to the level of seizure freedom and therefore the KD was maintained. Even after these extended periods, all children maintained large urinary ketosis and control was also stable with only periodic breakthrough seizures. Of these 28 children, 24 (86%) were reported as having >90% seizure reduction. 73  Beyond Two Decades Although anecdotal cases of continuous KD use for decades exist in children treated prior to 1965, no reports as such exist in the medical literature. This changed in 2008, after a case report of a 29-year man with tuberous sclerosis complex who started the KD at age 6 years of age. 74 This patient's family had continuously provided the KD for nearly a decade without neurologist or dietitian supervision. To date, he remains on a 3:1 KD with large ketosis and >90% seizure reduction (approximately 1-2 seizures per year). His parents provide his KD, which he brings daily to work, and he does not appear to have tolerability issues. Results from this study and the others discussed in this review suggest that the benefits of the KD can be seen long-term and do not diminish over time. They may even persist years after the KD is stopped. Recognizing the potential side effects of the KD from extended use (e.g., kidney stones, bone fractures, decreased linear growth 73 ), should it prove useful and be necessary long-term, it may be reasonable to consider changing these patients to the MAD or LGIT after several years. However, at this time, due to their only recent introduction, we do not yet know the long-term side effect (or efficacy) profile of these new alternative diets and whether they truly have fewer long-term side effects.  Beyond Two Decades Although anecdotal cases of continuous KD use for decades exist in children treated prior to 1965, no reports as such exist in the medical literature. This changed in 2008, after a case report of a 29-year man with tuberous sclerosis complex who started the KD at age 6 years of age. 74 This patient's family had continuously provided the KD for nearly a decade without neurologist or dietitian supervision. To date, he remains on a 3:1 KD with large ketosis and >90% seizure reduction (approximately 1-2 seizures per year). His parents provide his KD, which he brings daily to work, and he does not appear to have tolerability issues. Results from this study and the others discussed in this review suggest that the benefits of the KD can be seen long-term and do not diminish over time. They may even persist years after the KD is stopped. Recognizing the potential side effects of the KD from extended use (e.g., kidney stones, bone fractures, decreased linear growth 73 ), should it prove useful and be necessary long-term, it may be reasonable to consider changing these patients to the MAD or LGIT after several years. However, at this time, due to their only recent introduction, we do not yet know the long-term side effect (or efficacy) profile of these new alternative diets and whether they truly have fewer long-term side effects.  Conclusion In summary, the traditional and alternative KDs appear to show significant immediate and short-term benefits. This effect is seen in both animal and human studies. As it has been in existence for nearly a century, the KD has also had sufficient time to demonstrate long-term clinical benefits in those who maintain it and interestingly even those who discontinue it. Recent animal studies have also confirmed this finding that the KD and its metabolic substrates may exert neuroprotective properties. Further studies of dietary therapies are necessary and ongoing. 