Methods of Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis III (PIOPED III) The methods of the Prospective Investigation of Pulmonary Embolism Diagnosis III (PIOPED III) are described in detail. PIOPED III is a multicenter collaborative investigation sponsored by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. The purpose is to determine the accuracy of gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (Gd-MRA) in combination with venous phase magnetic resonance venography (Gd-MRV) for the diagnosis for acute pulmonary embolism (PE). A composite reference standard based on usual diagnostic methods for pulmonary embolism is used. All images will be read by two blinded and study-certified central readers. Patients with no PE according to the composite reference test will be randomized to undergo Gd-MRA/MRV. This will reduce the proportion of patients with negative tests at no loss in evaluation of sensitivity and specificity.  GADOLINIUM ENHANCED MRA/MRV Gd-MRA for PE: Methods Gadolinium enhanced MRA/MRV will be performed on commercially available 1.5T systems with fast gradient-echo capability (30-40 mT/m max gradient field strength) and slew rate 130-200 mT/msec ( Table 3 ). At one center (University of Michigan) a 3.0 T unit (max gradient strength of 40 mT/m and 200 mT/msec slew rate) will be used in some patients. The protocol is otherwise analogous to that designed for the 1.5 T scanner. At all centers, parallel imaging will be used. Thus, a specialized multichannel (6-12 channel) phased array coil will be used for reception of the pulmonary MRA data. The body coil will be used for signal transmission. MR Imaging protocol All scout imaging of both the chest and thighs will be obtained at the beginning of the examination with the table prescribed to move to the thigh station automatically. A torso multichannel phased array coil will be used for the pulmonary Gd-MRA. Magnetic resonance venography of the thigh will be performed with the body coil. A single bolus of gadolinium-containing contrast material timed to the main pulmonary artery will be used for all imaging, with multiple measures (data acquisitions) obtained immediately and consecutively in the thighs to avoid missing the maximal venous opacification. Patient Preparation A 20-gauge catheter will be placed in an antecubital vein and connected to a power injector by an intravenous tubing extension. The patient will be positioned supine within the bore of the magnet. A torso/body multichannel phased array coil will be placed around the chest as well as a respiratory bellow sensor, if the MR system requires it. The patient will receive 2L/min of oxygen through a nasal cannula throughout the study. Scout Imaging Sagittal and transverse locators will be performed at the thorax, centered at the midline in the left-to-right direction and at the nipple line in the superior-to-inferior direction. A second coronal locator will be acquired mid thighs for graphical thigh MRV prescription. Gd-MRA of Pulmonary Arteries Scan parameters Pulmonary Gd-MRA imaging will be performed using a 3D gradient recalled echo (GRE) sequence in the coronal plane using the following parameters: “MinTR” (TR? 6.6ms), and “MinTE” (?2.3ms), flip angle=20°-35°, T1-weighting approximately 384 by 288 matrix, 40 cm field of view, bandwidth 380-1500 Hz/pixel, single acquisition/number of excitations (NEX), 3 mm slice thickness (interpolated to 1.5) and at least 44 (88 interpolated) slices or sufficient to cover the anatomy. In large or obese patients, phase wrap artifact can be a significant problem with parallel imaging. For studies in which phase wrap is likely to occur, parallel imaging will not be used. With obese patients the breath-hold length (no more than 22 sec) and field of view will be kept constant (40 cm) and the matrix will be reduced, thus decreasing the in-plane resolution in the phase-encoding direction. Scan location The coronal volume will be prescribed from the midline sagittal or transverse locator slice. The posterior aspect of the imaging volume will be placed in the thorax at or near the posterior border of the vertebral body at the level of the heart. The position of the imaging volume will be set to ensure that the descending pulmonary arteries, segmental and proximal subsegmental branches are included in the imaging region. Scan timing Imaging time (breath hold) will be approximately 14-22 seconds. The MR technologists will record breath hold duration relative to the scan duration (breath-hold duration 0-25% to100% of scan). The scan delay will be determined using 1-2 mL of contrast agent as a test bolus during a gradient recalled echo sequence performed at 1 image/sec of one slice positioned sagittally through the main pulmonary artery. The scan delay will be calculated to place the peak of the infusion enhancement at the center of “k-space” of the pulmonary MRA since the reconstructed image contrast depicts the imaged object contrast at the time the center of k-space was acquired. Contrast injection Immediately before the administration of gadolinium-containing contrast material, the patient will hyperventilate for 30 seconds, and then suspend breathing in full inspiration during the pulmonary Gd-MRA scan (<22 sec). Prior to recognition of the dangers of NSF/NFD, pulmonary Gd-MRA was performed during an intravenous infusion of 0.2 mmol/Kg (approximately 40 mL) of conventional gadolinium-based MR contrast agent (gadodiamide or gadopentetate dimeglumine). In response to the increased awareness of the risk of NSF/NFD, the protocol was changed to require MultiHanceR and the maximum dose was 0.1mmol/kg body weight (approximately 20 mL). The contrast agent is injected by a commercially available magnetic resonance-compatible power injector at an infusion rate of 2 mL/sec followed by an injection of 15 mL of normal saline. Gd-MRA: Diagnostic Criteria for PE The diagnostic criteria for acute PE are: A partially occlusive intraluminal filling. This may be shown as “railway tracking”, i.e. a small amount of contrast material between the central filling defect and the arterial wall or, in cross sectional images, as a filling defect surrounded by contrast material Complete arterial occlusion with termination of the column of contrast material in a meniscus that outlines the trailing edge of the embolus ( 35 ). Examination time Total examination time for Gd-MRA of the pulmonary arteries will be 20 minutes. This includes scout scanning for position of the images and the test bolus. State-of-the-Art Technology With newer 1.5 T scanners that allow whole body multichannel potential (for instance the Siemens Avanto), the same sequences planned can be employed, with the added advantage that whole body, multichannel, phased array imaging is present. This permits an improved signal-to-noise ratio in the legs. MR Perfusion Imaging Some have used Gd-MRA to show pulmonary perfusion based on filling of small vessels ( 36 ). This is analogous to the perfusion phase of a pulmonary angiogram, which has been shown to be useful, but nonspecific ( 37 ). It is also analogous to a perfusion lung scan. Most perfusion studies have been physiological investigations ( 38 - 40 ). Those that have focused on detection of perfusion defects from PE have been preliminary and showed inconclusive results ( 36 , 41 , 42 ). Newer time-resolved three-dimensional contrast enhanced MR angiography sequences, such as Time-Resolved Imaging of Contrast Kinetics (TRICKS), that can provide both pulmonary angiography and perfusion in a single breath-hold sequence, have been developed ( 43 , 44 ). Although these methods are now commercially available on most systems, they were not widely available at the start of PIOPED III. In addition, they typically provide lower spatial resolution MRA images in comparison to non-time resolved methods. These methods, therefore, will not be used in PIOPED III and perfusion will not be evaluated. Delayed-enhanced MRV of the veins of the thighs Upon completion of the pulmonary MRA, MR venography of the thighs will be performed with the table prescribed to immediately move to the region of scout of the thighs performed at the beginning of the examination. The same imaging sequence performed for pulmonary Gd-MR angiography will be performed in the thighs with minor modifications of the parameters. Scan parameters Delayed MR venography will be performed using a transmit and receive body coil and 3D gradient-recalled echo sequence. Dynamic thigh Gd-MRV imaging will be performed in the coronal plane using “MinTR” (TR? 6.6 ms), and “MinTE” (?2.3 ms), flip angle= 20°-35°, 384 by 288 matrix, 40 cm field of view, bandwidth 380-1500 Hz/pixel, 3 - 4 mm slice thickness (interpolated to 1.5 - 2.0 mm) and 44 slices (88 interpolated slices). Parallel imaging will not be used, as breath holding is not an issue. Six measurements will be performed in rapid succession prior to image construction in order to ensure that the bolus is not missed. Each measurement will take approximately 30 seconds. Scan location Imaging will be prescribed in the coronal plane to cover the thighs from the acetabulum to the tibial plateaus. The posterior aspect of the imaging volume will be set at the sacrum and the anterior aspect set anterior to the pubic symphysis to encompass femoral to popliteal veins. Veins of the calf will not be studied. Scan timing Scanning will begin immediately upon completion of the pulmonary MRA station. Six measurements over approximately 3 minutes will be performed to ensure that the bolus will not be missed. Contrast Injection No additional gadolinium-based contrast material is necessary for the Gd-MRV following MR angiography. The protocol does not acquire baseline (i.e. precontrast) images for subsequent subtraction from Gd-MRA/MRV images. Coronal source images of the pulmonary Gd-MRA will be submitted for interpretation. Transverse images of the thigh MRV data set obtained at greatest venous opacification will be constructed at 5 mm intervals contiguously and submitted for interpretation. A single projection image created by subtracting the first (arterial phase) of thigh imaging from the most opacified venous phase images will also be created to be used at the discretion of the central MR reader. Gd-MRV: Diagnostic Criteria for Acute DVT The diagnostic criteria for acute DVT on Gd-MRV are: Occlusive = complete filling defect, i.e., failure to opacify the entire lumen due to a central filling defect (the vessel may enlarge compared to the opposite vein); Nonocclusive = partial filling defect surrounded by opacification. Comprehensive Examination The use of MRV of the veins of the lower extremities in combination with Gd-MRA of the pulmonary arteries creates a comprehensive study for thromboembolism comparable to the combination of contrast enhanced pulmonary spiral CT of the pulmonary arteries in combination with venous phase CT of the veins of the lower extremities (CTV) ( 30 , 45 , 46 ). The pelvic veins will not be investigated in order to decrease the duration of the examination. In PIOPED II it was shown that most patients with pelvic vein DVT also had DVT of the veins of the thighs ( 30 ). MRI Workstations Workstations with a minimum resolution of 1 k pixel × 1 k pixel will be used for readings of all Gd-MRA and Gd-MRV images. All source images will be reviewed systematically using dynamic paging at appropriate gray-scale windows, followed by review of thin slab reformations at least in the coronal and sagittal planes for the pulmonary arteries and coronal and transverse planes for the veins of the lower extremities. Source images will be loaded into 3D reformat software routines for interactive display of full volume maximum intensity projection and limited volume maximum intensity views. Reformations including maximum intensity projection images will be made at the discretion of the reader. Principal central reader interpretation will be made from the original, unsubtracted source images. Multiple window/level settings, including ‘custom’ settings will be used ( 47 ). In selected cases the readers may reformat images parallel or perpendicular to the long axis of the vessel, using sliding thin slab reformations. Since most of the pulmonary arteries have an oblique course (particularly the middle lobe and lingular arteries), this can help eliminate the possibility of volume averaging ( 48 ). Although the range of tissue signal intensity that must be accommodated in Gd-MRV data sets is less, and the anatomy is more conducive to straightforward cross-sectional image review than the pulmonary Gd-MRA, dynamic visualization of the veins of the thighs is still advantageous. Incomplete visualization of the popliteal veins may result in patients over 6 feet tall, as the plan is to avoid moving the patient and move only the table. The distal thighs in tall patients, therefore, may be outside of the field of view. A correction filter will be used to insure homogeneous linearity at the periphery of the image. MRI Equipment Quality Control System performance tests will be performed using the American College of Radiology MRI phantom. The relevant phantom components for this study include uniform signal and background noise regions, geometric accuracy, and a high-contrast resolution insert. Tests will be performed on a semi-annual basis. All images will be submitted on compact disc to the University of Michigan for analysis. The standard American College of Radiology MRI head coil test protocol is performed to assess overall system status. In addition, the high-contrast resolution performance of each site will be measured using a protocol close to the local pulmonary MRA settings to scan the high-contrast resolution insert of the MRI phantom reoriented for a coronal acquisition. Comparable performance of all scanners will be confirmed and monitored for signal-to-noise ratio. The value of the signal-to-noise ratio will also reflect system performance for the thigh MRV scan that utilizes the body coil. Clinical Assessment: Methods The Wells scoring system for a pretest clinical probability of PE will be used ( 2 ). It was described previously ( 30 ).  Gd-MRA for PE: Methods Gadolinium enhanced MRA/MRV will be performed on commercially available 1.5T systems with fast gradient-echo capability (30-40 mT/m max gradient field strength) and slew rate 130-200 mT/msec ( Table 3 ). At one center (University of Michigan) a 3.0 T unit (max gradient strength of 40 mT/m and 200 mT/msec slew rate) will be used in some patients. The protocol is otherwise analogous to that designed for the 1.5 T scanner. At all centers, parallel imaging will be used. Thus, a specialized multichannel (6-12 channel) phased array coil will be used for reception of the pulmonary MRA data. The body coil will be used for signal transmission.  MR Imaging protocol All scout imaging of both the chest and thighs will be obtained at the beginning of the examination with the table prescribed to move to the thigh station automatically. A torso multichannel phased array coil will be used for the pulmonary Gd-MRA. Magnetic resonance venography of the thigh will be performed with the body coil. A single bolus of gadolinium-containing contrast material timed to the main pulmonary artery will be used for all imaging, with multiple measures (data acquisitions) obtained immediately and consecutively in the thighs to avoid missing the maximal venous opacification. Patient Preparation A 20-gauge catheter will be placed in an antecubital vein and connected to a power injector by an intravenous tubing extension. The patient will be positioned supine within the bore of the magnet. A torso/body multichannel phased array coil will be placed around the chest as well as a respiratory bellow sensor, if the MR system requires it. The patient will receive 2L/min of oxygen through a nasal cannula throughout the study. Scout Imaging Sagittal and transverse locators will be performed at the thorax, centered at the midline in the left-to-right direction and at the nipple line in the superior-to-inferior direction. A second coronal locator will be acquired mid thighs for graphical thigh MRV prescription.  Patient Preparation A 20-gauge catheter will be placed in an antecubital vein and connected to a power injector by an intravenous tubing extension. The patient will be positioned supine within the bore of the magnet. A torso/body multichannel phased array coil will be placed around the chest as well as a respiratory bellow sensor, if the MR system requires it. The patient will receive 2L/min of oxygen through a nasal cannula throughout the study.  Scout Imaging Sagittal and transverse locators will be performed at the thorax, centered at the midline in the left-to-right direction and at the nipple line in the superior-to-inferior direction. A second coronal locator will be acquired mid thighs for graphical thigh MRV prescription.  Gd-MRA of Pulmonary Arteries Scan parameters Pulmonary Gd-MRA imaging will be performed using a 3D gradient recalled echo (GRE) sequence in the coronal plane using the following parameters: “MinTR” (TR? 6.6ms), and “MinTE” (?2.3ms), flip angle=20°-35°, T1-weighting approximately 384 by 288 matrix, 40 cm field of view, bandwidth 380-1500 Hz/pixel, single acquisition/number of excitations (NEX), 3 mm slice thickness (interpolated to 1.5) and at least 44 (88 interpolated) slices or sufficient to cover the anatomy. In large or obese patients, phase wrap artifact can be a significant problem with parallel imaging. For studies in which phase wrap is likely to occur, parallel imaging will not be used. With obese patients the breath-hold length (no more than 22 sec) and field of view will be kept constant (40 cm) and the matrix will be reduced, thus decreasing the in-plane resolution in the phase-encoding direction. Scan location The coronal volume will be prescribed from the midline sagittal or transverse locator slice. The posterior aspect of the imaging volume will be placed in the thorax at or near the posterior border of the vertebral body at the level of the heart. The position of the imaging volume will be set to ensure that the descending pulmonary arteries, segmental and proximal subsegmental branches are included in the imaging region. Scan timing Imaging time (breath hold) will be approximately 14-22 seconds. The MR technologists will record breath hold duration relative to the scan duration (breath-hold duration 0-25% to100% of scan). The scan delay will be determined using 1-2 mL of contrast agent as a test bolus during a gradient recalled echo sequence performed at 1 image/sec of one slice positioned sagittally through the main pulmonary artery. The scan delay will be calculated to place the peak of the infusion enhancement at the center of “k-space” of the pulmonary MRA since the reconstructed image contrast depicts the imaged object contrast at the time the center of k-space was acquired. Contrast injection Immediately before the administration of gadolinium-containing contrast material, the patient will hyperventilate for 30 seconds, and then suspend breathing in full inspiration during the pulmonary Gd-MRA scan (<22 sec). Prior to recognition of the dangers of NSF/NFD, pulmonary Gd-MRA was performed during an intravenous infusion of 0.2 mmol/Kg (approximately 40 mL) of conventional gadolinium-based MR contrast agent (gadodiamide or gadopentetate dimeglumine). In response to the increased awareness of the risk of NSF/NFD, the protocol was changed to require MultiHanceR and the maximum dose was 0.1mmol/kg body weight (approximately 20 mL). The contrast agent is injected by a commercially available magnetic resonance-compatible power injector at an infusion rate of 2 mL/sec followed by an injection of 15 mL of normal saline.  Scan parameters Pulmonary Gd-MRA imaging will be performed using a 3D gradient recalled echo (GRE) sequence in the coronal plane using the following parameters: “MinTR” (TR? 6.6ms), and “MinTE” (?2.3ms), flip angle=20°-35°, T1-weighting approximately 384 by 288 matrix, 40 cm field of view, bandwidth 380-1500 Hz/pixel, single acquisition/number of excitations (NEX), 3 mm slice thickness (interpolated to 1.5) and at least 44 (88 interpolated) slices or sufficient to cover the anatomy. In large or obese patients, phase wrap artifact can be a significant problem with parallel imaging. For studies in which phase wrap is likely to occur, parallel imaging will not be used. With obese patients the breath-hold length (no more than 22 sec) and field of view will be kept constant (40 cm) and the matrix will be reduced, thus decreasing the in-plane resolution in the phase-encoding direction.  Scan location The coronal volume will be prescribed from the midline sagittal or transverse locator slice. The posterior aspect of the imaging volume will be placed in the thorax at or near the posterior border of the vertebral body at the level of the heart. The position of the imaging volume will be set to ensure that the descending pulmonary arteries, segmental and proximal subsegmental branches are included in the imaging region.  Scan timing Imaging time (breath hold) will be approximately 14-22 seconds. The MR technologists will record breath hold duration relative to the scan duration (breath-hold duration 0-25% to100% of scan). The scan delay will be determined using 1-2 mL of contrast agent as a test bolus during a gradient recalled echo sequence performed at 1 image/sec of one slice positioned sagittally through the main pulmonary artery. The scan delay will be calculated to place the peak of the infusion enhancement at the center of “k-space” of the pulmonary MRA since the reconstructed image contrast depicts the imaged object contrast at the time the center of k-space was acquired.  Contrast injection Immediately before the administration of gadolinium-containing contrast material, the patient will hyperventilate for 30 seconds, and then suspend breathing in full inspiration during the pulmonary Gd-MRA scan (<22 sec). Prior to recognition of the dangers of NSF/NFD, pulmonary Gd-MRA was performed during an intravenous infusion of 0.2 mmol/Kg (approximately 40 mL) of conventional gadolinium-based MR contrast agent (gadodiamide or gadopentetate dimeglumine). In response to the increased awareness of the risk of NSF/NFD, the protocol was changed to require MultiHanceR and the maximum dose was 0.1mmol/kg body weight (approximately 20 mL). The contrast agent is injected by a commercially available magnetic resonance-compatible power injector at an infusion rate of 2 mL/sec followed by an injection of 15 mL of normal saline.  Gd-MRA: Diagnostic Criteria for PE The diagnostic criteria for acute PE are: A partially occlusive intraluminal filling. This may be shown as “railway tracking”, i.e. a small amount of contrast material between the central filling defect and the arterial wall or, in cross sectional images, as a filling defect surrounded by contrast material Complete arterial occlusion with termination of the column of contrast material in a meniscus that outlines the trailing edge of the embolus ( 35 ).  Examination time Total examination time for Gd-MRA of the pulmonary arteries will be 20 minutes. This includes scout scanning for position of the images and the test bolus.  State-of-the-Art Technology With newer 1.5 T scanners that allow whole body multichannel potential (for instance the Siemens Avanto), the same sequences planned can be employed, with the added advantage that whole body, multichannel, phased array imaging is present. This permits an improved signal-to-noise ratio in the legs.  MR Perfusion Imaging Some have used Gd-MRA to show pulmonary perfusion based on filling of small vessels ( 36 ). This is analogous to the perfusion phase of a pulmonary angiogram, which has been shown to be useful, but nonspecific ( 37 ). It is also analogous to a perfusion lung scan. Most perfusion studies have been physiological investigations ( 38 - 40 ). Those that have focused on detection of perfusion defects from PE have been preliminary and showed inconclusive results ( 36 , 41 , 42 ). Newer time-resolved three-dimensional contrast enhanced MR angiography sequences, such as Time-Resolved Imaging of Contrast Kinetics (TRICKS), that can provide both pulmonary angiography and perfusion in a single breath-hold sequence, have been developed ( 43 , 44 ). Although these methods are now commercially available on most systems, they were not widely available at the start of PIOPED III. In addition, they typically provide lower spatial resolution MRA images in comparison to non-time resolved methods. These methods, therefore, will not be used in PIOPED III and perfusion will not be evaluated.  Delayed-enhanced MRV of the veins of the thighs Upon completion of the pulmonary MRA, MR venography of the thighs will be performed with the table prescribed to immediately move to the region of scout of the thighs performed at the beginning of the examination. The same imaging sequence performed for pulmonary Gd-MR angiography will be performed in the thighs with minor modifications of the parameters. Scan parameters Delayed MR venography will be performed using a transmit and receive body coil and 3D gradient-recalled echo sequence. Dynamic thigh Gd-MRV imaging will be performed in the coronal plane using “MinTR” (TR? 6.6 ms), and “MinTE” (?2.3 ms), flip angle= 20°-35°, 384 by 288 matrix, 40 cm field of view, bandwidth 380-1500 Hz/pixel, 3 - 4 mm slice thickness (interpolated to 1.5 - 2.0 mm) and 44 slices (88 interpolated slices). Parallel imaging will not be used, as breath holding is not an issue. Six measurements will be performed in rapid succession prior to image construction in order to ensure that the bolus is not missed. Each measurement will take approximately 30 seconds. Scan location Imaging will be prescribed in the coronal plane to cover the thighs from the acetabulum to the tibial plateaus. The posterior aspect of the imaging volume will be set at the sacrum and the anterior aspect set anterior to the pubic symphysis to encompass femoral to popliteal veins. Veins of the calf will not be studied. Scan timing Scanning will begin immediately upon completion of the pulmonary MRA station. Six measurements over approximately 3 minutes will be performed to ensure that the bolus will not be missed. Contrast Injection No additional gadolinium-based contrast material is necessary for the Gd-MRV following MR angiography. The protocol does not acquire baseline (i.e. precontrast) images for subsequent subtraction from Gd-MRA/MRV images. Coronal source images of the pulmonary Gd-MRA will be submitted for interpretation. Transverse images of the thigh MRV data set obtained at greatest venous opacification will be constructed at 5 mm intervals contiguously and submitted for interpretation. A single projection image created by subtracting the first (arterial phase) of thigh imaging from the most opacified venous phase images will also be created to be used at the discretion of the central MR reader.  Scan parameters Delayed MR venography will be performed using a transmit and receive body coil and 3D gradient-recalled echo sequence. Dynamic thigh Gd-MRV imaging will be performed in the coronal plane using “MinTR” (TR? 6.6 ms), and “MinTE” (?2.3 ms), flip angle= 20°-35°, 384 by 288 matrix, 40 cm field of view, bandwidth 380-1500 Hz/pixel, 3 - 4 mm slice thickness (interpolated to 1.5 - 2.0 mm) and 44 slices (88 interpolated slices). Parallel imaging will not be used, as breath holding is not an issue. Six measurements will be performed in rapid succession prior to image construction in order to ensure that the bolus is not missed. Each measurement will take approximately 30 seconds.  Scan location Imaging will be prescribed in the coronal plane to cover the thighs from the acetabulum to the tibial plateaus. The posterior aspect of the imaging volume will be set at the sacrum and the anterior aspect set anterior to the pubic symphysis to encompass femoral to popliteal veins. Veins of the calf will not be studied.  Scan timing Scanning will begin immediately upon completion of the pulmonary MRA station. Six measurements over approximately 3 minutes will be performed to ensure that the bolus will not be missed.  Contrast Injection No additional gadolinium-based contrast material is necessary for the Gd-MRV following MR angiography. The protocol does not acquire baseline (i.e. precontrast) images for subsequent subtraction from Gd-MRA/MRV images. Coronal source images of the pulmonary Gd-MRA will be submitted for interpretation. Transverse images of the thigh MRV data set obtained at greatest venous opacification will be constructed at 5 mm intervals contiguously and submitted for interpretation. A single projection image created by subtracting the first (arterial phase) of thigh imaging from the most opacified venous phase images will also be created to be used at the discretion of the central MR reader.  Gd-MRV: Diagnostic Criteria for Acute DVT The diagnostic criteria for acute DVT on Gd-MRV are: Occlusive = complete filling defect, i.e., failure to opacify the entire lumen due to a central filling defect (the vessel may enlarge compared to the opposite vein); Nonocclusive = partial filling defect surrounded by opacification.  Comprehensive Examination The use of MRV of the veins of the lower extremities in combination with Gd-MRA of the pulmonary arteries creates a comprehensive study for thromboembolism comparable to the combination of contrast enhanced pulmonary spiral CT of the pulmonary arteries in combination with venous phase CT of the veins of the lower extremities (CTV) ( 30 , 45 , 46 ). The pelvic veins will not be investigated in order to decrease the duration of the examination. In PIOPED II it was shown that most patients with pelvic vein DVT also had DVT of the veins of the thighs ( 30 ).  MRI Workstations Workstations with a minimum resolution of 1 k pixel × 1 k pixel will be used for readings of all Gd-MRA and Gd-MRV images. All source images will be reviewed systematically using dynamic paging at appropriate gray-scale windows, followed by review of thin slab reformations at least in the coronal and sagittal planes for the pulmonary arteries and coronal and transverse planes for the veins of the lower extremities. Source images will be loaded into 3D reformat software routines for interactive display of full volume maximum intensity projection and limited volume maximum intensity views. Reformations including maximum intensity projection images will be made at the discretion of the reader. Principal central reader interpretation will be made from the original, unsubtracted source images. Multiple window/level settings, including ‘custom’ settings will be used ( 47 ). In selected cases the readers may reformat images parallel or perpendicular to the long axis of the vessel, using sliding thin slab reformations. Since most of the pulmonary arteries have an oblique course (particularly the middle lobe and lingular arteries), this can help eliminate the possibility of volume averaging ( 48 ). Although the range of tissue signal intensity that must be accommodated in Gd-MRV data sets is less, and the anatomy is more conducive to straightforward cross-sectional image review than the pulmonary Gd-MRA, dynamic visualization of the veins of the thighs is still advantageous. Incomplete visualization of the popliteal veins may result in patients over 6 feet tall, as the plan is to avoid moving the patient and move only the table. The distal thighs in tall patients, therefore, may be outside of the field of view. A correction filter will be used to insure homogeneous linearity at the periphery of the image.  MRI Equipment Quality Control System performance tests will be performed using the American College of Radiology MRI phantom. The relevant phantom components for this study include uniform signal and background noise regions, geometric accuracy, and a high-contrast resolution insert. Tests will be performed on a semi-annual basis. All images will be submitted on compact disc to the University of Michigan for analysis. The standard American College of Radiology MRI head coil test protocol is performed to assess overall system status. In addition, the high-contrast resolution performance of each site will be measured using a protocol close to the local pulmonary MRA settings to scan the high-contrast resolution insert of the MRI phantom reoriented for a coronal acquisition. Comparable performance of all scanners will be confirmed and monitored for signal-to-noise ratio. The value of the signal-to-noise ratio will also reflect system performance for the thigh MRV scan that utilizes the body coil.  Clinical Assessment: Methods The Wells scoring system for a pretest clinical probability of PE will be used ( 2 ). It was described previously ( 30 ).  D-DIMER D-dimer: Methods D-dimer, measured by the quantitative rapid ELISA, will be considered normal if < 500 ng/ml ( 49 ).  D-dimer: Methods D-dimer, measured by the quantitative rapid ELISA, will be considered normal if < 500 ng/ml ( 49 ).  VENOUS COMPRESSION ULTRASOUND Compression Ultrasound: Methods Bilateral venous duplex imaging of the lower extremities will use B-mode real time venous compression in combination with color Doppler. Ideally the patient will be supine, with the hip externally rotated and the knee slightly flexed. Knee flexion is used for popliteal evaluation. B-mode real time venous compression will be performed in the transverse orientation. The common femoral, femoral, popliteal, and proximal greater saphenous veins will be evaluated with sequential compression throughout with identification of flow characteristics. The calf veins will not be evaluated. Acute DVT will be diagnosed if there is noncompressibility of the vein in combination with: a) vein enlarged in size, b) hypoechoic vein lumen, and c) lack of significant collaterals.  Compression Ultrasound: Methods Bilateral venous duplex imaging of the lower extremities will use B-mode real time venous compression in combination with color Doppler. Ideally the patient will be supine, with the hip externally rotated and the knee slightly flexed. Knee flexion is used for popliteal evaluation. B-mode real time venous compression will be performed in the transverse orientation. The common femoral, femoral, popliteal, and proximal greater saphenous veins will be evaluated with sequential compression throughout with identification of flow characteristics. The calf veins will not be evaluated. Acute DVT will be diagnosed if there is noncompressibility of the vein in combination with: a) vein enlarged in size, b) hypoechoic vein lumen, and c) lack of significant collaterals.  CHEST RADIOGRAPH An upright 6-foot posterior-anterior chest and lateral radiograph will be obtained within 2 hours of the V-Q lung scan if possible and within 12 hours in all cases. If the patient is unable to sit or stand, an anterior-posterior supine chest radiograph will be obtained. Ventilation Lung Scan and Perfusion Lung Scan Methods Ventilation lung scan and perfusion lung scan methods and criteria for interpretation were described in detail in the methods of PIOPED II ( 50 ). The criteria for interpretation of V-Q scans are based on the revised PIOPED criteria ( 51 ). Contrast Enhanced Spiral CT All clinical centers are encouraged to use scanners with 16 or more detectors. Newer scanners installed during PIOPED III will be used. In general, the techniques described for PIOPED II will be used ( 30 , 50 ), but local centers may modify the techniques. For scanners with 16 or more detectors, the scan may start at the diaphragm or start at the top of the apex of lung and proceed to 2 cm below the lowest hemidiaphragm. The diagnostic criteria for acute PE are as described in PIOPED II ( 30 , 50 ). Venous Phase Spiral CT of the Veins of the Lower Extremities Venous phase contrast enhanced spiral CT of the veins of the thighs (CTV) will be performed and interpreted as in PIOPED II ( 50 ), except scans will commence at the acetabulum rather than the iliac crest.  Ventilation Lung Scan and Perfusion Lung Scan Methods Ventilation lung scan and perfusion lung scan methods and criteria for interpretation were described in detail in the methods of PIOPED II ( 50 ). The criteria for interpretation of V-Q scans are based on the revised PIOPED criteria ( 51 ).  Contrast Enhanced Spiral CT All clinical centers are encouraged to use scanners with 16 or more detectors. Newer scanners installed during PIOPED III will be used. In general, the techniques described for PIOPED II will be used ( 30 , 50 ), but local centers may modify the techniques. For scanners with 16 or more detectors, the scan may start at the diaphragm or start at the top of the apex of lung and proceed to 2 cm below the lowest hemidiaphragm. The diagnostic criteria for acute PE are as described in PIOPED II ( 30 , 50 ).  Venous Phase Spiral CT of the Veins of the Lower Extremities Venous phase contrast enhanced spiral CT of the veins of the thighs (CTV) will be performed and interpreted as in PIOPED II ( 50 ), except scans will commence at the acetabulum rather than the iliac crest.  DIGITAL SUBTRACTION PULMONARY ANGIOGRAPHY (DSA) Pulmonary DSA’s typically will use 1024 × 1024 pixels when possible to allow 6 frames/sec. Maximum magnification, which allows visualization of the entire lung on both views, will be used. Pulmonary DSA’s will be obtained during the intrapulmonary artery injection of 25 to 50 mL of a low or iso-osmolar nonionic contrast agent injected at 20-25 mL/sec by power injector through a 5.0-8.0 French side hole catheter. The criteria for interpretation will be as in PIOPED II ( 50 ). Design Similarities and Differences Compared with PIOPED II The methods of PIOPED III will parallel the methods of PIOPED II ( 50 ) to the extent that a composite reference standard will be used for the diagnosis and exclusion of PE and all images will be read by two blinded and study certified readers at centers other than where the images were obtained ( 30 ). An important difference is that patients with no PE according to the composite reference test will be randomized to undergo Gd-MRA/MRV. This will reduce the proportion of patients with negative tests at no loss in evaluation of sensitivity and specificity, and reduce the cost of the trial.  Design Similarities and Differences Compared with PIOPED II The methods of PIOPED III will parallel the methods of PIOPED II ( 50 ) to the extent that a composite reference standard will be used for the diagnosis and exclusion of PE and all images will be read by two blinded and study certified readers at centers other than where the images were obtained ( 30 ). An important difference is that patients with no PE according to the composite reference test will be randomized to undergo Gd-MRA/MRV. This will reduce the proportion of patients with negative tests at no loss in evaluation of sensitivity and specificity, and reduce the cost of the trial.  Figure and Tables Figure 1 Table 1 Sensitivity and Specificity of Gd-MRA for PE Sensitivity n/N (%) Specificity n/N (%) Reference 8/8 (100) 21/22 (95) Meaney et al ( 3 ) 27/35 (77) 81/83 (98) Oudkerk et al ( 4 ) 11/13 (85) 22/23 (96) Gupta et al ( 5 ) Table 2 Exclusion Criteria • Critically ill • Currently suffer from shock or hypotension (systolic pressure < 80 mm Hg) or hemodynamically unstable • On ventilatory support • Documented episodes of ventricular fibrillation or sustained ventricular tachycardia within the past 24 hours • Myocardial infarction within the past month • Sickle cell disease, other hemoglobinopathies, and other hemolytic anemias • Estimated creatinine clearance < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 • Acute renal insufficiency or likely causes or findings with acute renal insufficiency including: • Severely dehydrated • Severe hemorrhage • Oliguria • Anuria • Severe trauma, within 7 days • Renal transplant, ever • Liver transplant, ever • Rhabdomyolysis • End-stage malignancy • Third degree burns, within 7 days • Poisoned (methanol, ethylene glycol), within 7 days • Increase in creatinine of >1.5 times initial level during hospitalization or in past 2 weeks • On renal dialysis • Gd-enhanced MRA within the previous 3 months • Gd-enhanced MRA is planned or likely within the next 3 months. • History of allergy to gadolinium-containing contrast agents or to iodinated contrast media (because patients allergic to iodinated contrast material are sometimes allergic to gadolinium containing contrast media) • Currently symptomatic asthma • Pregnant • Nursing mother • Previously enrolled in PIOPED III • Institutionalized or mentally handicapped • Prisoners • Unable to personally give informed consent Table 3 MRI Equipment and Characteristics Site MRI Field Strength (T) Max Gradient Field Strength (mT/m) Slew Rate mT/msec Calgary Siemens Sonata 1.5 30 200 Emory GE Signa Horizon ?LX High Speed 1.5 40 150 MGH Siemens Sonata 1.5 30 200 Michigan GE Signa Horizon ?LX Echo Speed Philips Achieva 1.5 3.0 30 40 150 200 NYU Siemens Sonata 1.5 30 200 St. Joseph Toshiba ?XGV Vantage 1.5 30 130 Washington Siemens Sonata 1.5 30 200 