Tetrasomy 13q Mosaicism Associated With Phylloid Hypomelanosis and Precocious Puberty Various forms of pigmentary dysplasias have been known to be associated with chromosomal mosaicism. One of these disorders, known as phylloid hypomelanosis, has been found to be predominantly associated with abnormalities in chromosome 13. Most of the reported literature involves mosaic trisomy 13 with clinical evidence of abnormal pigmentation in the form of leaf-like or oblong achromic macules following Blaschko’s lines. Here, we report on an 8-year-old girl with phylloid hypomelanosis and precocious puberty who was found to have mosaicism for tetrasomy 13q in the form of inverted dup(13)(q21) on her skin fibroblasts as well as peripheral blood karyotype. A higher resolution (244K) chromosomal microarray was done on DNA from skin fibroblasts confirming the breakpoint and gain of distal 13q, which made her tetrasomic for 13q21-qter. This is the first-ever reported association of tetrasomy 13q with phylloid hypomelanosis and precocious puberty. Our report further emphasizes the need to exclude any type of abnormalities of chromosome 13 in patients with phylloid hypopigmentation.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Chromosome analysis of cultured peripheral blood leukocytes as well as skin fibroblasts from the border of the area of hypopigmentation, was carried out using standard protocols. Chromosome microarray analysis (v.6.1) was carried out in peripheral blood leukocytes using a clinically available BAC microarray which includes 1472 BAC and PAC clones. Whole Human Genome Oligo Microarray 244K (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA) was used to define the inverted duplicated 13q21 region in cultured fibroblasts. The procedures for DNA digestion, labeling, and hybridization were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions with some modifications [ Probst et al., 2007 ].  RESULTS G-banded chromosome analysis of cultured peripheral blood leukocytes was initially reported as normal. A skin biopsy was performed on the area of hypopigmentation and chromosomal analysis in cultured fibroblasts revealed an inverted duplicated chromosome 13q21 in 16/20 (85%) cells while the remaining 4/20 cells showed a normal female karyotype ( Fig. 2a,b ). Repeat analysis of the cultured peripheral blood leukocytes showed the additional inverted chromosome 13q21 to be present in 1 out of 100 cells examined. Fluorescent in situ hybridization studies with whole chromosome 13 paint, confirmed the duplication to be chromosome 13 in origin. Array-CGH using a BAC-microarray on DNA from peripheral blood was reported as normal. High resolution array-CGH using the Agilent 244K oligo array on DNA from skin fibroblasts showed a gain in copy number of chromosome region 13q21-q33 of approximately 48.52 Mb. The 244K array was also performed on DNA sample from a buccal swab which was reported as normal. The 244K array was not performed on peripheral blood.  RESULTS G-banded chromosome analysis of cultured peripheral blood leukocytes was initially reported as normal. A skin biopsy was performed on the area of hypopigmentation and chromosomal analysis in cultured fibroblasts revealed an inverted duplicated chromosome 13q21 in 16/20 (85%) cells while the remaining 4/20 cells showed a normal female karyotype ( Fig. 2a,b ). Repeat analysis of the cultured peripheral blood leukocytes showed the additional inverted chromosome 13q21 to be present in 1 out of 100 cells examined. Fluorescent in situ hybridization studies with whole chromosome 13 paint, confirmed the duplication to be chromosome 13 in origin. Array-CGH using a BAC-microarray on DNA from peripheral blood was reported as normal. High resolution array-CGH using the Agilent 244K oligo array on DNA from skin fibroblasts showed a gain in copy number of chromosome region 13q21-q33 of approximately 48.52 Mb. The 244K array was also performed on DNA sample from a buccal swab which was reported as normal. The 244K array was not performed on peripheral blood.  DISCUSSION The finding of phylloid hypomelanosis associated with tetrasomy 13q has not been previously reported in the literature. The clinical features present in earlier reported cases of mosaic tetrasomy 13q are mental retardation, hypotonia, bony abnormalities and craniofacial abnormalities ( Table I ). It is interesting to note that the facial features noted in these three patients outlined in Table I are not similar. One reason could be that the cases reported in the year 2000 were ascertained by G-banding and not by array-CGH. However, given the small sample size, more cases need to be ascertained before we can reach a consensus on the craniofacial abnormalities related with tetrasomy 13q. In addition, the level of mosaicism in different tissues is another variable that could explain the lack of clinical similarity including pigmentation patterns between these cases. Moreover, patients with the same mosaic chromosomal abnormality sometimes show a totally different pigmentation pattern [ Wertelecki et al., 1986 ]. There seems to be an increased propensity for neocentromere formation in 13q [ Barwell et al., 2004 ]. To date, 11 cases of inv dup13q neocentromere –containing chromosomes have been reported. The 11 previously reported cases display a wide range of mosaicism, ranging from 100% trisomy for 13q14-qter to 26% hexasomy for 13q32-qter [ Li et al., 2002 ]. An inherent instability of marker chromosomes during early development, perhaps due to slight selection or selective advantage for karyotypically normal cells and/or lack of selection against the marker chromosome is a possible reason for the wide ranging degrees of mosaicism displayed by neocentromere-containing marker chromosomes [ Crolla, 1998 ]. In these 11 patients, no clear genotype–phenotype correlation could be elucidated. Over the years, it has become evident that correlating particular clinical features with specific mosaic chromosomal imbalances is a difficult task exacerbated by the varying degrees of mosaicism that are frequently observed with such chromosomal rearrangements. Furthermore, the presence of a neocentromere in these chromosomes, where the formation of a kinetochore may result in chromatin modification possibly influencing gene expression over a large chromosomal region, may further contribute to the observed clinical heterogeneity. A total of 76 candidate pigmentary genes have been identified in the genome. Among these genes, three genes are located within the area of duplication found in our patient. EDNRB (endothelin receptor type B) maps to 13q22 and functions as a growth factor receptor responsible for melanoblast migration [ Sturm et al., 1998 ]. The other two genes are DCT (dopachromoe tautomerase) (on 13q32) which functions as a melanosomal enzyme, and EFNB2 (ephrin-B2) (on 13q33) which is a growth factor also responsible for melanoblast migration [ Bouchard et al., 1994 ; Santiago and Erickson, 2002 ]. Their role in human disease is not yet known. It is possible that the inverted duplication in our patient caused an overexpression of these genes consequently producing the pigmentary phenotype due to increased gene dosage. Conversely, another possible explanation is that mosaic expression of these genes may lead to impaired melanoblast migration and melanocyte formation leading to the depigmentation. The developmental delay (including learning disabilities) observed in our patient is also seen in patients with full trisomy 13, although those patients have a worse cognitive outcome. In a review of 8 patients with mosaic trisomy or tetrasomy of 13q, it was found that none of them had holoprosencephaly or other midbrain anomalies, which are hallmarks of full trisomy 13 [ Warburton et al., 2000 ]. These features may be associated with duplication of the most-proximal region of chromosome 13q, which was not observed in our patient. It is possible that gene expression may be inactivated in the vicinity of the neocentromere on these chromosomes, potentially influencing the clinical features in these patients. The finding of multifocal leukoencephalopathy on her brain MRI could be associated with chromosomal mosaicism in her central nervous system. Her milder cognitive outcome could be due to a potential selection against the inverted duplication in the brain. On the other hand, we are not aware of any reported association with tetrasomy 13q and precocious puberty and it is possible that her precocious puberty could be completely unrelated to the observed chromosomal findings. In summary, this is a unique association of phylloid hypomelanosis, developmental delay and precocious puberty in an 8-year-old girl with mosaic tetrasomy 13q. It is puzzling that this pattern of phylloid hypomelanosis is observed only with chromosome 13 abnormalities and not with any other mosaic chromosomal abnormalities. Our case further strengthens the previous evidence that in patients with phylloid hypomelanosis, a chromosomal abnormality involving chromosome 13 needs to be considered.  DISCUSSION The finding of phylloid hypomelanosis associated with tetrasomy 13q has not been previously reported in the literature. The clinical features present in earlier reported cases of mosaic tetrasomy 13q are mental retardation, hypotonia, bony abnormalities and craniofacial abnormalities ( Table I ). It is interesting to note that the facial features noted in these three patients outlined in Table I are not similar. One reason could be that the cases reported in the year 2000 were ascertained by G-banding and not by array-CGH. However, given the small sample size, more cases need to be ascertained before we can reach a consensus on the craniofacial abnormalities related with tetrasomy 13q. In addition, the level of mosaicism in different tissues is another variable that could explain the lack of clinical similarity including pigmentation patterns between these cases. Moreover, patients with the same mosaic chromosomal abnormality sometimes show a totally different pigmentation pattern [ Wertelecki et al., 1986 ]. There seems to be an increased propensity for neocentromere formation in 13q [ Barwell et al., 2004 ]. To date, 11 cases of inv dup13q neocentromere –containing chromosomes have been reported. The 11 previously reported cases display a wide range of mosaicism, ranging from 100% trisomy for 13q14-qter to 26% hexasomy for 13q32-qter [ Li et al., 2002 ]. An inherent instability of marker chromosomes during early development, perhaps due to slight selection or selective advantage for karyotypically normal cells and/or lack of selection against the marker chromosome is a possible reason for the wide ranging degrees of mosaicism displayed by neocentromere-containing marker chromosomes [ Crolla, 1998 ]. In these 11 patients, no clear genotype–phenotype correlation could be elucidated. Over the years, it has become evident that correlating particular clinical features with specific mosaic chromosomal imbalances is a difficult task exacerbated by the varying degrees of mosaicism that are frequently observed with such chromosomal rearrangements. Furthermore, the presence of a neocentromere in these chromosomes, where the formation of a kinetochore may result in chromatin modification possibly influencing gene expression over a large chromosomal region, may further contribute to the observed clinical heterogeneity. A total of 76 candidate pigmentary genes have been identified in the genome. Among these genes, three genes are located within the area of duplication found in our patient. EDNRB (endothelin receptor type B) maps to 13q22 and functions as a growth factor receptor responsible for melanoblast migration [ Sturm et al., 1998 ]. The other two genes are DCT (dopachromoe tautomerase) (on 13q32) which functions as a melanosomal enzyme, and EFNB2 (ephrin-B2) (on 13q33) which is a growth factor also responsible for melanoblast migration [ Bouchard et al., 1994 ; Santiago and Erickson, 2002 ]. Their role in human disease is not yet known. It is possible that the inverted duplication in our patient caused an overexpression of these genes consequently producing the pigmentary phenotype due to increased gene dosage. Conversely, another possible explanation is that mosaic expression of these genes may lead to impaired melanoblast migration and melanocyte formation leading to the depigmentation. The developmental delay (including learning disabilities) observed in our patient is also seen in patients with full trisomy 13, although those patients have a worse cognitive outcome. In a review of 8 patients with mosaic trisomy or tetrasomy of 13q, it was found that none of them had holoprosencephaly or other midbrain anomalies, which are hallmarks of full trisomy 13 [ Warburton et al., 2000 ]. These features may be associated with duplication of the most-proximal region of chromosome 13q, which was not observed in our patient. It is possible that gene expression may be inactivated in the vicinity of the neocentromere on these chromosomes, potentially influencing the clinical features in these patients. The finding of multifocal leukoencephalopathy on her brain MRI could be associated with chromosomal mosaicism in her central nervous system. Her milder cognitive outcome could be due to a potential selection against the inverted duplication in the brain. On the other hand, we are not aware of any reported association with tetrasomy 13q and precocious puberty and it is possible that her precocious puberty could be completely unrelated to the observed chromosomal findings. In summary, this is a unique association of phylloid hypomelanosis, developmental delay and precocious puberty in an 8-year-old girl with mosaic tetrasomy 13q. It is puzzling that this pattern of phylloid hypomelanosis is observed only with chromosome 13 abnormalities and not with any other mosaic chromosomal abnormalities. Our case further strengthens the previous evidence that in patients with phylloid hypomelanosis, a chromosomal abnormality involving chromosome 13 needs to be considered. 