Pinch and Elbow Extension Restoration in People With Tetraplegia: A Systematic Review of the Literature Purpose We conducted a systematic review of the literature to summarize the available data on reconstructive surgeries involving pinch reconstruction and elbow extension restoration in people with tetraplegia. Methods English-language and French-language articles and abstracts published between 1966 and February 2007, identified through MEDLINE and EMBASE searches, bibliography review, and expert consultation, were reviewed for original reports of outcomes with pinch reconstruction and elbow extension restoration in tetraplegic patients after a spinal cord injury. Two reviewers independently extracted data on patient characteristics, surgical methods, and patient outcomes. Results Our search identified 765 articles, of which 37 met eligibility criteria (one article contained information on both elbow and pinch procedures). Results from 377 pinch reconstructions in 23 studies and 201 elbow extension restorations in 14 studies were summarized. The mean Medical Research Council score for elbow extension went from 0 to 3.3 after reconstruction. The overall mean postoperative strength measured after surgery for pinch reconstruction was 2 kg. Conclusions More than 500 patients having these procedures experienced a clinically important improvement for both procedures—one restoring elbow extension, and the other, pinch strength. Upper-limb surgeries markedly improved the hand function of people with tetraplegia. Type of study/level of evidence Therapeutic IV.  Methods English-language and French-language articles and abstracts published between 1966 and February 2007, identified through MEDLINE and EMBASE searches, bibliography review, and expert consultation, were reviewed for original reports of outcomes with pinch reconstruction and elbow extension restoration in tetraplegic patients after a spinal cord injury. Two reviewers independently extracted data on patient characteristics, surgical methods, and patient outcomes.  Results Our search identified 765 articles, of which 37 met eligibility criteria (one article contained information on both elbow and pinch procedures). Results from 377 pinch reconstructions in 23 studies and 201 elbow extension restorations in 14 studies were summarized. The mean Medical Research Council score for elbow extension went from 0 to 3.3 after reconstruction. The overall mean postoperative strength measured after surgery for pinch reconstruction was 2 kg.  Conclusions More than 500 patients having these procedures experienced a clinically important improvement for both procedures—one restoring elbow extension, and the other, pinch strength. Upper-limb surgeries markedly improved the hand function of people with tetraplegia.  Type of study/level of evidence Therapeutic IV.  MATERIALS AND METHODS A set of inclusion and exclusion criteria was established, an exhaustive search of the literature was conducted, studies were reviewed, and results were pooled for analysis. Inclusion and exclusion criteria The following exclusion criteria were used: Articles in languages other than English or French. Citations relating to functional electric stimulation; it was believed that this would add unacceptable diversity to an already complicated subject. Articles unrelated to upper extremity reconstruction for tetraplegia due to spinal cord injury; for example, articles on reconstruction after stroke. Review articles not citing primary data. To be included, the articles had to meet all of the following criteria: Articles had to report the outcomes of surgeries designed to restore pinch or elbow extension in patients with tetraplegia due to spinal cord injury. Articles had to report 1 or several of the outcomes of interest defined as (a) pinch strength in kilograms and (b) elbow strength as defined by the MRC grading system. If several articles included the same patients, only the most complete record was included, to prevent double counting. Literature search Literature searches were conducted using the following databases: MEDLINE (1966–2007) and EMBASE (1974–2000). For our initial search, we used the following key words: tetraplegia, spinal cord injury, quadriplegia, paralysis, cervical spine injury surgery, reconstruction, reconstructive surgery, tendon transfer, fusion, opponensplasty, key pinch, arm, hand, elbow, deltoid, thumb, finger, upper extremity, upper limb, and wrist. This search was supplemented with manual searches of the bibliographies of retrieved articles. The Journal of Hand Surgery was independently searched using the keyword tetraplegia . Abstracts from the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation (Bologna, Italy, 2001) were also included. Our initial literature search identified 765 citations. Of these citations, we were unable to obtain 13 articles, and 558 were rejected on initial review of the titles or abstracts because they were duplicates, focused on functional electrical stimulation, on the wrong topic, or were qualitative reviews. After this initial review, we had 194 potential articles, which we closely assessed for possible inclusion. After this second detailed review, we found 37 articles that met our inclusion criteria. Please refer to the flow diagram ( Fig. 1 ) for a more detailed explanation of our selection process. Data abstraction First, the title and abstract of each citation were reviewed. Many reports could be excluded on that basis. The remaining articles were checked for inclusion and exclusion criteria by 2 physicians with training in epidemiology. The following data were abstracted: number of patients in study, type of surgery performed, number of arms, postoperative pinch strength in kilograms, MRC muscle strength score for elbow extension, and the number and type of adverse events. We selected these points because these were the most common outcomes reported in this literature. For the strength of the elbow extension measured by MRC grade, 0.5 was added to the score for a plus rate to calculate a mean (eg, 3+ was considered 3.5). For the adverse outcomes, we included all postoperative events even if they did not result in additional procedures or were not the direct result of the surgery (eg, alcohol withdrawal). Any differences between reviewers were resolved through consensus.  Inclusion and exclusion criteria The following exclusion criteria were used: Articles in languages other than English or French. Citations relating to functional electric stimulation; it was believed that this would add unacceptable diversity to an already complicated subject. Articles unrelated to upper extremity reconstruction for tetraplegia due to spinal cord injury; for example, articles on reconstruction after stroke. Review articles not citing primary data. To be included, the articles had to meet all of the following criteria: Articles had to report the outcomes of surgeries designed to restore pinch or elbow extension in patients with tetraplegia due to spinal cord injury. Articles had to report 1 or several of the outcomes of interest defined as (a) pinch strength in kilograms and (b) elbow strength as defined by the MRC grading system. If several articles included the same patients, only the most complete record was included, to prevent double counting.  Literature search Literature searches were conducted using the following databases: MEDLINE (1966–2007) and EMBASE (1974–2000). For our initial search, we used the following key words: tetraplegia, spinal cord injury, quadriplegia, paralysis, cervical spine injury surgery, reconstruction, reconstructive surgery, tendon transfer, fusion, opponensplasty, key pinch, arm, hand, elbow, deltoid, thumb, finger, upper extremity, upper limb, and wrist. This search was supplemented with manual searches of the bibliographies of retrieved articles. The Journal of Hand Surgery was independently searched using the keyword tetraplegia . Abstracts from the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation (Bologna, Italy, 2001) were also included. Our initial literature search identified 765 citations. Of these citations, we were unable to obtain 13 articles, and 558 were rejected on initial review of the titles or abstracts because they were duplicates, focused on functional electrical stimulation, on the wrong topic, or were qualitative reviews. After this initial review, we had 194 potential articles, which we closely assessed for possible inclusion. After this second detailed review, we found 37 articles that met our inclusion criteria. Please refer to the flow diagram ( Fig. 1 ) for a more detailed explanation of our selection process.  Data abstraction First, the title and abstract of each citation were reviewed. Many reports could be excluded on that basis. The remaining articles were checked for inclusion and exclusion criteria by 2 physicians with training in epidemiology. The following data were abstracted: number of patients in study, type of surgery performed, number of arms, postoperative pinch strength in kilograms, MRC muscle strength score for elbow extension, and the number and type of adverse events. We selected these points because these were the most common outcomes reported in this literature. For the strength of the elbow extension measured by MRC grade, 0.5 was added to the score for a plus rate to calculate a mean (eg, 3+ was considered 3.5). For the adverse outcomes, we included all postoperative events even if they did not result in additional procedures or were not the direct result of the surgery (eg, alcohol withdrawal). Any differences between reviewers were resolved through consensus.  Rationale for a quantitative analysis of case series It is difficult to assess upper limb surgery in people with tetraplegia because of this population’s heterogeneity, including different preoperative neurologic deficits, varying patient social support, and a diversity of surgical procedures. Even within one patient, both upper limbs may have very different function. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to systematically quantify and summarize the data on upper-extremity reconstruction in patients with tetraplegia. A randomized trial is clearly the best way to evaluate different interventions. In the absence of such data, we have attempted to synthesize the existing treatment experience in a quantitative analysis of previously published case series. Some discount the results of quantitative reviews of the literature; however, there are a number of precedents for their use in the setting of hand surgery. 42 – 44 We believe that in injuries that are not amenable to a true randomized trial, either because of relative infrequency of the injury or because of a multitude of variables, treatment decisions assisted by information from quantitative analysis of case series is preferable to treatment decisions made by conjecture or unassessed personal experience. One advantage of a quantitative review of case series data with rigorous inclusion and exclusion criteria is the ability to represent the outcomes experienced in the broadest clinical setting, which might come closer to showing the true results of the population of clinicians treating upper-limb functional loss in tetraplegic patients rather than the experience of just a few surgeons.  Outcome measures The literature was heterogeneous, with many different outcomes reported. We chose to report only objective outcomes, as subjective outcomes were reported in different and unreproducible manners depending on authors and centers. We focused on the most common objective outcomes reported: MRC muscle strength score for elbow extension and postoperative pinch strength in kilograms.  Adverse events measures The overall rate of postoperative adverse events was 114 adverse events in 339 surgeries, or 1 adverse event for every 3 operated limbs. This rate is not higher than complication rates reported for other upper-limb functional surgeries; for example, series reporting results of surgeries for osteoarthritis of the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb using the standard ligament reconstruction tendon interposition reported a complication rate of 52%. 45 Furthermore, the complications reported for restoration of elbow extension and restoration of pinch strength were mostly local and benign complications directly related to the procedure. More serious or life-threatening complications occurred in a relatively small number of cases: 10% of the overall complications in reconstructions for restoration of elbow extension and 2% of the overall complications in surgeries for restoration of pinch strength.  RESULTS Studies of elbow extension strength We identified 14 studies reporting outcomes of reconstructions to restore elbow extension on 201 operated limbs 11 , 13 , 17 – 26 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Landi et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). Of these studies, 12 used the posterior deltoid to triceps tendon as their reconstructive procedure, 2 used biceps to triceps transfer, and 1 used both methods. Adverse events were reported in 11 studies including 156 elbow reconstructions. For these studies, the adverse-event rate for reconstruction of elbow extension was 1 complication for every 4 limbs operated on (n = 39 adverse events total). The most common adverse events, 54% of the complications (n = 21), were rupture or stretching of the repair. Other more serious outcomes were functional loss secondary to syrinx and spinal instability (n = 2), deep venous thrombosis (n = 1), and divorce thought to be the result of increased dependence during postoperative rehabilitation (n = 1). Adverse events in the 156 reconstructed elbows are reported in Table 1 . Table 2 summarizes the results of the posterior deltoid reconstructions. When reported, the preoperative strength was an MRC score of 0 or less than 1. The average postoperative elbow extension strength after posterior deltoid reconstruction was an MRC score of 3.3 for 190 operated limbs. Studies of pinch strength We identified 23 studies with a total of 377 limbs that had procedures to improve pinch strength 13 , 15 , 18 , 20 , 23 , 27 – 41 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Bednar et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001; Hentz, presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). These articles included a variety of procedures that could be broadly divided into those that used an active motor to power the pinch, for example brachioradialis to flexor pollicis longus transfer (7 studies), or those that only applied a tenodesis effect, for example the Möberg key pinch procedure (16 studies). Three studies did not specify the technique used. Three of these 23 studies reported results for procedures using an active motor and for procedures applying a tenodesis effect. The postoperative adverse-event rate for studies that reported negative outcomes was 75 events for 183 limbs, or 40%. The most common complications were flexion contracture of the elbow or of the thumb (25% of the complications [n = 19]), stretching or rupture of repair (22% of the complications [n = 17]), and loosening of pins across the thumb interphalangeal joint (21% of the complications [n = 16]). Other common complications were misalignment of pinch (10% of the complications [n = 8]) and trapezial/trapezoid arthritis (8% of the complications [n = 6], but this complication is reported in a single study and was severe in only 1 case). More serious adverse events were 1 syrinx and 1 episode of postoperative pneumonia. All the adverse events after the 183 pinch reconstructions are reported in Table 3 . Table 4 summarizes the results of pinch reconstruction for procedures using an active motor, and Table 5 reports the results for other procedures (ie, procedures applying a tenodesis effect or not specified). Pinch strength was measured in kilograms. When reported, the preoperative strength was 0. The overall mean postoperative strength measured after surgery was 2 kg. The mean postoperative strength was 1 kg with the procedures that applied a tenodesis effect and 2 kg with the procedures that used an active motor. Overall results While subgroups might benefit even more (eg, patients for whom an active motor can be used for pinch reconstruction), almost every patient who met the inclusion criteria of this systematic review had a positive benefit-to-risk ratio of more than 2, as defined by a clinically significant improvement in upper limb function (i.e., MRC score improvement of 3+ for elbow extension or increase of more than 2 kg for pinch force) versus adverse outcomes.  RESULTS Studies of elbow extension strength We identified 14 studies reporting outcomes of reconstructions to restore elbow extension on 201 operated limbs 11 , 13 , 17 – 26 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Landi et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). Of these studies, 12 used the posterior deltoid to triceps tendon as their reconstructive procedure, 2 used biceps to triceps transfer, and 1 used both methods. Adverse events were reported in 11 studies including 156 elbow reconstructions. For these studies, the adverse-event rate for reconstruction of elbow extension was 1 complication for every 4 limbs operated on (n = 39 adverse events total). The most common adverse events, 54% of the complications (n = 21), were rupture or stretching of the repair. Other more serious outcomes were functional loss secondary to syrinx and spinal instability (n = 2), deep venous thrombosis (n = 1), and divorce thought to be the result of increased dependence during postoperative rehabilitation (n = 1). Adverse events in the 156 reconstructed elbows are reported in Table 1 . Table 2 summarizes the results of the posterior deltoid reconstructions. When reported, the preoperative strength was an MRC score of 0 or less than 1. The average postoperative elbow extension strength after posterior deltoid reconstruction was an MRC score of 3.3 for 190 operated limbs. Studies of pinch strength We identified 23 studies with a total of 377 limbs that had procedures to improve pinch strength 13 , 15 , 18 , 20 , 23 , 27 – 41 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Bednar et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001; Hentz, presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). These articles included a variety of procedures that could be broadly divided into those that used an active motor to power the pinch, for example brachioradialis to flexor pollicis longus transfer (7 studies), or those that only applied a tenodesis effect, for example the Möberg key pinch procedure (16 studies). Three studies did not specify the technique used. Three of these 23 studies reported results for procedures using an active motor and for procedures applying a tenodesis effect. The postoperative adverse-event rate for studies that reported negative outcomes was 75 events for 183 limbs, or 40%. The most common complications were flexion contracture of the elbow or of the thumb (25% of the complications [n = 19]), stretching or rupture of repair (22% of the complications [n = 17]), and loosening of pins across the thumb interphalangeal joint (21% of the complications [n = 16]). Other common complications were misalignment of pinch (10% of the complications [n = 8]) and trapezial/trapezoid arthritis (8% of the complications [n = 6], but this complication is reported in a single study and was severe in only 1 case). More serious adverse events were 1 syrinx and 1 episode of postoperative pneumonia. All the adverse events after the 183 pinch reconstructions are reported in Table 3 . Table 4 summarizes the results of pinch reconstruction for procedures using an active motor, and Table 5 reports the results for other procedures (ie, procedures applying a tenodesis effect or not specified). Pinch strength was measured in kilograms. When reported, the preoperative strength was 0. The overall mean postoperative strength measured after surgery was 2 kg. The mean postoperative strength was 1 kg with the procedures that applied a tenodesis effect and 2 kg with the procedures that used an active motor. Overall results While subgroups might benefit even more (eg, patients for whom an active motor can be used for pinch reconstruction), almost every patient who met the inclusion criteria of this systematic review had a positive benefit-to-risk ratio of more than 2, as defined by a clinically significant improvement in upper limb function (i.e., MRC score improvement of 3+ for elbow extension or increase of more than 2 kg for pinch force) versus adverse outcomes.  Studies of elbow extension strength We identified 14 studies reporting outcomes of reconstructions to restore elbow extension on 201 operated limbs 11 , 13 , 17 – 26 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Landi et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). Of these studies, 12 used the posterior deltoid to triceps tendon as their reconstructive procedure, 2 used biceps to triceps transfer, and 1 used both methods. Adverse events were reported in 11 studies including 156 elbow reconstructions. For these studies, the adverse-event rate for reconstruction of elbow extension was 1 complication for every 4 limbs operated on (n = 39 adverse events total). The most common adverse events, 54% of the complications (n = 21), were rupture or stretching of the repair. Other more serious outcomes were functional loss secondary to syrinx and spinal instability (n = 2), deep venous thrombosis (n = 1), and divorce thought to be the result of increased dependence during postoperative rehabilitation (n = 1). Adverse events in the 156 reconstructed elbows are reported in Table 1 . Table 2 summarizes the results of the posterior deltoid reconstructions. When reported, the preoperative strength was an MRC score of 0 or less than 1. The average postoperative elbow extension strength after posterior deltoid reconstruction was an MRC score of 3.3 for 190 operated limbs.  Studies of elbow extension strength We identified 14 studies reporting outcomes of reconstructions to restore elbow extension on 201 operated limbs 11 , 13 , 17 – 26 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Landi et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). Of these studies, 12 used the posterior deltoid to triceps tendon as their reconstructive procedure, 2 used biceps to triceps transfer, and 1 used both methods. Adverse events were reported in 11 studies including 156 elbow reconstructions. For these studies, the adverse-event rate for reconstruction of elbow extension was 1 complication for every 4 limbs operated on (n = 39 adverse events total). The most common adverse events, 54% of the complications (n = 21), were rupture or stretching of the repair. Other more serious outcomes were functional loss secondary to syrinx and spinal instability (n = 2), deep venous thrombosis (n = 1), and divorce thought to be the result of increased dependence during postoperative rehabilitation (n = 1). Adverse events in the 156 reconstructed elbows are reported in Table 1 . Table 2 summarizes the results of the posterior deltoid reconstructions. When reported, the preoperative strength was an MRC score of 0 or less than 1. The average postoperative elbow extension strength after posterior deltoid reconstruction was an MRC score of 3.3 for 190 operated limbs.  Studies of pinch strength We identified 23 studies with a total of 377 limbs that had procedures to improve pinch strength 13 , 15 , 18 , 20 , 23 , 27 – 41 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Bednar et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001; Hentz, presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). These articles included a variety of procedures that could be broadly divided into those that used an active motor to power the pinch, for example brachioradialis to flexor pollicis longus transfer (7 studies), or those that only applied a tenodesis effect, for example the Möberg key pinch procedure (16 studies). Three studies did not specify the technique used. Three of these 23 studies reported results for procedures using an active motor and for procedures applying a tenodesis effect. The postoperative adverse-event rate for studies that reported negative outcomes was 75 events for 183 limbs, or 40%. The most common complications were flexion contracture of the elbow or of the thumb (25% of the complications [n = 19]), stretching or rupture of repair (22% of the complications [n = 17]), and loosening of pins across the thumb interphalangeal joint (21% of the complications [n = 16]). Other common complications were misalignment of pinch (10% of the complications [n = 8]) and trapezial/trapezoid arthritis (8% of the complications [n = 6], but this complication is reported in a single study and was severe in only 1 case). More serious adverse events were 1 syrinx and 1 episode of postoperative pneumonia. All the adverse events after the 183 pinch reconstructions are reported in Table 3 . Table 4 summarizes the results of pinch reconstruction for procedures using an active motor, and Table 5 reports the results for other procedures (ie, procedures applying a tenodesis effect or not specified). Pinch strength was measured in kilograms. When reported, the preoperative strength was 0. The overall mean postoperative strength measured after surgery was 2 kg. The mean postoperative strength was 1 kg with the procedures that applied a tenodesis effect and 2 kg with the procedures that used an active motor.  Studies of pinch strength We identified 23 studies with a total of 377 limbs that had procedures to improve pinch strength 13 , 15 , 18 , 20 , 23 , 27 – 41 (Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001; Bednar et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001; Hentz, presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001). These articles included a variety of procedures that could be broadly divided into those that used an active motor to power the pinch, for example brachioradialis to flexor pollicis longus transfer (7 studies), or those that only applied a tenodesis effect, for example the Möberg key pinch procedure (16 studies). Three studies did not specify the technique used. Three of these 23 studies reported results for procedures using an active motor and for procedures applying a tenodesis effect. The postoperative adverse-event rate for studies that reported negative outcomes was 75 events for 183 limbs, or 40%. The most common complications were flexion contracture of the elbow or of the thumb (25% of the complications [n = 19]), stretching or rupture of repair (22% of the complications [n = 17]), and loosening of pins across the thumb interphalangeal joint (21% of the complications [n = 16]). Other common complications were misalignment of pinch (10% of the complications [n = 8]) and trapezial/trapezoid arthritis (8% of the complications [n = 6], but this complication is reported in a single study and was severe in only 1 case). More serious adverse events were 1 syrinx and 1 episode of postoperative pneumonia. All the adverse events after the 183 pinch reconstructions are reported in Table 3 . Table 4 summarizes the results of pinch reconstruction for procedures using an active motor, and Table 5 reports the results for other procedures (ie, procedures applying a tenodesis effect or not specified). Pinch strength was measured in kilograms. When reported, the preoperative strength was 0. The overall mean postoperative strength measured after surgery was 2 kg. The mean postoperative strength was 1 kg with the procedures that applied a tenodesis effect and 2 kg with the procedures that used an active motor.  Overall results While subgroups might benefit even more (eg, patients for whom an active motor can be used for pinch reconstruction), almost every patient who met the inclusion criteria of this systematic review had a positive benefit-to-risk ratio of more than 2, as defined by a clinically significant improvement in upper limb function (i.e., MRC score improvement of 3+ for elbow extension or increase of more than 2 kg for pinch force) versus adverse outcomes.  Overall results While subgroups might benefit even more (eg, patients for whom an active motor can be used for pinch reconstruction), almost every patient who met the inclusion criteria of this systematic review had a positive benefit-to-risk ratio of more than 2, as defined by a clinically significant improvement in upper limb function (i.e., MRC score improvement of 3+ for elbow extension or increase of more than 2 kg for pinch force) versus adverse outcomes.  DISCUSSION Rationale for a quantitative analysis of case series It is difficult to assess upper limb surgery in people with tetraplegia because of this population’s heterogeneity, including different preoperative neurologic deficits, varying patient social support, and a diversity of surgical procedures. Even within one patient, both upper limbs may have very different function. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to systematically quantify and summarize the data on upper-extremity reconstruction in patients with tetraplegia. A randomized trial is clearly the best way to evaluate different interventions. In the absence of such data, we have attempted to synthesize the existing treatment experience in a quantitative analysis of previously published case series. Some discount the results of quantitative reviews of the literature; however, there are a number of precedents for their use in the setting of hand surgery. 42 – 44 We believe that in injuries that are not amenable to a true randomized trial, either because of relative infrequency of the injury or because of a multitude of variables, treatment decisions assisted by information from quantitative analysis of case series is preferable to treatment decisions made by conjecture or unassessed personal experience. One advantage of a quantitative review of case series data with rigorous inclusion and exclusion criteria is the ability to represent the outcomes experienced in the broadest clinical setting, which might come closer to showing the true results of the population of clinicians treating upper-limb functional loss in tetraplegic patients rather than the experience of just a few surgeons. Outcome measures The literature was heterogeneous, with many different outcomes reported. We chose to report only objective outcomes, as subjective outcomes were reported in different and unreproducible manners depending on authors and centers. We focused on the most common objective outcomes reported: MRC muscle strength score for elbow extension and postoperative pinch strength in kilograms. Adverse events measures The overall rate of postoperative adverse events was 114 adverse events in 339 surgeries, or 1 adverse event for every 3 operated limbs. This rate is not higher than complication rates reported for other upper-limb functional surgeries; for example, series reporting results of surgeries for osteoarthritis of the carpometacarpal joint of the thumb using the standard ligament reconstruction tendon interposition reported a complication rate of 52%. 45 Furthermore, the complications reported for restoration of elbow extension and restoration of pinch strength were mostly local and benign complications directly related to the procedure. More serious or life-threatening complications occurred in a relatively small number of cases: 10% of the overall complications in reconstructions for restoration of elbow extension and 2% of the overall complications in surgeries for restoration of pinch strength. Commentary on outcomes The cumulative experience of more than 500 patients having these procedures resulted in a clinically important improvement after procedures focusing on restoring elbow extension or pinch strength. An MRC score of more than 3 for elbow extension in patients with tetraplegia means that these patients are able to keep the arm steady in space. The ability to extend the hand in space by an additional 12 inches results in an additional 800% of space that the hand can reach. 46 This means that restoration of elbow extension to an MRC score greater than 3 allowed patients with tetraplegia to increase abilities to reach overhead and to manipulate objects above the head such as a light switch. A key pinch strength of 2 kg for patients with tetraplegia means that they are able to perform a large range of activities of daily living, as has been established by Smaby et al. when defining target pinch force requirements for these activities, 16 such as pushing a button on a remote control, manipulating a key in and out of an entrance lock, opening and closing a vertical or horizontal zipper, inserting a standard card into an automated teller machine and retrieving it, and even manipulating a 3-prong plug out of a wall socket. The mean postoperative strength was 1 kg higher for procedures using an active motor than that for procedures applying a tenodesis effect. This result highlights how the functional result depends on the level of preoperative muscle strength. Based on this systematic review, we conclude that reconstructive surgery for upper extremity function restoration carries substantial promise for the vast majority of eligible tetraplegic patients who meet a heterogeneous set of clinical criteria. We anticipate this study will help providers better counsel their patients and ultimately improve use of these procedures. Limitations Concerning the outcomes of the pinch reconstruction patients, the status of elbow extension (grade of strength and whether the subjects had reconstruction of elbow extension before the pinch plasty or simultaneously) was not known. That lack of information is a weakness of this study because pinch strength after reconstruction using a brachioradialis transfer is stronger when active elbow extension is present. Moreover, in this systematic review, most of the case series we included reported more than 5 patients who had relevant surgeries. This might result in publication bias, as surgeons who have poorer outcomes are less likely to publish their experience. In addition, the experience reported in such series may only reflect that of high-volume academic centers, and outcomes may not be the same in lower-volume centers or for surgeons with less experience. Nevertheless, we believe that in the setting of upper extremity reconstruction for tetraplegia, the relative infrequency of the injury and the limited number of centers capable of performing this surgery makes an exhaustive quantitative review of the existing case series a better tool for informed treatment decisions than unassessed personal experience.  Commentary on outcomes The cumulative experience of more than 500 patients having these procedures resulted in a clinically important improvement after procedures focusing on restoring elbow extension or pinch strength. An MRC score of more than 3 for elbow extension in patients with tetraplegia means that these patients are able to keep the arm steady in space. The ability to extend the hand in space by an additional 12 inches results in an additional 800% of space that the hand can reach. 46 This means that restoration of elbow extension to an MRC score greater than 3 allowed patients with tetraplegia to increase abilities to reach overhead and to manipulate objects above the head such as a light switch. A key pinch strength of 2 kg for patients with tetraplegia means that they are able to perform a large range of activities of daily living, as has been established by Smaby et al. when defining target pinch force requirements for these activities, 16 such as pushing a button on a remote control, manipulating a key in and out of an entrance lock, opening and closing a vertical or horizontal zipper, inserting a standard card into an automated teller machine and retrieving it, and even manipulating a 3-prong plug out of a wall socket. The mean postoperative strength was 1 kg higher for procedures using an active motor than that for procedures applying a tenodesis effect. This result highlights how the functional result depends on the level of preoperative muscle strength. Based on this systematic review, we conclude that reconstructive surgery for upper extremity function restoration carries substantial promise for the vast majority of eligible tetraplegic patients who meet a heterogeneous set of clinical criteria. We anticipate this study will help providers better counsel their patients and ultimately improve use of these procedures.  Limitations Concerning the outcomes of the pinch reconstruction patients, the status of elbow extension (grade of strength and whether the subjects had reconstruction of elbow extension before the pinch plasty or simultaneously) was not known. That lack of information is a weakness of this study because pinch strength after reconstruction using a brachioradialis transfer is stronger when active elbow extension is present. Moreover, in this systematic review, most of the case series we included reported more than 5 patients who had relevant surgeries. This might result in publication bias, as surgeons who have poorer outcomes are less likely to publish their experience. In addition, the experience reported in such series may only reflect that of high-volume academic centers, and outcomes may not be the same in lower-volume centers or for surgeons with less experience. Nevertheless, we believe that in the setting of upper extremity reconstruction for tetraplegia, the relative infrequency of the injury and the limited number of centers capable of performing this surgery makes an exhaustive quantitative review of the existing case series a better tool for informed treatment decisions than unassessed personal experience.  Figure and Tables FIGURE 1 Flow diagram of article selection process. FES, functional electrical stimulation. TABLE 1 Adverse Events Reported After 156 Reconstructions for Elbow Extension Adverse Events Number of Patients Directly related to the procedure ?Rupture or stretching of the repair 21 ?Elbow contracture 5 ?Local infection 4 ?Inflammatory reaction 2 ?Heterotopic ossification in triceps 1 ?Hematoma 1 ?Toe contracture 1 Not directly related to the procedure ?Spine instability/syrinx 2 ?Deep venous thrombosis 1 ?Marriage trouble due to increased dependence 1 Total 39 TABLE 2 Posterior Deltoid to Triceps Reconstruction for Elbow Extension Elbow Extension Strength (MRC Score) Study Number of Patients Number of Limbs Preoperative Postoperative (Average) Number of Adverse Events Bryan, 1977 18 7 14 NR 3.1 4 Debenedetti, 1979 19 13 14 0.5 3.6 4 Lamb and Chan, 1983 22 10 16 NR 4.3 1 Raczka et al., 1984 24 18 19 0.3 2.9 6 Allieu, 1985 17 13 21 NR 3.4 12 Lacey et al., 1986 21 10 17 0 3.4 2 Johnstone et al., 1987 20 7 8 0 2.5 2 Vanden et al., 1991 25 NR 8 NR 3.25 1 Mohammed et al., 1992 23 NR 24 0 3 NR Paul et al., 1994 13 9 10 0.6 3.4 3 Allieu et al., 2001 * NR 9 NR 3.8 NR Landi et al., 2001 † , ‡ NR 25 NR 4.1 4 Welraeds et al., 2003 26 3 5 0 1.8 NR NR, not reported. * Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001. † Landi et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001. ‡ Includes one patient who had a biceps to triceps reconstruction. TABLE 3 Adverse Events Reported After 183 Reconstructions for Pinch Strength Adverse Events Number of Patients Directly related to the procedure ?Flexion contracture of the elbow or flexor pollicis longus 19 ?Stretching or rupture of the repair 17 ?Loosening of pins across the thumb interphalangeal joint 16 ?Misalignment of pinch 8 ?Trapezial/trapezoid arthritis 6 ?Local infection 3 ?Pain 3 ?Wound separation 1 Not directly related to the procedure ?Syrinx 1 ?Pneumonia 1 Total 75 TABLE 4 Procedures to Reconstruct Pinch Using an Active Motor Pinch Strength (kg) Study Number of Patients Number of Limbs Preoperative Postoperative Number of Adverse Events Surgical Type Freehafer et al., 1974 32 12 12 0 1 2 Active motor House et al., 1976 35 7 10 0 3 3 Active motor Waters et al., 1985 41 15 17 0 2 5 Active motor Ainsley et al., 1985 27 23 23 NR 2 7 Active motor House, 1985 * , 15 6 6 0 3 0 Active motor House, 1985 * , 15 6 6 0 4 0 Active motor Brys and Waters, 1987 29 15 15 0 1 NR Active motor Johnstone et al., 1987 20 3 3 NR 1 4 Active motor Gansel et al., 1990 33 11 11 0 2 3 Active motor Mohammed et al., 1992 23 NR 52 NR 2 NR Active motor House et al., 1992 36 18 21 0 3 12 Active motor Paul et al., 1994 13 9 10 0 1 2 Active motor Mulcahey et al., 1995 38 1 1 0 2 0 Active motor Lo et al., 1998 37 NR 8 NR 1 3 Active motor Allieu et al., 2001 † NR 9 NR 2 NR Active motor Hentz, 2001 ‡ NR 18 NR 4 NR Active motor NR, not reported. * Highlights 2 parts of the same study. † Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001. ‡ Hentz, presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001. TABLE 5 Procedures to Reconstruct Pinch Not Using an Active Motor (Tenodesis or Not Specified) Pinch Strength (kg) Study Number of Patients Number of Limbs Preoperative Postoperative Number of Adverse Events Surgical Type Colyer and Kappelman, 1981 30 8 10 0 1 10 Tenodesis Hentz et al., 1983 34 13 18 0 2 6 Tenodesis Rieser and Waters, 1986 39 9 10 0 1 12 Tenodesis Ejeskar, 1988 31 55 68 0 1 NR Tenodesis Hentz, 2001 * NR 10 NR 2 NR Tenodesis Allieu et al., 2001 † NR 7 NR 1 NR Tenodesis Vastamaki, 2006 40 6 10 NR 1 NR Tenodesis Bryan, 1977 18 NR 7 NR 1 4 NR Beasly, 1983 28 10 10 NR 3 2 NR Bednar et al., 2001 ‡ NR 5 NR 3 NR NR NR, not reported. * Hentz, presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001. † Allieu et al., presented to the Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique, 2001. ‡ Bednar et al., presented at the Seventh International Conference on Tetraplegia: Surgery and Rehabilitation, 2001. 