Audiovisual integration of speech in a bistable illusion Summary Visible speech enhances the intelligibility of auditory speech when listening conditions are poor [ 1 ], and can even modify the perception of otherwise perfectly audible utterances [ 2 ]. This audiovisual perception is our most natural form of communication and one of our most common multisensory phenomena. However, where and in what form the visual and auditory representations interact is still not completely understood. While there are longstanding proposals that multisensory integration occurs relatively late in the speech processing sequence [ 3 ], there is considerable neurophysiological evidence that audiovisual interactions can occur in the brain stem and primary auditory and visual cortices [ 4 , 5 ]. One of the difficulties testing such hypotheses is that when the degree of integration is manipulated experimentally, the visual and/or auditory stimulus conditions are drastically modified [ 6 , 7 ] and thus the perceptual processing within a modality and the corresponding processing loads are affected [ 8 ]. Here we used a novel bistable speech stimulus to examine the conditions under which there is a visual influence on auditory perception in speech. The results indicate that visual influences on auditory speech processing, at least for the McGurk illusion, necessitate the conscious perception of the visual speech gestures, thus supporting the hypothesis that multisensory speech integration is not completed in early processing stages.  Experimental Procedures Subjects The studies were approved by the Queen's University General Research Ethics Board and all subjects gave informed consent before participating in the research. Stimuli Audiovisual stimuli were created using a dynamic version of the Rubin Vase illusion [ 9 ]. Experiments 1 and 2, used an animated version ( Figure 1 ) of a vase created with Maya (Autodesk) with the face profile determined by the same video sequence as Experiment 1. In both stimuli, the vase was irregular and as it rotated, its edge would produce a different face profile. Figure 1a shows three frames from the movie in which the vase rotates and its changing shape produced a face profile that articulates the utterance /aba/. The face profile matches the original movie exactly on a frame-by-frame basis. Figure 1b shows 3 frames from the control movie in which a slightly different vase rotates but its changing shape produces no change in the face profile. The difference in profile changes between 1a and 1b is due to subtle differences in the animated vase 3D shape between the two conditions. In Experiment 3, a video of a rotating, custom-constructed vase was edited using the profile of a female speaker saying the utterance /aba/. Procedure Experiment 1 12 subjects were presented with 2 types of stimuli in single trials. The stimuli were the two dynamic stimuli from Experiment 2 (rotating vase that produced an articulating face, rotating vase that produced a still face) both presented with the audio track, /aga/. Subjects were asked to indicate whether they saw a face or vase. Only a single response was permitted for each trial. After reporting this, they were instructed to record whether the sound they perceived was most like /aga/ or /abga/. Following 10 warm up trials, the subjects were presented with 60 experimental trials, 30 of each condition in randomized order. Experiment 2 14 subjects were presented with 6 types of stimuli in single trials. Three visual stimuli (still frame, moving face, moving vase: rotating vase that produced an articulating face, and still face, moving vase: rotating vase that produced a still face) were presented with either the audio track, /aga/, or silence. Each trial was composed of a single rotation of the vase or in the case of the still frame a period equaling the duration of the dynamic trials. The subjects' task was to indicate whether they saw the face or the vase first, then indicate each time it changed within a trial. Following 12 warm up trials, each of the stimuli was presented five times with order randomized across stimulus type making 30 experimental trials in total. When subjects reported more than one state in a single trial both responses were included in the analyses as separate responses for that condition. Subjects generally reported only one perceptual state for the bistable stimulus in each trial with the overall average number of states reported being 1.05 states per trial. There were no differences in the number of states seen across the conditions. Experiment 3 We tested 7 subjects on a behavioural task in which the stimulus was displayed in loops of 10 continuous utterances. Subjects responded after each loop with a keypress indicating whether they heard a /b/ sound or not. In addition to the behavioural task, we examined whether the varying audiovisual percept of the bistable stimulus depended on the subject's gaze fixation positions by monitoring horizontal and vertical eye position of the subjects while they view the stimulus during repeated trials and reported when their percept changed. Horizontal and vertical eye position were sampled at a rate of 1 kHz using the search-coil-in-magnetic-field technique [ 38 ] with an induction coil that consisted of a light coil of wire embedded in a flexible ring of silicone rubber (Skalar) that adheres to the limbus of the human eye, concentric with the cornea [ 39 ]. The search coil was positioned in the dominant eye of the subjects and only after the surface of the eye had been anesthetized with a few drops of anesthetic (Tetracaine Hcl, 0.5%). Details of this method were described previously [ 21 ]. Analysis –Experiment 3 The distributions of fixations for the signal detection analysis were computed in the following manner. At each millisecond in each type of utterance (i.e., ones perceived either as /bg/ or /g/), we calculated separately the probabilities that the positions of horizontal and vertical gaze fixation were greater than a position criterion, which was incremented in 1-deg steps across the image from either the left margin of the image or its bottom margin. The ensuing fixation position probabilities (for each percept) were then plotted against each other in a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and the area under each curve (AUROC) computed to capture the amount of separation between the two distributions of fixation positions. This quantitative measure gives the general probability that, given one draw from each distribution, the fixation positions from the distributions associated with the two percepts would be distinct.  Subjects The studies were approved by the Queen's University General Research Ethics Board and all subjects gave informed consent before participating in the research.  Stimuli Audiovisual stimuli were created using a dynamic version of the Rubin Vase illusion [ 9 ]. Experiments 1 and 2, used an animated version ( Figure 1 ) of a vase created with Maya (Autodesk) with the face profile determined by the same video sequence as Experiment 1. In both stimuli, the vase was irregular and as it rotated, its edge would produce a different face profile. Figure 1a shows three frames from the movie in which the vase rotates and its changing shape produced a face profile that articulates the utterance /aba/. The face profile matches the original movie exactly on a frame-by-frame basis. Figure 1b shows 3 frames from the control movie in which a slightly different vase rotates but its changing shape produces no change in the face profile. The difference in profile changes between 1a and 1b is due to subtle differences in the animated vase 3D shape between the two conditions. In Experiment 3, a video of a rotating, custom-constructed vase was edited using the profile of a female speaker saying the utterance /aba/.  Procedure Experiment 1 12 subjects were presented with 2 types of stimuli in single trials. The stimuli were the two dynamic stimuli from Experiment 2 (rotating vase that produced an articulating face, rotating vase that produced a still face) both presented with the audio track, /aga/. Subjects were asked to indicate whether they saw a face or vase. Only a single response was permitted for each trial. After reporting this, they were instructed to record whether the sound they perceived was most like /aga/ or /abga/. Following 10 warm up trials, the subjects were presented with 60 experimental trials, 30 of each condition in randomized order. Experiment 2 14 subjects were presented with 6 types of stimuli in single trials. Three visual stimuli (still frame, moving face, moving vase: rotating vase that produced an articulating face, and still face, moving vase: rotating vase that produced a still face) were presented with either the audio track, /aga/, or silence. Each trial was composed of a single rotation of the vase or in the case of the still frame a period equaling the duration of the dynamic trials. The subjects' task was to indicate whether they saw the face or the vase first, then indicate each time it changed within a trial. Following 12 warm up trials, each of the stimuli was presented five times with order randomized across stimulus type making 30 experimental trials in total. When subjects reported more than one state in a single trial both responses were included in the analyses as separate responses for that condition. Subjects generally reported only one perceptual state for the bistable stimulus in each trial with the overall average number of states reported being 1.05 states per trial. There were no differences in the number of states seen across the conditions. Experiment 3 We tested 7 subjects on a behavioural task in which the stimulus was displayed in loops of 10 continuous utterances. Subjects responded after each loop with a keypress indicating whether they heard a /b/ sound or not. In addition to the behavioural task, we examined whether the varying audiovisual percept of the bistable stimulus depended on the subject's gaze fixation positions by monitoring horizontal and vertical eye position of the subjects while they view the stimulus during repeated trials and reported when their percept changed. Horizontal and vertical eye position were sampled at a rate of 1 kHz using the search-coil-in-magnetic-field technique [ 38 ] with an induction coil that consisted of a light coil of wire embedded in a flexible ring of silicone rubber (Skalar) that adheres to the limbus of the human eye, concentric with the cornea [ 39 ]. The search coil was positioned in the dominant eye of the subjects and only after the surface of the eye had been anesthetized with a few drops of anesthetic (Tetracaine Hcl, 0.5%). Details of this method were described previously [ 21 ]. Analysis –Experiment 3 The distributions of fixations for the signal detection analysis were computed in the following manner. At each millisecond in each type of utterance (i.e., ones perceived either as /bg/ or /g/), we calculated separately the probabilities that the positions of horizontal and vertical gaze fixation were greater than a position criterion, which was incremented in 1-deg steps across the image from either the left margin of the image or its bottom margin. The ensuing fixation position probabilities (for each percept) were then plotted against each other in a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and the area under each curve (AUROC) computed to capture the amount of separation between the two distributions of fixation positions. This quantitative measure gives the general probability that, given one draw from each distribution, the fixation positions from the distributions associated with the two percepts would be distinct.  Experiment 1 12 subjects were presented with 2 types of stimuli in single trials. The stimuli were the two dynamic stimuli from Experiment 2 (rotating vase that produced an articulating face, rotating vase that produced a still face) both presented with the audio track, /aga/. Subjects were asked to indicate whether they saw a face or vase. Only a single response was permitted for each trial. After reporting this, they were instructed to record whether the sound they perceived was most like /aga/ or /abga/. Following 10 warm up trials, the subjects were presented with 60 experimental trials, 30 of each condition in randomized order.  Experiment 2 14 subjects were presented with 6 types of stimuli in single trials. Three visual stimuli (still frame, moving face, moving vase: rotating vase that produced an articulating face, and still face, moving vase: rotating vase that produced a still face) were presented with either the audio track, /aga/, or silence. Each trial was composed of a single rotation of the vase or in the case of the still frame a period equaling the duration of the dynamic trials. The subjects' task was to indicate whether they saw the face or the vase first, then indicate each time it changed within a trial. Following 12 warm up trials, each of the stimuli was presented five times with order randomized across stimulus type making 30 experimental trials in total. When subjects reported more than one state in a single trial both responses were included in the analyses as separate responses for that condition. Subjects generally reported only one perceptual state for the bistable stimulus in each trial with the overall average number of states reported being 1.05 states per trial. There were no differences in the number of states seen across the conditions.  Experiment 3 We tested 7 subjects on a behavioural task in which the stimulus was displayed in loops of 10 continuous utterances. Subjects responded after each loop with a keypress indicating whether they heard a /b/ sound or not. In addition to the behavioural task, we examined whether the varying audiovisual percept of the bistable stimulus depended on the subject's gaze fixation positions by monitoring horizontal and vertical eye position of the subjects while they view the stimulus during repeated trials and reported when their percept changed. Horizontal and vertical eye position were sampled at a rate of 1 kHz using the search-coil-in-magnetic-field technique [ 38 ] with an induction coil that consisted of a light coil of wire embedded in a flexible ring of silicone rubber (Skalar) that adheres to the limbus of the human eye, concentric with the cornea [ 39 ]. The search coil was positioned in the dominant eye of the subjects and only after the surface of the eye had been anesthetized with a few drops of anesthetic (Tetracaine Hcl, 0.5%). Details of this method were described previously [ 21 ].  Analysis –Experiment 3 The distributions of fixations for the signal detection analysis were computed in the following manner. At each millisecond in each type of utterance (i.e., ones perceived either as /bg/ or /g/), we calculated separately the probabilities that the positions of horizontal and vertical gaze fixation were greater than a position criterion, which was incremented in 1-deg steps across the image from either the left margin of the image or its bottom margin. The ensuing fixation position probabilities (for each percept) were then plotted against each other in a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and the area under each curve (AUROC) computed to capture the amount of separation between the two distributions of fixation positions. This quantitative measure gives the general probability that, given one draw from each distribution, the fixation positions from the distributions associated with the two percepts would be distinct.  Figures Figure 1 Individual frames from rotating vase movie used in the dynamic vase conditions in Experiments 2 and 3. A. Moving face, moving vase: The face profile changes shape as if the face is articulating the utterance /aba/ as the vase rotates. The three frames correspond to the points in time during the first vowel, during the closure for the /b/, and during the second vowel. The circle shows the detail of the lip closure in the facial profile. B. Still face, moving vase: The face profile does not change shape as the vase rotates. The three frames correspond to the same points in time as the sequence shown in A. The circle shows the detail of the open lips in this condition in contrast to that shown in A. Figure 2 Proportion of different speech percepts as a function of whether the face or vase was perceived for the still face, moving vase (upper panel) and moving face, moving vase (lower panel) conditions. The proportions are computed separately for the two stimulus conditions and sum to 1.0 for each panel. AGA responses correspond to perception of the sound track while ABGA responses indicate the McGurk combination percept. Figure 3 Proportion of vase percepts reported as a function of visual motion conditions and presence or absence of auditory speech. 