Adenovirus as a carrier for the development of influenza virus-free avian influenza vaccines A long-sought goal during the battle against avian influenza is to develop a new generation of vaccines capable of mass immunizing humans as well as poultry (the major source of avian influenza for human infections) in a timely manner. Although administration of the currently licensed influenza vaccine is effective in eliciting protective immunity against seasonal influenza, this approach is associated with a number of insurmountable problems for preventing an avian influenza pandemic. Many of the hurdles may be eliminated by developing new avian influenza vaccines that do not require the propagation of an influenza virus during vaccine production. Replication-competent adenovirus-free adenovirus vectors hold promise as a carrier for influenza virus-free avian influenza vaccines owing to their safety profile and rapid manufacture using cultured suspension cells in a serum-free medium. Simple and efficient mass-immunization protocols, including nasal spray for people and automated in ovo vaccination for poultry, convey another advantage for this class of vaccines. In contrast to parenteral injection of adenovirus vector, the potency of adenovirus-vectored nasal vaccine is not appreciably interfered by pre-existing immunity to adenovirus.  Conclusion Overall, rapid and cost-effective production of Ad5-vectored AI vaccines in conjunction with existing mass administration techniques may foster the development of a powerful tool for mass immunization of humans as well as poultry in order to arrest an AI pandemic in a simple, effective, economic and safe manner without the requirement for propagating an IFV during vaccine production.  Expert commentary Avian influenza is a major threat to global poultry industry as well as public health worldwide. It is urgent to develop a new generation of IFV-free AI vaccine that can be produced rapidly, at low costs, and easily administered by non-medical personnel, to prevent or mitigate an AI pandemic. Ad5-vectored AI vaccines hold great promise as a critical tool against AI since they comply with those criteria. Ad5-vectored AI vaccines induce robust immune responses in humans as well as poultry, and they can be applied in mass-vaccination programs (nasal spray for people and automated in ovo administration for poultry). The disadvantages identified with Ad5 vectors during classic gene therapy trials have been shown to be advantages when Ad5 vectors are used as nasal vaccine carriers. Nasal spray of a nonreplicating Ad5 vector is in compliance with evolutionary medicine and thus should be less risky than artificial vaccines, manmade adjuvants and/or un natural routes that are unfamiliar to the human immune system.  Five-year view A human Phase I clinical trial on a RCA-free Ad5-vectored nasal AI vaccine against a H5 HA was initiated in the fourth quarter of 2008 at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA. Human Phase II clinical trials on two different Ad5-vectored nasal AI vaccines are expected to be completed within 5 years. An US NIH Small Business Innovation Research Program Phase II grant (#2-R44-AI-068285-02) has been awarded to the Vaxin Inc.–Auburn University–Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory team for refining Ad5-vectored in ovo AI vaccines and developing an Ad5-vectored in ovo Newcastle disease vaccine during 2008–2011. Ad5-vectored in ovo vaccines are expected to enter the commercial market within 5 years. Key issues It is urgent to develop an influenza virus-free avian influenza (AI) vaccine that does not require the propagation of influenza viruses and the supply of embryonated chicken eggs. Replication-competent Ad (RCA)-free recombinant Ad5 vectors can be generated rapidly by the AdHigh system in PER.C6 cells. RCA-free Ad5-vectored AI vaccines can be rapidly produced at low costs from PER.C6 suspension cells in serum-free medium in response to an escalation in demand. RCA-free Ad5-vectored AI vaccines can be mass administered into people by nasal spray, as well as into poultry by automated in ovo administration. Ad5-vectored vaccines can induce highly specific immune interventions based on well-defined antigens that are the focus of specific immune reactivity. There should not be any safety concerns for nasal administration of a RCA-free Ad5 vector into people since the vector is nonreplicating and the procedure is in compliance with evolutionary medicine. There should not be any safety concerns for in ovo administration of an Ad5 vector since chicken cells do not support the replication of human Ad5. It is conceivable that chickens will rapidly eliminate Ad5 after the immune repertoire is mobilized toward a beneficial immune protection following vaccination.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Rapid generation of replication-competent adenovirus (RCA)-free recombinant Ad5 vectors with the AdHigh system A new RCA-free Ad5 vector encoding a synthetic transgene potentially may be generated within 1 month. Ad5: Adenovirus serotype 5. Figure 2 The AdHigh system The pAdHigh shuttle plasmid is a hybrid between pShuttle-CMV [ 79 ] and pAdApt [ 35 ], containing Ad5 sequences flanking an expression cassette. After cloning a transgene into the cassette, homologous recombination is allowed to occur between the shuttle plasmid pAdHigh and the Ad5 backbone plasmid pAdEasy-1 in Escherichia coli BJ5183 cells. RCA-free Ad5 vectors encoding a transgene can be generated by transfecting PER.C6 cells with the recombinant plasmid. Ad5: Adenovirus serotype 5; Amp: Ampicillin-resistance gene; CMV: Cytomelagovirus; Kan: Kanamycin-resistance gene; Left arm: Ad5 nucleotides 34931–35935; LITR: Ad5 nucleotides 1–454; MCS: Multiple cloning site; polyA+: Simian virus 40 polyadenylation signal; Ori: PBR322 origin of replication; Promoter: CMV promoter; RCA: Replication-competent adenovirus; Right arm: Ad5 nucleotides 3511–5790 including a functional pIX promoter [ 81 ]. This schema was a modification of that for generating AdEasy-derived Ad5 vectors in 293 cells [ 79 ]. Figure 3 Schema for mass production of Ad5-vectored avian influenza (AI) vaccines PER.C6 suspension cells are propagated in serum-free medium in a disposable cellbag on a WAVETM bioreactor; Ad5-infected cells are lysed by treatment with a detergent; PER.C6 DNA is digested with benzonase; Ad5 particles are purified by anion exchange chromatography and formulated in A195 buffer [ 87 ]; and the Ad5-vectored AI vaccine is finally sterilized by filtration through 0.2-µm membranes. This schema was a modification of that for producing cGMP-grade Ad5-vectored AI vaccines in one of Vaxin’s Investigational New Drug applications filed with the US FDA. Ad5: Adenovirus serotype 5. Table 1 Prospects for current (licensed in the USA) and experimental human influenza vaccines. Influenza vaccine Propagation of influenza virus Egg dependence Production speed Replication post-vaccination Mode of administration Reassortment potential Licensed inactivated influenza virus vaccine Yes Yes Slow No Injection No Licensed live-attenuated influenza virus vaccine Yes Yes Slow Yes Nasal spray Yes Inactivated influenza virus vaccine produced in MDCK, VERO and PER.C6 cells Yes No Fast No Injection No Live attenuated influenza virus vaccine produced in MDCK cells Yes No Fast Yes Nasal spray Yes Baculovirus-expressed influenza vaccine * No No Fast No Injection; VLP may be administered by nasal spray No DNA-based influenza vaccine No No Fast No Injection No Vaccinia virus-vectored influenza vaccine No No Fast Yes Injection No Ad5-vectored influenza vaccine * No No Fast No Nasal spray No * Ad5-vectored and baculovirus-expressed VLP nasal influenza vaccines can be produced rapidly without the requirement to propagate an IFV; without dependence on the supply of qualified embryonated chicken eggs; without the hazard of shedding replicating viruses; without the need to use a penetrating device; and without the potential for reassortment with wild avian influenza viruses. Ad5: Adenovirus serotype 5; IFV: Influenza virus; MDCK: Madin–Darby canine kidney; VLP: Virus-like particle. Table 2 Prospects for current (licensed in various countries) and experimental avian influenza vaccines for the mass immunization of poultry. AI vaccine Propagation of AI virus Replication postvaccination Mode of administration Interference by pre-existing immunity to avian virus Mass administration (simultaneous immunization of multiple birds by one administration) Licensed oil emulsion inactivated whole AI virus vaccine Yes No Subcutaneous or intramuscular injection after 10 days of age No No Licensed fowl pox-vectored AI vaccine No Yes Subcutaneous or intramuscular injection at or after 1 day of age Yes No Licensed Newcastle disease virus-vectored AI vaccine No Yes Aerosol spray Yes Yes Baculovirus-expressed, oil emulsion AI vaccine No No Subcutaneous injection No No DNA-based AI vaccine * No No Subcutaneous, intramuscular or in ovo injection No Yes Ad5-vectored AI vaccine * No No Subcutaneous, intramuscular or in ovo injection No Yes * Ad5-vectored and DNA-based AI vaccines can be produced rapidly without the requirement to propagate an influenza virus; without dependence on the supply of qualified embryonated chicken eggs; without the hazard of shedding replicating viruses; without immunologic interference from pre-existing immunity to avian viruses; and with the potential for mass administration. However, DNA-based Al vaccine has not been licensed for commercial application owing to its low potency [ 88 ]. Although the Ad5-vectored AI vaccine is more potent than its DNA-based counterpart in immunizing chickens (T oro H, U npublished D ata ), whether the former will be licensed for mass immunization of poultry remains to be seen. Low-pathogenic AI virus vaccines are not recommended for poultry immunization owing to the potential for generating harmful reassortants, as well as inducing respiratory disease and egg-production drop [ 88 ]. Ad: Adenovirus; Ad5: Adenovirus serotype 5; AI: Avian influenza. 