Myeloid-Derived Suppressor Cells: Linking Inflammation and Cancer 1 Many cancer immunotherapies developed in experimental animals have been tested in clinical trials. Although some have shown modest clinical effects, most have not been effective. Recent studies have identified myeloid-origin cells that are potent suppressors of tumor immunity and therefore a significant impediment to cancer immunotherapy. “Myeloid-derived suppressor cells” (MDSC) accumulate in the blood, lymph nodes, and bone marrow and at tumor sites in most patients and experimental animals with cancer and inhibit both adaptive and innate immunity. MDSC are induced by tumor-secreted and host-secreted factors, many of which are proinflammatory molecules. The induction of MDSC by proinflammatory mediators led to the hypothesis that inflammation promotes the accumulation of MDSC that down-regulate immune surveillance and antitumor immunity, thereby facilitating tumor growth. This article reviews the characterization and suppressive mechanisms used by MDSC to block tumor immunity and describes the mechanisms by which inflammation promotes tumor progression through the induction of MDSC.  Conclusions MDSC cause immune suppression in most cancer patients, where they are an impediment to all immunotherapies that require an active immune response by the host. They may also facilitate the transformation of premalignant cells and promote tumor growth and metastasis by suppressing innate and adaptive immune surveillance that would otherwise eliminate abnormal cells. The induction of MDSC by proinflammatory factors identifies the immune system as another contributing mechanism by which chronic inflammation contributes to the onset and progression of cancer. Elimination of MDSC is a priority for cancer patients who are candidates for active immunotherapy. Likewise, limiting the accumulation and retention of MDSC during chronic inflammation may reduce the risk of developing cancers. The proinflammatory mediators that induce MDSC are particularly attractive targets for limiting this suppressor cell population, although there are several unknowns that make it difficult to decide which mediators to target. For example, it is not known whether the various proinflammatory factors induce MDSC through independent or overlapping pathways. If the pathways are independent, then it will be necessary to block individual pathways. In contrast, if the pathways merge, then a single drug aimed at a common molecule may be effective. Future studies may identify additional proinflammatory mediators or factors that independently or coordinately regulate the accumulation of MDSC. The heterogeneity of MDSC also complicates finding a single strategy for eliminating the cells. Pathologically distinct tumors produce different arrays and quantities of proinflammatory factors that induce MDSC. As a result, there is phenotypic heterogeneity between MDSC induced by histologically distinct tumors. There is also phenotypic heterogeneity within the MDSC population induced within a single individual. This heterogeneity may require identifying and then specifically targeting the relevant proinflammatory mediator(s) for individual patients or for the specific type of tumor. Regardless of the complexity of MDSC induction, reduction of this inhibitory population is essential, and a comprehensive understanding of the proinflammatory mediators that regulate MDSC will provide valuable information for future drug design.  Figures FIGURE 1 Mouse and human MDSC are heterogeneous populations of immature myeloid cells. Subpopulations of MDSC display different constellations of cell surface and intracellular markers and suppress by different mechanisms. This diversity is likely due to different combinations of factors produced by histologically distinct tumors that cause myeloid cells to arrest at different stages of differentiation. FIGURE 2 MDSC suppress antitumor immunity through a variety of diverse mechanisms. T cell activation is suppressed by the production of arginase and ROS, the nitration of the TCR, cysteine deprivation, and the induction of Tregs. Innate immunity is impaired by the down-regulation of macrophage-produced IL-12, the increase in MDSC production of IL-10, and the suppression of NK cell cytotoxicity. Ag presentation is limited by the expansion of MDSC at the expense of DC. FIGURE 3 MDSC are induced and/or activated by multiple proinflammatory mediators. MDSC accumulate in the blood, bone marrow, lymph nodes, and at tumor sites in response to proinflammatory molecules produced by tumor cells or by host cells in the tumor microenvironment. These factors include PGE2, IL-1 ? , IL-6, VEGF, S100A8/A9 proteins, and the complement component C5a. 