Developing Patient-centered Outcome Measures for Evaluating Vasospasm in Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage Rationale and Objectives Patient-centered outcome measures have become an essential focus in research methodology in recent years. This may be particularly challenging in imaging research at the technology assessment level to incorporate patient-centeredness. A primary issue in this field is designing a reference standard that is applicable to the entire study population. Materials and Methods This important element is necessary for translation of findings into clinical practice. In our work, computed tomographic perfusion imaging is being evaluated as a new technology used in aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage patients to detect cerebral vasospasm. We have developed a new reference standard employing a multistage hierarchical design incorporating both clinical and imaging criteria to determine a diagnosis of vasospasm. Results A flowchart of the reference standard levels is provided for illustration. The limitations and potential biases that may occur using this reference standard are discussed. Conclusions This reference standard will be applicable to the entire study population, including those with and without symptoms or further imaging with digital subtraction angiography.  DISCUSSION A review of the literature reveals that vasospasm is associated with altered or abnormal perfusion detected with different imaging modalities, such as positron emission tomography ( 9 , 10 ), single-photon emission computed tomography ( 11 ), Xenon-CT ( 9 , 11 ), MRI perfusion ( 12 ), and CT perfusion ( 13 ). CBF reduction after A-SAH has been shown to be a significant predictor of clinical outcome ( 14 , 15 – 17 ). In particular, Xenon-CT yields reliable information regarding quantitative CBF values in cerebral ischemia ( 9 , 11 ). Patients with CBF at or below 15 mL/100 g/min tended to develop stroke on follow-up CT ( 9 , 11 ). CBF and cerebral blood volume values using CTP were also significantly lower in patients with moderate to severe vasospasm ( 13 ). Overall, CTP data correlated well with positron emission tomographic and Xenon-CT results in several studies ( 9 , 18 , 19 ). However, in the clinical setting, CTP has many advantages over these other perfusion imaging modalities because of its rapid acquisition and ability to process data in an emergent fashion. In addition, CTP can be easily coupled with CT angiography to assess both brain perfusion and anatomic vessel narrowing during a single examination. Before instituting treatment for vasospasm, patients require a non-contrast head CT to exclude re-hemorrhage, cerebral edema, hydrocephalus, or stroke. CTP and CT angiography can be easily performed immediately after this noncontrast head CT; an ideal opportunity to assess brain perfusion and anatomic vessel narrowing without delaying patient treatment. Given these important aspects, the accurate assessment of the test characteristics of CTP is valuable in translating these research findings into the clinical care setting. Incorporating patient-centeredness into research methodology for technology assessment can initially be addressed by implementing a reference standard that is applicable to the clinical population. In previous literature on the evaluation of vasospasm in A-SAH patients, imaging criteria using DSA for arterial narrowing or CT for delayed infarction has been used as the reference standard. For example, the accuracy of transcranial Doppler ultrasonography and single-photon emission CT in predicting vasospasm was based on DSA performed within 24 hours ( 20 ). Another study evaluating the potential use of CTP and CT angiography in the detection of vasospasm in patients with A-SAH was also based on DSA as the reference standard ( 21 ). Using DSA as the sole standard for determining patient outcomes may bias accuracy estimates of CTP in our study. Only including patients who have had a DSA examination leads to a selection bias because patients with symptoms of vasospasm are more likely to have a DSA performed compared to subjects without symptoms. Subjects with symptoms are also more likely to have a vasospasm diagnosis with both DSA positive and CTP positive exams. Thereby, A-SAH patients with symptoms of vasospasm and DSA-positive and CTP-positive exams would be overrepresented in the analysis. DSA as a reference standard alone in this population would lead to inaccurate assessment of the CTP test characteristics and may bias results toward overestimating its diagnostic accuracy. An alternate approach is to subject all A-SAH patients to a DSA examination. However, the risks associated with DSA would not be justified, because major complications include embolus to a vascular territory, permanent neurologic deficit, stroke, and death reported in 0.1%–0.16% ( 22 ). It is important to evaluate a test that will be used for medical decision making in a research population that is equivalent to the clinical population in which the test might be implemented. Doing otherwise may lead to a misunderstanding of the actual sensitivity and specificity of the test and thereby faulty subsequent patient management. Our proposed reference standard design is a practical and systematic method for determining the presence or absence of vasospasm, using both clinical and imaging criteria. This reference standard is modeled after the clinical setting of decision making in A-SAH patients, and will allow the translation of research results into clinical practice. However, we recognize that limitations and potential biases may occur at each level in the reference standard. The following is a brief discussion of the limitations that are most likely to occur in our study. At the primary level, using DSA may introduce bias by overestimating the CTP false-positive results. For example, A-SAH patients with vasospasm only involving the distal intraparenchymal vessels may not be detected on DSA and would be classified as a DSA-negative examination. According to our reference standard, this patient would be classified as a no vasospasm diagnosis. Given the working hypothesis that CTP is sensitive for detection of vasospasm, then a true-positive CTP in this patient would be considered as a false-positive result in the analysis. This limitation may have a minimal effect on the study results because DSA is a sensitive modality for detection of vasospasm and only few patients will be affected in this scenario. However, if this is a significant subgroup, then these potential cases will bias the study results of CTP toward a lower specificity. This represents a more conservative approach in determining the test characteristics of CTP. At the secondary level, the clinical criteria defined for vasospasm does not include death related to vasospasm. A-SAH patients experience many complicating co-morbidities, including myocardial infarction, cardiopulmonary failure, and pulmonary embolus. Death is not sufficient evidence for assigning a vasospasm diagnosis because etiologies of death are difficult to isolate in this population. Most of these severely ill patients will undergo DSA with intra-arterial treatment and therefore be classified under the primary level of the reference standard. An additional safe-guard in the reference standard to account for this limitation is to include imaging criteria for evidence of delayed infarction at the secondary level and response to treatment at the tertiary level. Patients with true vasospasm related death, without a DSA examination, will likely develop delayed infarction or not demonstrate a response to treatment. Last, at the tertiary level, patients who receive HHH therapy, and do not undergo a DSA exam or develop clinical or imaging sequela of vasospasm may demonstrate symptom improvement due to other etiologic factors rather than vasospasm. However, the standard of care is to assess all etiologic factors to explain symptom onset before starting medical therapy. This practice allows us to exclude other treatable etiologies, such as hydrocephalus, re-hemorrhage, postoperative infarction, and metabolic disturbances. The frequency of undetected etiologies resulting in symptom improvement without dedicated treatment is very low and unlikely to bias our results. On the other hand, patients who receive HHH therapy and do not demonstrate response to treatment may be given a diagnosis of no vasospasm. The natural progression of the disease in this subpopulation without clinical or imaging sequelae is to full recovery and the frequency of occurrence is very low. Again, as standard of care, patients who have symptoms of vasospasm and do not respond to HHH therapy, without other etiologic factors identified, will likely undergo DSA for further diagnostic testing and will be classified at the primary level. In conclusion, this new reference standard is a simplified and systemic approach to determine the study outcome of a vasospasm diagnosis by incorporating both clinical and imaging criteria. To date, this multistage hierarchical design may be considered the best available method to determine the performance of CTP as a diagnostic tool in the evaluation of vasospasm. This new reference standard may provide a more comprehensive assessment of the entire A-SAH population for improved translation of research findings into clinical practice.  DISCUSSION A review of the literature reveals that vasospasm is associated with altered or abnormal perfusion detected with different imaging modalities, such as positron emission tomography ( 9 , 10 ), single-photon emission computed tomography ( 11 ), Xenon-CT ( 9 , 11 ), MRI perfusion ( 12 ), and CT perfusion ( 13 ). CBF reduction after A-SAH has been shown to be a significant predictor of clinical outcome ( 14 , 15 – 17 ). In particular, Xenon-CT yields reliable information regarding quantitative CBF values in cerebral ischemia ( 9 , 11 ). Patients with CBF at or below 15 mL/100 g/min tended to develop stroke on follow-up CT ( 9 , 11 ). CBF and cerebral blood volume values using CTP were also significantly lower in patients with moderate to severe vasospasm ( 13 ). Overall, CTP data correlated well with positron emission tomographic and Xenon-CT results in several studies ( 9 , 18 , 19 ). However, in the clinical setting, CTP has many advantages over these other perfusion imaging modalities because of its rapid acquisition and ability to process data in an emergent fashion. In addition, CTP can be easily coupled with CT angiography to assess both brain perfusion and anatomic vessel narrowing during a single examination. Before instituting treatment for vasospasm, patients require a non-contrast head CT to exclude re-hemorrhage, cerebral edema, hydrocephalus, or stroke. CTP and CT angiography can be easily performed immediately after this noncontrast head CT; an ideal opportunity to assess brain perfusion and anatomic vessel narrowing without delaying patient treatment. Given these important aspects, the accurate assessment of the test characteristics of CTP is valuable in translating these research findings into the clinical care setting. Incorporating patient-centeredness into research methodology for technology assessment can initially be addressed by implementing a reference standard that is applicable to the clinical population. In previous literature on the evaluation of vasospasm in A-SAH patients, imaging criteria using DSA for arterial narrowing or CT for delayed infarction has been used as the reference standard. For example, the accuracy of transcranial Doppler ultrasonography and single-photon emission CT in predicting vasospasm was based on DSA performed within 24 hours ( 20 ). Another study evaluating the potential use of CTP and CT angiography in the detection of vasospasm in patients with A-SAH was also based on DSA as the reference standard ( 21 ). Using DSA as the sole standard for determining patient outcomes may bias accuracy estimates of CTP in our study. Only including patients who have had a DSA examination leads to a selection bias because patients with symptoms of vasospasm are more likely to have a DSA performed compared to subjects without symptoms. Subjects with symptoms are also more likely to have a vasospasm diagnosis with both DSA positive and CTP positive exams. Thereby, A-SAH patients with symptoms of vasospasm and DSA-positive and CTP-positive exams would be overrepresented in the analysis. DSA as a reference standard alone in this population would lead to inaccurate assessment of the CTP test characteristics and may bias results toward overestimating its diagnostic accuracy. An alternate approach is to subject all A-SAH patients to a DSA examination. However, the risks associated with DSA would not be justified, because major complications include embolus to a vascular territory, permanent neurologic deficit, stroke, and death reported in 0.1%–0.16% ( 22 ). It is important to evaluate a test that will be used for medical decision making in a research population that is equivalent to the clinical population in which the test might be implemented. Doing otherwise may lead to a misunderstanding of the actual sensitivity and specificity of the test and thereby faulty subsequent patient management. Our proposed reference standard design is a practical and systematic method for determining the presence or absence of vasospasm, using both clinical and imaging criteria. This reference standard is modeled after the clinical setting of decision making in A-SAH patients, and will allow the translation of research results into clinical practice. However, we recognize that limitations and potential biases may occur at each level in the reference standard. The following is a brief discussion of the limitations that are most likely to occur in our study. At the primary level, using DSA may introduce bias by overestimating the CTP false-positive results. For example, A-SAH patients with vasospasm only involving the distal intraparenchymal vessels may not be detected on DSA and would be classified as a DSA-negative examination. According to our reference standard, this patient would be classified as a no vasospasm diagnosis. Given the working hypothesis that CTP is sensitive for detection of vasospasm, then a true-positive CTP in this patient would be considered as a false-positive result in the analysis. This limitation may have a minimal effect on the study results because DSA is a sensitive modality for detection of vasospasm and only few patients will be affected in this scenario. However, if this is a significant subgroup, then these potential cases will bias the study results of CTP toward a lower specificity. This represents a more conservative approach in determining the test characteristics of CTP. At the secondary level, the clinical criteria defined for vasospasm does not include death related to vasospasm. A-SAH patients experience many complicating co-morbidities, including myocardial infarction, cardiopulmonary failure, and pulmonary embolus. Death is not sufficient evidence for assigning a vasospasm diagnosis because etiologies of death are difficult to isolate in this population. Most of these severely ill patients will undergo DSA with intra-arterial treatment and therefore be classified under the primary level of the reference standard. An additional safe-guard in the reference standard to account for this limitation is to include imaging criteria for evidence of delayed infarction at the secondary level and response to treatment at the tertiary level. Patients with true vasospasm related death, without a DSA examination, will likely develop delayed infarction or not demonstrate a response to treatment. Last, at the tertiary level, patients who receive HHH therapy, and do not undergo a DSA exam or develop clinical or imaging sequela of vasospasm may demonstrate symptom improvement due to other etiologic factors rather than vasospasm. However, the standard of care is to assess all etiologic factors to explain symptom onset before starting medical therapy. This practice allows us to exclude other treatable etiologies, such as hydrocephalus, re-hemorrhage, postoperative infarction, and metabolic disturbances. The frequency of undetected etiologies resulting in symptom improvement without dedicated treatment is very low and unlikely to bias our results. On the other hand, patients who receive HHH therapy and do not demonstrate response to treatment may be given a diagnosis of no vasospasm. The natural progression of the disease in this subpopulation without clinical or imaging sequelae is to full recovery and the frequency of occurrence is very low. Again, as standard of care, patients who have symptoms of vasospasm and do not respond to HHH therapy, without other etiologic factors identified, will likely undergo DSA for further diagnostic testing and will be classified at the primary level. In conclusion, this new reference standard is a simplified and systemic approach to determine the study outcome of a vasospasm diagnosis by incorporating both clinical and imaging criteria. To date, this multistage hierarchical design may be considered the best available method to determine the performance of CTP as a diagnostic tool in the evaluation of vasospasm. This new reference standard may provide a more comprehensive assessment of the entire A-SAH population for improved translation of research findings into clinical practice. 