Targeted Therapies for Malignant Glioma Progress and Potential Malignant gliomas represent one of the most aggressive forms of brain cancer. Recent advances in the understanding of the deregulated molecular pathways of gliomas have brought about targeted therapies that have the ability to increase therapeutic efficacy in tumors while decreasing toxicity. Multi-targeted kinase inhibitors, novel monoclonal antibodies, and new vaccines have been developed. Standard treatments and current development of new therapies for malignant gliomas are reviewed, focusing specifically on growth factors and their receptors (e.g. epidermal growth factor receptor, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor), as well as the intracellular effector molecules that are downstream of these growth factors (e.g. Ras/Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin, and protein kinase C). The efficacies of other novel targeted inhibitors such as deacetylase inhibitors and heat shock protein 90 inhibitors in the treatment of gliomas are also discussed, as well as new combination therapies. In order for new agents to increase treatment efficacy, new targets need to be developed, drug delivery efficiency needs to be improved, and new biomarkers need to be discovered. All of these goals can be accomplished with time through innovative experimental designs.  9. Conclusions Recent research has provided new insight into the molecular pathways involved in malignant gliomas. Although much progress has been made, there is a lack of knowledge as to which targets are the most favorable, as well as the optimal way to inhibit these targets. Also, the heterogeneity of brain tumors and patients has made unselected patient treatment difficult. As new approaches to molecularly targeted therapies are explored, and novel combination therapies are discovered, insights will be gained as to where further research is best directed in order to provide personalized therapy for patients with malignant gliomas.  Figure Fig. 1 A generalized schematic presentation of signaling pathways targeted by molecular therapies in malignant glioma. Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are shown in their activated (dimerized) form, binding ligand. The diagram illustrates pathways that are activated upon receptor activation. Many receptors share common intracellular effectors (i.e. Ras, AKT, protein kinase C [PKC], etc.) and no single intracellular pathway is exclusive to a particular receptor. Arrowheads indicate the activation of an intracellular molecule and/or a cellular response. A line with a blunted end corresponds to the inhibition of a cellular molecule and/or signaling pathway. As shown, molecular therapies have been designed to inhibit signaling pathways at different stages of the cellular response. Some therapies, such as bevacizumab, target angiogenesis at the level of the receptor by antagonizing VEGF-VEGFR interactions. Others, such as temsirolimus, target effectors (mTOR) that are downstream in a cellular response. AKT is a serine/threonine protein kinase (also known as protein kinase B [PKB]) with pleiotropic effects on cell survival and growth. Raf is a serine/threonine protein kinase with pleiotropic effects on cell survival, differentiation, and proliferation. Ras is a small G protein, ‘a GTPase’, which acts as a second messenger by catalyzing the hydrolysis of GTP to guanosine diphosphate. EGFR =epidermal growth factor receptor; ERK =extracellular regulated kinase (also known as mitogen activated protein kinase [MAPK]); FT =farnesyltransferase; GTP =guanosine tripho-sphate; MEK =MAP-ERK kinase; mTOR =mammalian target of rapamycin; PDGFR =platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PI3K =phosphoinositide-3-kinase; PIP2 =phosphatidylinositol-4,5-biphosphate; PIP3 =phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate; PTEN =phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10; VEGF =vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR =vascular endothelial growth factor receptor. 