Work-in-Progress Toward Incorporating Patients’ Preferences in Practice Guidelines for Imaging Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage 1 Rationale and Objectives Patient-centered care has become a primary focus in clinical practice. In developing practice guidelines for clinical care, the patients’ perspective is an important component. Materials and Methods Patients’ preferences are represented in a decision analytic model as quality-of-life weights for different health states associated with the aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage population. The time–tradeoff method is used to obtain the individual patients’ preferences, which are directly measured in quality-adjusted life years. An individualized care model is explained as a means of implementing a patient-centered approach into practice guidelines for clinical care. A method for calculating the expected value for societal benefit from improved decision making using an individualized care model is reviewed. Results We discuss our work-in-progress towards incorporating patients’ preferences in a decision analytic model for aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage patients. The main methodologic concerns for using patients’ preferences in cost-effectiveness analyses for developing practice guidelines are discussed. Conclusion Emphasis is placed on using patients’ preferences and patient-centered outcome measures in cost-effectiveness analyses.  DISCUSSION A patient-centered approach is an important component in developing practice guidelines for clinical care. Patient-centered analyses incorporate the patient’s perspective on important outcome measures and satisfaction of care. An example of a patient-centered analysis was performed by Sommers et al ( 11 ) in patients with prostate cancer. Compared to the traditional CEA model for the treatment of prostate cancer, 30% of patients in this study indicated a different optimal treatment. Treating these patients based on population based preferences would result in sacrifice of 0.13 QALYs on average, which translates into a significant loss of 1.5 months of perfect health. The key message is that an optimal treatment often depends on individual patient preferences, and not merely the clinical scenario viewed by the physicians or policy makers. In another study of patients with prostate cancer, Wennberg reported that doctors cannot predict patients’ preferences unless they explicitly ask the patients for their preferences ( 13 ). Patients’ preferences affect their assigned utility values for different health states in a subjective manner, which is not completely understood or evaluated by physicians. Many personal factors influence these individual preferences, such as cultural, religious, political, and gender-related experiences. In the Beaver Dam Health Outcome study, an age-adjusted utility value of 0.87 was reported for patients without any particular disease, indicating that most patients had other unknown problems of some significance ( 14 ) affecting their personal assigned utility values. Specifically in A-SAH patients, the utility values for different health states cannot be comprehensively determined by current established outcome instruments. Kim et al ( 15 ) studied six different outcome instruments in patients following treatment for intracranial aneurysms, including the Glasgow Outcome Score, Rankin Scale, Barthel Index, National Institutes of Health Stroke Score, Short Form-36, and the Mini Mental Status Examination. They concluded that a single graded scale does not address all aspects of recovery after aneurysm treatment, particularly cognitive dysfunction and the patient’s perception of health ( 15 ). In this population, a lower functional status is associated with depression and poor general mental health ( 16 ). The patients’ perspective and subjective well-being are influenced by their levels of anxiety, depression, functional status, and, importantly, their social support network ( 17 , 18 ). These personal variables affect their assigned utility values for different health states, which cannot be adequately measured by an established outcome instrument. Incorporating patients’ preferences into an individualized care model can begin to address this important public concern of implementing patient-centered care to improve health outcomes and satisfaction. Due to the heterogeneity of patients’ preferences, a sensitivity analysis of the QALY estimates may be helpful in determining a distribution of probabilities assigned to each health state from the patients’ perspective. The importance of this variability in each health state and a probability threshold value can be determined. Individualized care can potentially be provided by using QALY threshold values in determining the optimal strategy for each patient. Additional analysis may be performed by measuring the EVIC to estimate the overall benefits for society in using an individualized care model. An interesting question has been raised in this model indicating that patients’ preferences may possibly lead to patterns of self selection ( 19 ). It is conceivable that certain attributes of patients will lead to preferences that drive decision making towards more or less aggressive treatment strategies. It is uncertain whether this may have a significant impact on societal health outcomes. Several important methodological concerns exist in incorporating patients’ preferences in the QALY estimates for CEA methods. First, a standardized method needs to be employed to elicit the appropriate weights to be used for individualized QALY values. There are many advantages to using the TTO method because there is direct calculation of individualized QALYs for each health state and it has been shown to be a validated and reliable technique. However, the main disadvantage of using a TTO method is that it can be conceptually difficult for patients to fully understand or judge a health state they have never experienced ( 20 ). Bias may be introduced from the individual patient by underestimating or overestimating the QALYs assigned for each health state. Other areas of bias may also include the effect of physicians’ influence on eliciting patients’ preferences. Second, there are challenges in adequately representing the cultural, religious, and social values in the TTO method, which are relevant personal factors that affect the QALYs assigned to these health states. Third, an important consideration in determining QALYs is the source of preferences to be used in the analysis. In patient-centered analyses, the patient is clearly the appropriate source. However, a question may be raised at what time-point in the course of the disease is the patient the most appropriate source. Before treatment is instituted is preferable, however, at this early time-point patients’ preferences may reflect a lack of understanding and knowledge of the different health states. Patients with an optimistic attitude may not seriously consider the worst states as true possibilities. In our population of A-SAH patients, many patients are experiencing significant physical and psychological stress in the acute stage prior to treatment, which may interfere with adequately performing a TTO method. An alternative is to survey the preferences of patients and families in the later stage of the disease because they have the most experience with a given health state and are most familiar with implications for quality of life ( 21 ). The disadvantage may be that their perspective and values about the illness may change based on their adaptation with the disease. Fourth, using an individualized care model with patients’ preferences may be costly and time-consuming in clinical practice. Many issues still need to be addressed, such as accommodating non-English speaking patients and patients with impaired decision making due to medical or psychological issues, as well as determining adequate patient comprehension of the TTO method. It remains uncertain how often patients’ preferences should be obtained because the assigned QALY values may change at different time points according to the patients’ perspective and subjective well-being. In conclusion, this decision analytic model establishes the foundation of evaluating diagnostic and therapeutic strategies in A-SAH patients using a patient-centered approach by incorporating patients’ preferences. Future work may include extending the model to also incorporate the short-term disutility associated particularly with medical imaging, such as the psychological costs of pain, anxiety, and discomfort from a patient’s perspective. This important information can then be used in formulating patient-centered practice guidelines in clinical care.  DISCUSSION A patient-centered approach is an important component in developing practice guidelines for clinical care. Patient-centered analyses incorporate the patient’s perspective on important outcome measures and satisfaction of care. An example of a patient-centered analysis was performed by Sommers et al ( 11 ) in patients with prostate cancer. Compared to the traditional CEA model for the treatment of prostate cancer, 30% of patients in this study indicated a different optimal treatment. Treating these patients based on population based preferences would result in sacrifice of 0.13 QALYs on average, which translates into a significant loss of 1.5 months of perfect health. The key message is that an optimal treatment often depends on individual patient preferences, and not merely the clinical scenario viewed by the physicians or policy makers. In another study of patients with prostate cancer, Wennberg reported that doctors cannot predict patients’ preferences unless they explicitly ask the patients for their preferences ( 13 ). Patients’ preferences affect their assigned utility values for different health states in a subjective manner, which is not completely understood or evaluated by physicians. Many personal factors influence these individual preferences, such as cultural, religious, political, and gender-related experiences. In the Beaver Dam Health Outcome study, an age-adjusted utility value of 0.87 was reported for patients without any particular disease, indicating that most patients had other unknown problems of some significance ( 14 ) affecting their personal assigned utility values. Specifically in A-SAH patients, the utility values for different health states cannot be comprehensively determined by current established outcome instruments. Kim et al ( 15 ) studied six different outcome instruments in patients following treatment for intracranial aneurysms, including the Glasgow Outcome Score, Rankin Scale, Barthel Index, National Institutes of Health Stroke Score, Short Form-36, and the Mini Mental Status Examination. They concluded that a single graded scale does not address all aspects of recovery after aneurysm treatment, particularly cognitive dysfunction and the patient’s perception of health ( 15 ). In this population, a lower functional status is associated with depression and poor general mental health ( 16 ). The patients’ perspective and subjective well-being are influenced by their levels of anxiety, depression, functional status, and, importantly, their social support network ( 17 , 18 ). These personal variables affect their assigned utility values for different health states, which cannot be adequately measured by an established outcome instrument. Incorporating patients’ preferences into an individualized care model can begin to address this important public concern of implementing patient-centered care to improve health outcomes and satisfaction. Due to the heterogeneity of patients’ preferences, a sensitivity analysis of the QALY estimates may be helpful in determining a distribution of probabilities assigned to each health state from the patients’ perspective. The importance of this variability in each health state and a probability threshold value can be determined. Individualized care can potentially be provided by using QALY threshold values in determining the optimal strategy for each patient. Additional analysis may be performed by measuring the EVIC to estimate the overall benefits for society in using an individualized care model. An interesting question has been raised in this model indicating that patients’ preferences may possibly lead to patterns of self selection ( 19 ). It is conceivable that certain attributes of patients will lead to preferences that drive decision making towards more or less aggressive treatment strategies. It is uncertain whether this may have a significant impact on societal health outcomes. Several important methodological concerns exist in incorporating patients’ preferences in the QALY estimates for CEA methods. First, a standardized method needs to be employed to elicit the appropriate weights to be used for individualized QALY values. There are many advantages to using the TTO method because there is direct calculation of individualized QALYs for each health state and it has been shown to be a validated and reliable technique. However, the main disadvantage of using a TTO method is that it can be conceptually difficult for patients to fully understand or judge a health state they have never experienced ( 20 ). Bias may be introduced from the individual patient by underestimating or overestimating the QALYs assigned for each health state. Other areas of bias may also include the effect of physicians’ influence on eliciting patients’ preferences. Second, there are challenges in adequately representing the cultural, religious, and social values in the TTO method, which are relevant personal factors that affect the QALYs assigned to these health states. Third, an important consideration in determining QALYs is the source of preferences to be used in the analysis. In patient-centered analyses, the patient is clearly the appropriate source. However, a question may be raised at what time-point in the course of the disease is the patient the most appropriate source. Before treatment is instituted is preferable, however, at this early time-point patients’ preferences may reflect a lack of understanding and knowledge of the different health states. Patients with an optimistic attitude may not seriously consider the worst states as true possibilities. In our population of A-SAH patients, many patients are experiencing significant physical and psychological stress in the acute stage prior to treatment, which may interfere with adequately performing a TTO method. An alternative is to survey the preferences of patients and families in the later stage of the disease because they have the most experience with a given health state and are most familiar with implications for quality of life ( 21 ). The disadvantage may be that their perspective and values about the illness may change based on their adaptation with the disease. Fourth, using an individualized care model with patients’ preferences may be costly and time-consuming in clinical practice. Many issues still need to be addressed, such as accommodating non-English speaking patients and patients with impaired decision making due to medical or psychological issues, as well as determining adequate patient comprehension of the TTO method. It remains uncertain how often patients’ preferences should be obtained because the assigned QALY values may change at different time points according to the patients’ perspective and subjective well-being. In conclusion, this decision analytic model establishes the foundation of evaluating diagnostic and therapeutic strategies in A-SAH patients using a patient-centered approach by incorporating patients’ preferences. Future work may include extending the model to also incorporate the short-term disutility associated particularly with medical imaging, such as the psychological costs of pain, anxiety, and discomfort from a patient’s perspective. This important information can then be used in formulating patient-centered practice guidelines in clinical care. 