Anti-inflammatory effects of the ETS factor ERG in endothelial cells are mediated through transcriptional repression of the interleukin-8 gene ERG (Ets Related Gene) is an ETS transcription factor that has recently been shown to regulate a number of endothelial cell (EC) restricted genes including VE-cadherin, von Willebrand Factor (vWF), endoglin, and intercellular adhesion molecule-2 (ICAM-2). Our preliminary data demonstrate that unlike other ETS factors, ERG exhibits a highly EC-restricted pattern of expression in cultured primary cells and several adult mouse tissues including the heart, lung, and brain. In response to inflammatory stimuli, such as TNF-?, we observed a marked reduction of ERG expression in EC. To further define the role of ERG in the regulation of normal EC function we used RNA interference to knockdown ERG. Microarray analysis of RNA derived from ERG siRNA- or TNF-?–treated HUVEC revealed significant overlap (P value <0.01) in the genes that are up- or downregulated. Of particular interest to us was a significant change in expression of interleukin-8 (IL-8) at both protein and RNA levels. Exposure of EC to TNF-? is known to be associated with increased neutrophil attachment. We observed that knockdown of ERG in HUVEC is similarly associated with increased neutrophil attachment compared to control siRNA-treated cells. This enhanced adhesion could be blocked with IL-8 neutralizing or IL-8 receptor blocking antibodies. ERG can inhibit the activity of the IL-8 promoter in a dose dependent manner. Direct binding of ERG to the IL-8 promoter in EC was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. In summary, our findings support a role for ERG in promoting anti-inflammatory effects in EC through repression of inflammatory genes such as IL-8.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Mouse models of endotoxemia The model used is as described previously 31 . Briefly, 8 male 8-wk-old C57BL/6 mice were injected i.p. with normal saline (control) or LPS (18 mg/kg) from E. coli serotype 0111:B4 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), or treated with cecal ligation and puncture (CLP). Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of xylazine (5 mg/kg) and ketamine (80 mg/kg) after 6 or 24 hours of LPS or CLP treatment to collect tissues. siRNA transfection HUVEC were plated at a density to achieve 80–90% confluency on the day of transfection. Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and siRNAs were first incubated in Opti-MEM I Reduced-Serum Medium (Invitrogen) and added to media from HUVEC. The siRNA used in this study are as follows: ERG siRNA, 5?-GGACAGACUUCCAAGAUGAUU-3?; control siRNA, 5?-UAGCGACUAAACACAUCAA-3?, produced by Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO). Neutrophil preparation and adhesion Neutrophils were isolated following the method described previously 32 . Briefly, neutrophils were prepared from human whole blood (collected in the presence of citrate and dextran) by standard Ficoll-Hypaque (Sigma) buoyant density centrifugation, followed by brief osmotic lysis of red blood cells. HUVEC expressing either ERG siRNA or control siRNA were plated at 90% confluency and cultured for 12 hours with medium alone, medium containing TNF-?, or selected blocking antibody prior to the experiment. Freshly isolated neutrophils were washed and resuspended and then added to HUVEC monolayers and incubated at 37°C for 4 hours. Samples were washed and imaged live using a 10x phase-contrast objective and the number of adherent neutrophils counted. Luciferase reporter gene constructs Human IL-8 promoter (?1396 to +27 bp) fragments were cloned from human BAC clone RP11-126P1 by PCR. The primer sequences were: sense 5?-AGCTAGCCAGACAAACCTTTTTGGAAAG-3?; antisense 5?-TCTCGAGGTCTCTGAAAGTTTGTGCCTTAT-3?, each of which contains NheI and XhoI cutting sites respectively. The ?1396 to +27bp fragment was inserted into the NheI-XhoI site and subcloned into the pGL3 Basic luciferase reporter vector (Promega, Madison, WI). IL-8 blocking studies Culture media were mixed with antibodies against IL8, CXCR1, CXCR2 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) or with control normal IgG at a final concentration of 10 ?g/ml. Neutrophil attachment assays were then carried out.  Mouse models of endotoxemia The model used is as described previously 31 . Briefly, 8 male 8-wk-old C57BL/6 mice were injected i.p. with normal saline (control) or LPS (18 mg/kg) from E. coli serotype 0111:B4 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), or treated with cecal ligation and puncture (CLP). Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of xylazine (5 mg/kg) and ketamine (80 mg/kg) after 6 or 24 hours of LPS or CLP treatment to collect tissues.  siRNA transfection HUVEC were plated at a density to achieve 80–90% confluency on the day of transfection. Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and siRNAs were first incubated in Opti-MEM I Reduced-Serum Medium (Invitrogen) and added to media from HUVEC. The siRNA used in this study are as follows: ERG siRNA, 5?-GGACAGACUUCCAAGAUGAUU-3?; control siRNA, 5?-UAGCGACUAAACACAUCAA-3?, produced by Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO).  Neutrophil preparation and adhesion Neutrophils were isolated following the method described previously 32 . Briefly, neutrophils were prepared from human whole blood (collected in the presence of citrate and dextran) by standard Ficoll-Hypaque (Sigma) buoyant density centrifugation, followed by brief osmotic lysis of red blood cells. HUVEC expressing either ERG siRNA or control siRNA were plated at 90% confluency and cultured for 12 hours with medium alone, medium containing TNF-?, or selected blocking antibody prior to the experiment. Freshly isolated neutrophils were washed and resuspended and then added to HUVEC monolayers and incubated at 37°C for 4 hours. Samples were washed and imaged live using a 10x phase-contrast objective and the number of adherent neutrophils counted.  Luciferase reporter gene constructs Human IL-8 promoter (?1396 to +27 bp) fragments were cloned from human BAC clone RP11-126P1 by PCR. The primer sequences were: sense 5?-AGCTAGCCAGACAAACCTTTTTGGAAAG-3?; antisense 5?-TCTCGAGGTCTCTGAAAGTTTGTGCCTTAT-3?, each of which contains NheI and XhoI cutting sites respectively. The ?1396 to +27bp fragment was inserted into the NheI-XhoI site and subcloned into the pGL3 Basic luciferase reporter vector (Promega, Madison, WI).  IL-8 blocking studies Culture media were mixed with antibodies against IL8, CXCR1, CXCR2 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) or with control normal IgG at a final concentration of 10 ?g/ml. Neutrophil attachment assays were then carried out.  RESULTS Previous studies on ERG have indicated a selective expression of ERG in EC by in situ hybridization or traditional RT-PCR. In this study, we evaluated ERG expression more extensively in a variety of human and mouse cells using quantitative real-time PCR (Q-PCR). Among these, ERG expression was only detected in EC and not in other cell types including smooth muscle cell (SMC) and cells of hemaetopoietic origin ( Fig. 1A, B ). Moreover, ERG was expressed in all the ECs we studied, despite their different tissue origins. Evaluation of ERG protein expression by immunofluorescence demonstrated that ERG protein is predominantly localized to the nuclei of EC such as HUVEC, whereas no staining was observed in HASMC ( Fig. 1C ). ERG expression was also evaluated in a variety of mouse tissues using Q-PCR. ERG expression levels were highest in the heart and lung, with lower levels in the brain, and minimal or no detectable expression in the liver ( Fig. 2A ). ERG expression was next evaluated by immunofluorescence in tissue sections from mouse heart and brain ( Fig. 2B ). These studies demonstrated a close association of ERG in the nuclei of cells expressing the EC-specific marker, VE-cadherin. DAPI staining showed many cells that do not express either ERG or VE-cadherin. Others have shown that ERG expression is downregulated in EC after stimulation with TNF-? 30 . In this study we observed a 50% reduction of ERG protein expression at 6 hours, and nearly undetectable levels 24 hours after TNF-? stimulation of HUVEC ( Fig. 3A ). This was also observed for LPS ( Fig. 3B ) and IL-1? (data not shown). A similar reduction in ERG expression levels was observed in mouse hearts 24 hours after systemic administration of LPS by immunofluorescence staining ( Fig. 3C ). A significant reduction in ERG expression was also confirmed at both 6 hour and 24 hour time points in this model by Q-PCR ( Supplemental Figure I ). Although injection of endotoxin has been widely used as a model of sepsis, limitations of this model include the transient nature of the response based on a single intraperitoneal injection of endotoxin and that it is not a model of bacterial sepsis 11 . To further validate our initial findings we used as second mouse model of sepsis, the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model, that may more closely mimic bacterial sepsis that occurs in patients 12 , 13 . A similar reduction of ERG expression was observed in the mouse hearts using the CLP model as detected by immunofluorescence staining ( Fig. 3D ). The fact that ERG is downregulated in the setting of inflammation suggested to us that ERG might play an important role in the regulation of inflammatory responses in EC. To test this hypothesis, we used ERG-specific siRNA to downregulate ERG expression. A total of five siRNAs directed against ERG were screened, four of which led to significant (>85%) reductions in ERG expression at the level of protein ( Supplemental Figure II ) and mRNA (data not shown). The ERG siRNA that yields the greatest reduction is shown in Figs. 4A and 4B . An early event that occurs in the setting of inflammation is activation of the endothelium. This leads to increased attachment and transmigration of neutrophils and other inflammatory cells. To evaluate the effect of ERG on neutrophil attachment, freshly isolated human neutrophils were incubated with HUVEC treated with either ERG siRNA or control siRNA as a control. Downregulation of ERG was associated with a significant increase in neutrophil attachment (100% increase in comparison with control siRNA-treated cells), however less than what was observed with maximal TNF-? stimulation ( Fig. 4C,D ). Based on the fact that ERG expression is suppressed in response to inflammatory mediators such as TNF-?, we postulated that ERG might be involved in the transcriptional regulation of a subset of genes downstream of TNF-?. To identify potential ERG gene targets, we performed microarray analysis of ERG siRNA- and control siRNA-treated HUVEC. Comparisons were made with publicly available microarray data for TNF-?–treated HUVEC. The comparison of the ERG siRNA differentially expressed genes and TNF-? differentially expressed genes demonstrates significant overlap (P value <0.01). The detailed expression of the overlapping genes in the ERG siRNA and TNF-? datasets is shown in Figs. 5B and 5C , respectively. Interestingly, approximately 20% of the genes significantly up- or down-regulated by suppression of ERG with siRNA (>2.0 FC) overlap with changes in gene expression that are observed after TNF-? stimulation, although the total number of genes differentially expressed after TNF-? stimulation was much greater than after ERG siRNA treatment ( Fig. 5A , Supplemental Table I and II ). Among the list of genes identified, several are involved in modulating inflammatory responses in EC including IL-8, CD44, urokinase and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1). The complete list of the differentially regulated genes as a result of ERG knockdown in HUVEC has been submitted to the Geo database (accession #GSE14801; www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ ). Changes in the expression of selected genes were validated by Q-PCR ( Fig. 6A ). Furthermore, evaluation of changes in the secreted expression of proteins in the supernatant of HUVEC by ELISA after treatment with control or ERG siRNA demonstrated that IL-8 is dramatically upregulated (above 25 ng/ml; Fig. 6B, C ) as a result of ERG downregulation. To ensure the specificity of the ERG siRNA, the expression levels of a panel of other ETS factors including Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Ese-1, ELF-1, and Nerf1, was examined. No change in the expression of any of the other ETS factors except ERG was observed after ERG siRNA treatment ( Supplemental Figure III ). We also used a second ERG-directed siRNA and observed a similar induction of IL-8 and CD44 expression ( Supplemental Figure IV ). To further characterize whether the increase in neutrophil attachment to HUVEC observed as a result of ERG suppression is IL-8 dependent, IL-8 blocking antibodies were used. In the presence of blocking antibodies to IL-8 or the IL-8 receptors (CXCR1 and CXCR2), the stimulatory effect of decreased ERG expression on neutrophil attachment was abolished ( Fig. 6D ). The presence of equivalent concentrations of isotype-matched control antibodies IgG had no effect ( Fig. 6D ). These results support the overall concept that ERG is a critical regulator of neutrophil attachment in EC that appears to be IL-8 dependent. To evaluate whether IL-8 is a direct target of ERG, we analyzed the nucleotide sequence of the proximal 1.4 kb of the IL-8 promoter for putative ERG binding sites. Several downstream targets of ERG have been identified in EC 24 – 26 . Based on a comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the known ERG binding sites in the promoters of these genes, we constructed the following ERG consensus binding site: (A/G)(G/C)AGGAA(A/G). Using this sequence, we identified at least two putative ERG binding sites within the proximal IL-8 promoter (ChIP1 and ChIP2; Fig. 7A ). ERG binding was observed by chromatin immunoprecipitation to DNA fragments containing ChIP2 but not ChIP1 ( Fig. 7B ). ERG binding was markedly diminished in response to TNF-? treatment ( Supplemental Figure V ). The proximal 1.4 kb of the human IL-8 promoter was subcloned into the PGL3 luciferase reporter vector. Transactivation assays demonstrated that cotransfection with increasing amounts of ERG cDNA is associated with decreased IL-8 promoter activity, suggesting that ERG represses IL-8 expression ( Fig. 7D ). In contrast, cotransfection of Fli-1, another ETS family member that is highly homologous to ERG, did not significantly affect IL-8 promoter activity ( Supplemental Figure VI ). To examine whether the ERG-binding site within the ChIP2 region is required for the suppression of the IL-8 promoter by ERG, site-directed mutagenesis was used to create mutations in the critical nucleotides required for ERG binding to the IL-8 promoter. The transactivation assay demonstrated that suppression of the promoter by ERG was largely abolished by the mutation of the ERG binding site ( Fig. 7C ).  RESULTS Previous studies on ERG have indicated a selective expression of ERG in EC by in situ hybridization or traditional RT-PCR. In this study, we evaluated ERG expression more extensively in a variety of human and mouse cells using quantitative real-time PCR (Q-PCR). Among these, ERG expression was only detected in EC and not in other cell types including smooth muscle cell (SMC) and cells of hemaetopoietic origin ( Fig. 1A, B ). Moreover, ERG was expressed in all the ECs we studied, despite their different tissue origins. Evaluation of ERG protein expression by immunofluorescence demonstrated that ERG protein is predominantly localized to the nuclei of EC such as HUVEC, whereas no staining was observed in HASMC ( Fig. 1C ). ERG expression was also evaluated in a variety of mouse tissues using Q-PCR. ERG expression levels were highest in the heart and lung, with lower levels in the brain, and minimal or no detectable expression in the liver ( Fig. 2A ). ERG expression was next evaluated by immunofluorescence in tissue sections from mouse heart and brain ( Fig. 2B ). These studies demonstrated a close association of ERG in the nuclei of cells expressing the EC-specific marker, VE-cadherin. DAPI staining showed many cells that do not express either ERG or VE-cadherin. Others have shown that ERG expression is downregulated in EC after stimulation with TNF-? 30 . In this study we observed a 50% reduction of ERG protein expression at 6 hours, and nearly undetectable levels 24 hours after TNF-? stimulation of HUVEC ( Fig. 3A ). This was also observed for LPS ( Fig. 3B ) and IL-1? (data not shown). A similar reduction in ERG expression levels was observed in mouse hearts 24 hours after systemic administration of LPS by immunofluorescence staining ( Fig. 3C ). A significant reduction in ERG expression was also confirmed at both 6 hour and 24 hour time points in this model by Q-PCR ( Supplemental Figure I ). Although injection of endotoxin has been widely used as a model of sepsis, limitations of this model include the transient nature of the response based on a single intraperitoneal injection of endotoxin and that it is not a model of bacterial sepsis 11 . To further validate our initial findings we used as second mouse model of sepsis, the cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) model, that may more closely mimic bacterial sepsis that occurs in patients 12 , 13 . A similar reduction of ERG expression was observed in the mouse hearts using the CLP model as detected by immunofluorescence staining ( Fig. 3D ). The fact that ERG is downregulated in the setting of inflammation suggested to us that ERG might play an important role in the regulation of inflammatory responses in EC. To test this hypothesis, we used ERG-specific siRNA to downregulate ERG expression. A total of five siRNAs directed against ERG were screened, four of which led to significant (>85%) reductions in ERG expression at the level of protein ( Supplemental Figure II ) and mRNA (data not shown). The ERG siRNA that yields the greatest reduction is shown in Figs. 4A and 4B . An early event that occurs in the setting of inflammation is activation of the endothelium. This leads to increased attachment and transmigration of neutrophils and other inflammatory cells. To evaluate the effect of ERG on neutrophil attachment, freshly isolated human neutrophils were incubated with HUVEC treated with either ERG siRNA or control siRNA as a control. Downregulation of ERG was associated with a significant increase in neutrophil attachment (100% increase in comparison with control siRNA-treated cells), however less than what was observed with maximal TNF-? stimulation ( Fig. 4C,D ). Based on the fact that ERG expression is suppressed in response to inflammatory mediators such as TNF-?, we postulated that ERG might be involved in the transcriptional regulation of a subset of genes downstream of TNF-?. To identify potential ERG gene targets, we performed microarray analysis of ERG siRNA- and control siRNA-treated HUVEC. Comparisons were made with publicly available microarray data for TNF-?–treated HUVEC. The comparison of the ERG siRNA differentially expressed genes and TNF-? differentially expressed genes demonstrates significant overlap (P value <0.01). The detailed expression of the overlapping genes in the ERG siRNA and TNF-? datasets is shown in Figs. 5B and 5C , respectively. Interestingly, approximately 20% of the genes significantly up- or down-regulated by suppression of ERG with siRNA (>2.0 FC) overlap with changes in gene expression that are observed after TNF-? stimulation, although the total number of genes differentially expressed after TNF-? stimulation was much greater than after ERG siRNA treatment ( Fig. 5A , Supplemental Table I and II ). Among the list of genes identified, several are involved in modulating inflammatory responses in EC including IL-8, CD44, urokinase and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1). The complete list of the differentially regulated genes as a result of ERG knockdown in HUVEC has been submitted to the Geo database (accession #GSE14801; www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ ). Changes in the expression of selected genes were validated by Q-PCR ( Fig. 6A ). Furthermore, evaluation of changes in the secreted expression of proteins in the supernatant of HUVEC by ELISA after treatment with control or ERG siRNA demonstrated that IL-8 is dramatically upregulated (above 25 ng/ml; Fig. 6B, C ) as a result of ERG downregulation. To ensure the specificity of the ERG siRNA, the expression levels of a panel of other ETS factors including Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Ese-1, ELF-1, and Nerf1, was examined. No change in the expression of any of the other ETS factors except ERG was observed after ERG siRNA treatment ( Supplemental Figure III ). We also used a second ERG-directed siRNA and observed a similar induction of IL-8 and CD44 expression ( Supplemental Figure IV ). To further characterize whether the increase in neutrophil attachment to HUVEC observed as a result of ERG suppression is IL-8 dependent, IL-8 blocking antibodies were used. In the presence of blocking antibodies to IL-8 or the IL-8 receptors (CXCR1 and CXCR2), the stimulatory effect of decreased ERG expression on neutrophil attachment was abolished ( Fig. 6D ). The presence of equivalent concentrations of isotype-matched control antibodies IgG had no effect ( Fig. 6D ). These results support the overall concept that ERG is a critical regulator of neutrophil attachment in EC that appears to be IL-8 dependent. To evaluate whether IL-8 is a direct target of ERG, we analyzed the nucleotide sequence of the proximal 1.4 kb of the IL-8 promoter for putative ERG binding sites. Several downstream targets of ERG have been identified in EC 24 – 26 . Based on a comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the known ERG binding sites in the promoters of these genes, we constructed the following ERG consensus binding site: (A/G)(G/C)AGGAA(A/G). Using this sequence, we identified at least two putative ERG binding sites within the proximal IL-8 promoter (ChIP1 and ChIP2; Fig. 7A ). ERG binding was observed by chromatin immunoprecipitation to DNA fragments containing ChIP2 but not ChIP1 ( Fig. 7B ). ERG binding was markedly diminished in response to TNF-? treatment ( Supplemental Figure V ). The proximal 1.4 kb of the human IL-8 promoter was subcloned into the PGL3 luciferase reporter vector. Transactivation assays demonstrated that cotransfection with increasing amounts of ERG cDNA is associated with decreased IL-8 promoter activity, suggesting that ERG represses IL-8 expression ( Fig. 7D ). In contrast, cotransfection of Fli-1, another ETS family member that is highly homologous to ERG, did not significantly affect IL-8 promoter activity ( Supplemental Figure VI ). To examine whether the ERG-binding site within the ChIP2 region is required for the suppression of the IL-8 promoter by ERG, site-directed mutagenesis was used to create mutations in the critical nucleotides required for ERG binding to the IL-8 promoter. The transactivation assay demonstrated that suppression of the promoter by ERG was largely abolished by the mutation of the ERG binding site ( Fig. 7C ).  DISCUSSION IL-8 is widely recognized as a potent chemotactic factor for leukocyte recruitment to the endothelium in the setting of inflammation 33 . The release of IL-8 is triggered by inflammatory signals from a variety of cells including neutrophils, smooth muscle cells and EC. It plays a key role in host defense mechanisms through its effect on neutrophil activation. However, sustained elevation of IL-8 levels may result in tissue damage. IL-8 administration alone can induce the conversion of rolling to stationary adhesion of neutrophils in as little as 80 milliseconds after the initial attachment 34 . Electron microscopy studies have demonstrated that radiolabeled interstitial IL-8 is internalized by venular EC abluminally and is transcytosed to the luminal surface where it is presented to the adherent leukocytes predominantly through EC projections 35 . Furthermore, TNF-? mediated trans-endothelial neutrophil migration has been shown to be IL-8 dependent 35 . IL-8 expression is induced in EC by a number of inflammatory mediators, including TNF-?, oxidized low density lipoprotein (LDL), and endotoxin 36 , 37 . In cultured EC exposure to TNF-?, for example, is associated with sustained increases in IL-8 protein in the supernatant of the cells for greater than 24 hours. The induction of IL-8 by these inflammatory mediators has been shown to occur predominantly at the level of gene transcription 37 . Furthermore, the transcriptional elements required for induction were shown to be contained within the proximal 1.4 kb of the IL-8 gene promoter, and induction of a luciferase reporter construct containing this region by TNF-?, was at least partially dependent on activation by NF-?B. The increased expression of IL-8, and other cytokines including IL-6 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in EC by TNF-? can be inhibited by the two inhibitors of NF-?B, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) 38 . In our study, we observed that downregulation of ERG in HUVEC was associated with a significant increase in neutrophil attachment which is less than what was observed with maximal TNF-? stimulation, suggesting that the combined effects of NF-?B activation and ERG suppression may be necessary for maximal IL-8 induction and neutrophil attachment. Another mechanism by which expression of the IL-8 gene can be induced in EC is in response to hypoxia. IL-8 expression is rapidly induced in human pulmonary and dermal microvascular EC exposed to hypoxia or cobalt 39 . This occurs at the transcriptional level and is associated with activation and increased binding of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1?), NF-?B, and AP-1, to the IL-8 promoter. We and others have shown a role for selected members of the ETS transcription factor family in the regulation of inflammatory responses in EC. For example, the Ets factor ESE-1 is rapidly induced in cultured EC in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1? and TNF-? and in vivo in response to endotoxin administration 40 . Target genes of ESE-1 include nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). Similarly Ets-1 induction occurs in EC in response to several inflammatory stimuli including pro-inflammatory cytokines and angiotensin II. Furthermore, Ets-1 is a critical mediator of the generation of reactive oxygen species and inflammatory gene expression in EC in vivo in response to systemic infusion of angiotensin II 41 , 42 . Target genes of Ets-1 include monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), p47 phox , and PAI-1. While most ETS factors function as transcriptional activators, selected members of the ETS family members have also been shown to function as transcriptional repressors of gene transcription. For example, the ETS factor Elk-3 represses the expression of hemoxygenase-1 (HO-1) in primary macrophages 43 . When macrophages are exposed to endotoxin Elk-3 levels rapidly diminish, with an associated increase in HO-1 expression. Elk-3 has also been shown to be a repressor of the NOS2 gene under non-inflammatory conditions 44 . The results of our study suggest a similar role for ERG, as a transcriptional repressor of IL-8 and several other genes in EC. Interestingly, in contrast to our findings for ERG in EC, the ETS factor MEF can induce the expression of IL-8 in hematopoietic cells 45 . In addition to its role as a transcriptional repressor, ERG has also been shown to function as a positive regulator of a number of EC-restricted genes including, vWF, VE-cadherin, angiopoietin-2, and endoglin 24 – 28 . Of particular interest to us was the fact that, in contrast to other ETS factors, ERG appears to exhibit a much more EC-restricted expression pattern both in cultured cells and in vivo in several different organs. Taken together, the results of our studies demonstrate that ERG functions as a transcriptional repressor of a selected number of genes. In the setting of inflammation ERG expression in EC is markedly diminished leading to the increased expression of IL-8 and other pro-inflammatory genes. Future studies directed at understanding how ERG levels can be maintained or upregulated in EC could lead to novel approaches towards inhibiting vascular inflammatory responses.  DISCUSSION IL-8 is widely recognized as a potent chemotactic factor for leukocyte recruitment to the endothelium in the setting of inflammation 33 . The release of IL-8 is triggered by inflammatory signals from a variety of cells including neutrophils, smooth muscle cells and EC. It plays a key role in host defense mechanisms through its effect on neutrophil activation. However, sustained elevation of IL-8 levels may result in tissue damage. IL-8 administration alone can induce the conversion of rolling to stationary adhesion of neutrophils in as little as 80 milliseconds after the initial attachment 34 . Electron microscopy studies have demonstrated that radiolabeled interstitial IL-8 is internalized by venular EC abluminally and is transcytosed to the luminal surface where it is presented to the adherent leukocytes predominantly through EC projections 35 . Furthermore, TNF-? mediated trans-endothelial neutrophil migration has been shown to be IL-8 dependent 35 . IL-8 expression is induced in EC by a number of inflammatory mediators, including TNF-?, oxidized low density lipoprotein (LDL), and endotoxin 36 , 37 . In cultured EC exposure to TNF-?, for example, is associated with sustained increases in IL-8 protein in the supernatant of the cells for greater than 24 hours. The induction of IL-8 by these inflammatory mediators has been shown to occur predominantly at the level of gene transcription 37 . Furthermore, the transcriptional elements required for induction were shown to be contained within the proximal 1.4 kb of the IL-8 gene promoter, and induction of a luciferase reporter construct containing this region by TNF-?, was at least partially dependent on activation by NF-?B. The increased expression of IL-8, and other cytokines including IL-6 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in EC by TNF-? can be inhibited by the two inhibitors of NF-?B, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) 38 . In our study, we observed that downregulation of ERG in HUVEC was associated with a significant increase in neutrophil attachment which is less than what was observed with maximal TNF-? stimulation, suggesting that the combined effects of NF-?B activation and ERG suppression may be necessary for maximal IL-8 induction and neutrophil attachment. Another mechanism by which expression of the IL-8 gene can be induced in EC is in response to hypoxia. IL-8 expression is rapidly induced in human pulmonary and dermal microvascular EC exposed to hypoxia or cobalt 39 . This occurs at the transcriptional level and is associated with activation and increased binding of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1?), NF-?B, and AP-1, to the IL-8 promoter. We and others have shown a role for selected members of the ETS transcription factor family in the regulation of inflammatory responses in EC. For example, the Ets factor ESE-1 is rapidly induced in cultured EC in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1? and TNF-? and in vivo in response to endotoxin administration 40 . Target genes of ESE-1 include nitric oxide synthase 2 (NOS2) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). Similarly Ets-1 induction occurs in EC in response to several inflammatory stimuli including pro-inflammatory cytokines and angiotensin II. Furthermore, Ets-1 is a critical mediator of the generation of reactive oxygen species and inflammatory gene expression in EC in vivo in response to systemic infusion of angiotensin II 41 , 42 . Target genes of Ets-1 include monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), p47 phox , and PAI-1. While most ETS factors function as transcriptional activators, selected members of the ETS family members have also been shown to function as transcriptional repressors of gene transcription. For example, the ETS factor Elk-3 represses the expression of hemoxygenase-1 (HO-1) in primary macrophages 43 . When macrophages are exposed to endotoxin Elk-3 levels rapidly diminish, with an associated increase in HO-1 expression. Elk-3 has also been shown to be a repressor of the NOS2 gene under non-inflammatory conditions 44 . The results of our study suggest a similar role for ERG, as a transcriptional repressor of IL-8 and several other genes in EC. Interestingly, in contrast to our findings for ERG in EC, the ETS factor MEF can induce the expression of IL-8 in hematopoietic cells 45 . In addition to its role as a transcriptional repressor, ERG has also been shown to function as a positive regulator of a number of EC-restricted genes including, vWF, VE-cadherin, angiopoietin-2, and endoglin 24 – 28 . Of particular interest to us was the fact that, in contrast to other ETS factors, ERG appears to exhibit a much more EC-restricted expression pattern both in cultured cells and in vivo in several different organs. Taken together, the results of our studies demonstrate that ERG functions as a transcriptional repressor of a selected number of genes. In the setting of inflammation ERG expression in EC is markedly diminished leading to the increased expression of IL-8 and other pro-inflammatory genes. Future studies directed at understanding how ERG levels can be maintained or upregulated in EC could lead to novel approaches towards inhibiting vascular inflammatory responses.  Supplementary Material 1  Supplementary Material 1 