Invasive Cortical Stimulation to Promote Recovery of Function After Stroke A Critical Appraisal Background and Purpose Residual motor deficits frequently linger after stroke. Search for newer effective strategies to promote functional recovery is ongoing. Brain stimulation, as a means of directing adaptive plasticity, is appealing. Animal studies and Phase I and II trials in humans have indicated safety, feasibility, and efficacy of combining rehabilitation and concurrent invasive cortical stimulation. However, a recent Phase III trial showed no advantage of the combination. We critically review results of various trials and discuss the factors that contributed to the distinctive result. Summary of Review Regarding cortical stimulation, it is important to determine the (1) location of peri-infarct representations by integrating multiple neuroanatomical and physiological techniques; (2) role of other mechanisms of stroke recovery; (3) viability of peri-infarct tissue and descending pathways; (4) lesion geometry to ensure no alteration/displacement of current density; and (5) applicability of lessons generated from noninvasive brain stimulation studies in humans. In terms of combining stimulation with rehabilitation, we should understand (1) the principle of homeostatic plasticity; (2) the effect of ongoing cortical activity and phases of learning; and (3) that subject-specific intervention may be necessary. Conclusions Future cortical stimulation trials should consider the factors that may have contributed to the peculiar results of the Phase III trial and address those in future study designs.  Conclusions Clearly, combining cortical stimulation with rehabilitation to promote functional recovery after stroke is complex and various obscure but important issues have to be considered. Localization, descending pathways’ integrity, and pattern of reorganization to the target may need to be carefully individualized and guided by ongoing physiological monitoring in future invasive cortical stimulation trials. Lessons from noninvasive brain stimulation trials about task specificity and subject selection should also be understood to plan more valid designs in the future. The divergent findings of the Phase III trial compared with the Phase I, Phase II, and animal trials should also guide future noninvasive stimulation trials; lesion geometry–current modeling, integration of multiple site-localizing techniques, and monitoring of ongoing cortical activity could be helpful. 