Progesterone receptors act as sensors for mitogenic protein kinases in breast cancer models Progesterone receptors (PR), members of the nuclear receptor superfamily, function as ligand-activated transcription factors and initiators of c-Src kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. Bidirectional cross-talk between PR and mitogenic protein kinases results in changes in PR post-translational modification, leading to alterations in PR transcriptional activity and promoter selectivity. PR-induced rapid activation of cytoplasmic protein kinases insures precise regulatory input to downstream cellular processes that are dependent upon nuclear PR, such as cell-cycle progression, and pro-survival signaling. Here, we review interactions between PR and mitogenic protein kinases and discuss the consequences of specific post-translational modifications on PR action in breast cancer cell-line models.  Conclusions PRs are able to interact with and activate protein kinases functioning as part of signaling cascades resulting in subsequent modification of associated protein substrates, including PR itself. These early and rapid events ultimately direct PR to specific promoters via phosphorylation-dependent tethering interactions, leading to altered cell-cycle progression. Interaction of PRs with the components of MAPK modules and/or MAPK-regulated CDKs provides an exquisite sensing mechanism for PR function in the context of multiple hormonal inputs emanating from the cell surface ( Fig. 3 ). We propose that differentially modified SR species shuttle to different promoters. Thus, experiments examining the transcriptional consequences of specific SR post-translational modifications must focus on the regulation of endogenous genes rather than deriving conclusions based solely on hormone response element-driven reporter constructs. We conclude that the cytoplasmic and genomic actions of SRs are often fully integrated in order to produce precisely timed events, such as cell-cycle entry in the case of PR. Targeting the dual activities of PR (and by analogy ER or AR) as both mediators of signal transduction and nuclear transcription factors using a combination of selective protein kinase inhibitors and anti-progestins (i.e. transcriptional antagonists) is likely to be a productive strategy for blockade of breast cancer progression. 