Activation of the PI3 Kinase Pathway By Retinoic Acid Mediates Sodium/Iodide Symporter (NIS) Induction and Iodide Transport in MCF-7 Breast Cancer Cells Iodide uptake in the thyroid and breast is mediated by the sodium/iodide symporter (NIS). NIS activation is utilized for radioiodide imaging and therapeutic ablation of thyroid carcinoma. NIS is expressed in more than 70% of breast cancers, but at a level insufficient for radioiodine treatment ( 1 ). All- trans retinoic acid (tRA) induces NIS gene expression and functional iodide uptake in human breast cancer cell lines and mouse breast cancer models. tRA usually regulates gene expression by direct interaction of Retinoic Acid Receptor (RAR) with a target gene, but it can also acts through nongenomic pathways. We report a direct influence of tRA treatment on the PI3K signal transduction pathway that mediates tRA-induced NIS expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. MCF-7 cells express all three RAR isoforms, ?, ? and ?, and RXR?. We previously identified RAR? and RXR? as important for NIS induction by tRA. Treatment with LY294002, the PI3K inhibitor, or p85? “knockdown” with siRNA, abolished tRA-induced NIS expression. Immunoprecipitation experiments and GST pull-down assay demonstrated a direct interaction between RAR?2, RXR? and p85?. RA also induced rapid activation of Akt in MCF-7 cells. Treatment with an Akt inhibitor or Akt “knockdown” with siRNA, reduced NIS expression. These findings indicate that RA-induction of NIS in MCF-7 cells is mediated by rapid activation of the PI3K pathway and involves direct interaction with RAR and RXR. Defining these mechanisms should lead to methods to further enhance NIS expression, as well as retinoid targets that influence growth and differentiation of breast cancer.  Introduction The sodium/iodide symporter (NIS) is a transmembrane glycoprotein that transports iodide into the thyroid to maintain adequate thyroid hormone production ( 2 ). NIS is expressed on the basolateral membrane of alveolar cells in lactating mammary gland, concentrating iodide in milk, but is not expressed in the non-lactating breast ( 3 - 5 ). It has been reported that more than 70% of breast cancer tissue expresses NIS, although the level of basal iodide transport is very low ( 4 , 5 ). A variety of approaches have been utilized to enhance functional NIS expression in breast cancer, with the goal of using radioiodide to image and treat some differentiated breast cancer ( 1 ). Our previous studies have shown that all- trans retinoic acid (tRA) significantly induces NIS gene expression and iodide uptake in human breast cancer cell line and breast cancer mouse models, but the precise mechanism has not been established ( 6 , 7 ). Retinoids, active metabolites of vitamin A, comprise both naturally occurring and synthetic compounds that have been used in animal models and humans as differentiation agents for various types of cancers, including breast cancer and promyelocytic leukemia ( 8 , 9 ). The classic retinoid pathway involves the ligand-activated nuclear receptors, retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and retinoid X receptors (RXRs) ( 9 ). Both RAR and RXR have three isoforms, ?, ? and ?. RAR-RXR heterodimers bind to retinoic acid- or retinoid X-response element (RAREs and RXREs, respectively) and activate transcription ( 9 , 10 ). Many hormones classically acting through nuclear receptors, however, have been shown to also act through non-genomic pathways ( 11 , 12 ). It has been reported that nuclear receptors can initiate second messenger production and interact with other cellular systems ( 11 - 13 ). The mechanism of rapid nuclear receptor signaling, however, is not established and a variety of models have been described ( 12 , 13 ). We have recently studied the human NIS gene and directly characterized 44kb of upstream and downstream sequence, but could not identify a functional RARE ( 14 ). We utilized signal transduction inhibitors to show that RA-induction of NIS is likely to be through a non-genomic pathway ( 14 ). Signal transduction pathways have been implicated by several studies of NIS expression in breast cancer ( 15 , 16 ). Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signaling pathway influences cell growth, cell survival and cell movement, and signaling defects have been identified in a wide spectrum of human cancers ( 17 , 18 ). PI3Ks are a family of enzymes and can be subdivided into three classes – class I, II and III ( 19 ). Class IA PI3Ks are heterodimers of regulatory and catalytic subunits ( 18 , 19 ). A regulatory subunit of class IA PI3Ks, p85?, is a phosphoprotein substrate of many cytoplasmic and receptor tyrosine kinases ( 17 , 19 ). Members of the nuclear receptor superfamily, such as the estrogen, thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors, have been shown to interact with p85?, and activate the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway ( 20 - 23 ). We have investigated the mechanism of tRA-induction of NIS. We show that rapid activation of PI3K/Akt by RA induces NIS expression in MCF-7 cells. We also show that this rapid activation of PI3K/Akt pathway is initiated by a direct interaction between p85? and RAR?, in association with RXR?.  Materials and Methods Cells and culture conditions MCF-7 cells and COS-7 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD) and maintained according to the recommended conditions. In the perfomance of immunoprecipitation, Akt phosphorylation and cell fractionation studies, cells were serum-starved in phenol-red free Dulbecco Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) for at least 24 h, and then treated with 1 ?M tRA for the indicated time. Reagents and antibodies tRA and 9cRA were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). LY294002 and Akt inhibitor VIII were purchased from EMD Biosciences (La Jolla, CA). Antibodies for phosphorylated S473 Akt, total Akt, ?-actin and PARP were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). RXR? antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). p85? antibody was purchased from Millipore (Billerica, MA). FLAG antibody was purchased from Sigma. NIS antibody was a gift from Dr. Nancy Carrasco (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY). Western blot analysis Whole cell lysates were prepared as described previously ( 21 ) with minor modifications. Briefly, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed with cell lysate buffer [Tris-HCl (20 mM, pH 7.4), EDTA (10 mM), NaCl (100 mM), Nonidet P-40 (1%), sodium deoxycholate (5%), Na3VO4 (1 mM), sodium pyrophosphate (2.5 mM), ?-Glycerolphosphate (1 mM) and the protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)]. Cells were sonicated for 20 seconds, centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,000g at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected and 2× sample buffer was added, then incubated at 95 °C for 5 minutes. Membrane fraction was prepared as previously described ( 6 ). Protein concentrations of the samples were measured using the Bio-Rad protein assay (Biorad). Western blot was performed as described previously ( 24 ), except the protein was visualized by ECL western blotting detection reagents (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences, Piscataway, NJ). For the same experiment, membranes were stripped with a stripping buffer (Pierce) and immunoblotted with another antibody. Immunoprecipitations (IP) Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed with cell lysate buffer. Immunoprecipitating antibody was added to equal amounts of cell lysates (3-5 mg) in 1 ml of lysis buffer for 12 h at 4 °C rotating. Then, 40 ?l of 1:1 Protein-A agarose was added and rotated for another 3 h at 4 °C. The immunoprecipitates were washed with an ice-cold lysis buffer for five times, then resuspended in a sample buffer and incubated at 95 °C for 5 minutes. The bound proteins were analyzed by Western blot analysis. The FLAG-IP, anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) was used and immunopreciptiation was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol. GST “pull-down” assay GST fusion protein was expressed in BL21 bacteria cells and purified using standard techniques. For the pull-down assays, bovine recombinant GST-p85? fusion protein or GST bound to glutathione-agarose beads was suspended in 500 ?l of AM-1 Buffer (20mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 20 % Glycerol, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT and 0.2 mM EDTA) and incubated with 1 ?g human recombinant RXR (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) for 1 h at 4 °C. The samples were washed five times with ice-cold PBS, then resuspended in a sample buffer and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. The bound proteins were analyzed by Western blotting. RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR analysis Total RNA isolation, RT-PCR and real-time PCR analysis were carried out as previously described ( 1 , 7 ). Sequences of PCR primer pairs for RAR?s, p85? and Akts are shown in supplemental data . Primers for NIS and GAPDH have been described previously ( 1 ). Plasmid Constructs pcDNA3.0-RAR?2 and FLAG-RAR?2 were sub-cloned from pCMX-RAR?2 into HindIII-BamHI site of pcDNA3.0 (Invitrogen) and p3XFLAG-14 vector (Sigma), respectively. For RAR?4, inserts were created by PCR amplification of cDNA obtained from the breast cancer cell line, Hs578T. cDNA was obtained as described above. Primers used for cloning are: 5?-CAAGCTTAGCGCCTGTGAGGGATGTAAG-3? (forward primer), 5?-ACTCGAGAAGGTACTGGGGAATGTTTGAAGTAG-3? (reverse primer). TOPO-Cloning kit was used and performed according to the manufacturer's manual. RAR?4 construct was then sub-cloned into HindIII-XhoI site of pcDNA3.0. Since there was another ATG site at nucleotide 411, 37 bp 5? of the RAR?4 transcription start site at nucleotide 448, the ATG site at 411 was modified to TTG by in vitro site-directed mutagenesis using PCR. Primer used for mutagenesis was: 5?-GAAAAAGCCCTTACAACCCTCACAGGCGCT-3?. pCMX-RAR?2 was a gift of Dr. David Mangelsdorf (Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX). pGEX-p85? used to produce GST-p85? fusion protein was a gift from Dr. Masato Kasuga (Kobe University, Kobe, Japan). pSG5-RXR? was a gift from Dr. Ronald Evans (Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA). Small interfering RNA (siRNA) preparation siRNAs targeting RAR?2 gene were designed and were chemically synthesized by Dharmacon RNA Technologies (Chicago, IL). The sequences for siRNAs are: GTATGGATGTTCTGTCAGT and GGATTTCTACACTGCGAGT. Non-targeting control siRNA (SMART pool control) and pre-designed siRNAs against RXR?, p85?, Akt1 and Akt2 (siGENOME siRNA) were also purchased from Dharmacon. Transfection Plasmids were transfected into MCF-7 cells and COS-7 cells with Effectene and Polyfect (Qiagen), respectively. siRNAs were transfected into cells at a final concentration of 100 nM by using transfection reagent, DharmaFECT 1 (Dharmacon). Transfection was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol. Iodide Uptake The iodide uptake assay was performed as described previously ( 1 ). The uptake was normalized to the cellular protein concentration measured with Bio-Rad protein assay. Statistical Analysis For statistical analysis, one-factor ANOVA followed by the Scheffe's F test was used. Values were expressed as means±SD, and P<0.01 was considered significant. All the experiments were performed with at least three replicates.  Cells and culture conditions MCF-7 cells and COS-7 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD) and maintained according to the recommended conditions. In the perfomance of immunoprecipitation, Akt phosphorylation and cell fractionation studies, cells were serum-starved in phenol-red free Dulbecco Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) for at least 24 h, and then treated with 1 ?M tRA for the indicated time.  Reagents and antibodies tRA and 9cRA were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). LY294002 and Akt inhibitor VIII were purchased from EMD Biosciences (La Jolla, CA). Antibodies for phosphorylated S473 Akt, total Akt, ?-actin and PARP were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). RXR? antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). p85? antibody was purchased from Millipore (Billerica, MA). FLAG antibody was purchased from Sigma. NIS antibody was a gift from Dr. Nancy Carrasco (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY).  Western blot analysis Whole cell lysates were prepared as described previously ( 21 ) with minor modifications. Briefly, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed with cell lysate buffer [Tris-HCl (20 mM, pH 7.4), EDTA (10 mM), NaCl (100 mM), Nonidet P-40 (1%), sodium deoxycholate (5%), Na3VO4 (1 mM), sodium pyrophosphate (2.5 mM), ?-Glycerolphosphate (1 mM) and the protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)]. Cells were sonicated for 20 seconds, centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,000g at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected and 2× sample buffer was added, then incubated at 95 °C for 5 minutes. Membrane fraction was prepared as previously described ( 6 ). Protein concentrations of the samples were measured using the Bio-Rad protein assay (Biorad). Western blot was performed as described previously ( 24 ), except the protein was visualized by ECL western blotting detection reagents (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences, Piscataway, NJ). For the same experiment, membranes were stripped with a stripping buffer (Pierce) and immunoblotted with another antibody.  Immunoprecipitations (IP) Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed with cell lysate buffer. Immunoprecipitating antibody was added to equal amounts of cell lysates (3-5 mg) in 1 ml of lysis buffer for 12 h at 4 °C rotating. Then, 40 ?l of 1:1 Protein-A agarose was added and rotated for another 3 h at 4 °C. The immunoprecipitates were washed with an ice-cold lysis buffer for five times, then resuspended in a sample buffer and incubated at 95 °C for 5 minutes. The bound proteins were analyzed by Western blot analysis. The FLAG-IP, anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) was used and immunopreciptiation was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol.  GST “pull-down” assay GST fusion protein was expressed in BL21 bacteria cells and purified using standard techniques. For the pull-down assays, bovine recombinant GST-p85? fusion protein or GST bound to glutathione-agarose beads was suspended in 500 ?l of AM-1 Buffer (20mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 20 % Glycerol, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT and 0.2 mM EDTA) and incubated with 1 ?g human recombinant RXR (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) for 1 h at 4 °C. The samples were washed five times with ice-cold PBS, then resuspended in a sample buffer and incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. The bound proteins were analyzed by Western blotting.  RT-PCR and quantitative real-time PCR analysis Total RNA isolation, RT-PCR and real-time PCR analysis were carried out as previously described ( 1 , 7 ). Sequences of PCR primer pairs for RAR?s, p85? and Akts are shown in supplemental data . Primers for NIS and GAPDH have been described previously ( 1 ).  Plasmid Constructs pcDNA3.0-RAR?2 and FLAG-RAR?2 were sub-cloned from pCMX-RAR?2 into HindIII-BamHI site of pcDNA3.0 (Invitrogen) and p3XFLAG-14 vector (Sigma), respectively. For RAR?4, inserts were created by PCR amplification of cDNA obtained from the breast cancer cell line, Hs578T. cDNA was obtained as described above. Primers used for cloning are: 5?-CAAGCTTAGCGCCTGTGAGGGATGTAAG-3? (forward primer), 5?-ACTCGAGAAGGTACTGGGGAATGTTTGAAGTAG-3? (reverse primer). TOPO-Cloning kit was used and performed according to the manufacturer's manual. RAR?4 construct was then sub-cloned into HindIII-XhoI site of pcDNA3.0. Since there was another ATG site at nucleotide 411, 37 bp 5? of the RAR?4 transcription start site at nucleotide 448, the ATG site at 411 was modified to TTG by in vitro site-directed mutagenesis using PCR. Primer used for mutagenesis was: 5?-GAAAAAGCCCTTACAACCCTCACAGGCGCT-3?. pCMX-RAR?2 was a gift of Dr. David Mangelsdorf (Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX). pGEX-p85? used to produce GST-p85? fusion protein was a gift from Dr. Masato Kasuga (Kobe University, Kobe, Japan). pSG5-RXR? was a gift from Dr. Ronald Evans (Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA).  Small interfering RNA (siRNA) preparation siRNAs targeting RAR?2 gene were designed and were chemically synthesized by Dharmacon RNA Technologies (Chicago, IL). The sequences for siRNAs are: GTATGGATGTTCTGTCAGT and GGATTTCTACACTGCGAGT. Non-targeting control siRNA (SMART pool control) and pre-designed siRNAs against RXR?, p85?, Akt1 and Akt2 (siGENOME siRNA) were also purchased from Dharmacon.  Transfection Plasmids were transfected into MCF-7 cells and COS-7 cells with Effectene and Polyfect (Qiagen), respectively. siRNAs were transfected into cells at a final concentration of 100 nM by using transfection reagent, DharmaFECT 1 (Dharmacon). Transfection was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol.  Iodide Uptake The iodide uptake assay was performed as described previously ( 1 ). The uptake was normalized to the cellular protein concentration measured with Bio-Rad protein assay.  Statistical Analysis For statistical analysis, one-factor ANOVA followed by the Scheffe's F test was used. Values were expressed as means±SD, and P<0.01 was considered significant. All the experiments were performed with at least three replicates.  Results Response to natural and synthetic retinoids We utilized isoform-specific retinoid receptor ligands to characterize the isoform specificity of tRA induction of NIS expression. We have reported previously that an RAR ?/? agonist was the most potent retinoid stimulator of NIS expression ( 1 ). We extended these studies and performed iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression with the RAR ?/? agonist, Am80, a pan-RAR agonist, Re80 and pan-RXR agonists PA024 ( Fig. 1A and C ). Although a natural pan-RAR agonist, tRA, and a natural pan-RAR/RXR agonist, 9cRA, induced iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression to the greatest level of expression, Am80 induced NIS to a similar level as Re80. This result, along with those from our previous study ( 1 ), indicates that RAR? plays the major role in NIS induction by tRA. In addition, we performed iodide uptake after treatment with an RAR antagonist, LE540, and an RXR antagonist, HX531. Interestingly, both LE531 and HX531 blocked tRA-stimulated iodide uptake ( Fig. 1B ). The RXR antagonist, HX531, is known to selectively inhibit the activity of RAR-RXR heterodimers ( 25 ). Inhibition of NIS induction by HX531 indicates that heterodimerization of RAR and RXR is required for the tRA-induction of iodide uptake. Nuclear receptor RAR?2 and RXR? is required for the NIS induction by tRA in MCF-7 cells The pharmacological studies demonstrated that RAR? and RXR are important for tRA-mediated NIS induction. We further evaluated the role of RAR? and RXR by determining the influence of loss- and gain-of-function experiments on NIS induction. MCF-7 breast cancer cells express RAR?, ?, ? and RXR? ( 26 , 27 ). RAR? generates multiple variants by using two promoters and alternative splicing ( 26 ). Variants of RAR? has been identified in human breast cancer cells; ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 ( Fig 2A ) ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). RAR?2 encodes the full-length isoform, while RAR?2S, ?4 and ?5 are truncated variants of RAR?2, and the corresponding sequences are indicated by gray boxes ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). Two kinds of protein are translated from these variants. One is the product of RAR?2 and ?2S, which include the receptor domains A to F, and the other is the product from ?4 and ?5, which lack the A, B and C domains ( Fig 2A ). MCF-7 cells express ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 mRNA as determined by RT-PCR (data not shown). We stably transfected MCF7 cells with vectors expressing one of the two RAR? protein product variants, either RAR?2 or ?4, and performed RT-qPCR of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake ( 28 , 29 ). Overexpression of RAR?2 significantly increased tRA-induction of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake (data not shown), while RAR?4 expression reduced both ( Fig 2B ). Selective knockdown of RAR?2, as well as RXR?, significantly decreased RA-induced NIS mRNA expression in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 2C ). These data indicate that tRA-induced NIS expression utilizes RAR?2 and RXR?, likely as heterodimers, while the truncated RAR?4 functions as an inhibitor. Activation of PI3K is required for NIS induction by tRA The specific inhibitor of PI3K, LY294002, blocked the induction of NIS mRNA expression by tRA in a time-dependent manner ( Figure 3A ). LY294002 treatment also inhibited NIS protein expression on the membrane in a dose-dependent fashion ( Fig 3B ). This is consistent with our recent study showing that LY294002 blocked the RA-induction of iodide uptake at an IC50 of 7.87 ± 1.1 ?M ( 14 ). Furthermore, tRA-induction of NIS mRNA did not require de novo protein synthesis, because co-treatment of tRA and cycloheximide did not influence NIS mRNA expression (data not shown). These pharmacological data, as well as our previous studies in which a functional RARE was not identified in the NIS gene locus or adjacent sequences ( 14 ), suggest that tRA treatment induces NIS expression in MCF-7 cells by modulating the PI3K signal transduction pathway. We further investigated the involvement of PI3K in NIS induction by tRA, by utilizing siRNA targeting p85?, one of the regulatory subunit of class IA PI3Ks. Knockdown of p85? significantly decreased the NIS mRNA induced by tRA compared to the control cells ( Fig 3C ). RAR?2 and RXR? forms a complex with p85? To determine the mechanism of PI3K activation by tRA, we investigated whether RAR?2 and RXR? directly interact with p85?, by performing co-immunoprecipitation and “pull-down” assays. Immunoprecipitation experiments using COS-7 cells transfected with RAR?2, p85? and RXR? demonstrated a direct interaction between RAR?2 and p85? in a tRA ligand-independent manner ( Fig 4A ). Conversely, a similar stable interaction between RAR?2 and p85? was observed with immunoprecipitation performed with anti-p85? antibody ( Fig 4B ). These finding demonstrate direct ligand-independent binding of RAR?2 and p85?. We then examined the interaction between RXR? and p85? in a cell-free system by performing a “pull-down” assay using GST- p85? fusion protein. GST-p85? fusion protein bound to the human recombinant RXR?, but GST alone did not. Interestingly, both pan-RAR and -RXR antagonist inhibited the binding of RXR? to p85? ( Fig 4D ). This is consistent with findings from the functional studies using pharmacological antagonists that blocked tRA-induced NIS expression ( Fig 1B ). Furthermore, using the co-immunoprecipitation assay with endogenous p85? and RXR? from cell lysates of MCF-7 cells, we found that tRA increases the association of p85? and RXR? ( Fig 4C ). Akt, downstream of PI3K pathway, is rapidly activated after treatment with tRA in MCF-7 cells Several nuclear receptors have been shown to rapidly activate Akt following PI3K activation. We determined whether tRA activates Akt in MCF-7 cells. The cells were serum-starved for 24–48 h before tRA treatment. Treatment with 1 ?M tRA rapidly increased Ser-473 phosphorylation of Akt at 5-10 min and then decreased to the basal level at 20 min ( Fig 5A ). Treatment with an Akt inhibitor VIII, an isozyme-specific inhibitor that inhibits Akt1 and Akt2 selectively, reduced NIS mRNA induced by tRA ( Fig 5B ). Combining Akt inhibition with PI3 kinase inhibition did not further reduce NIS mRNA ( Fig 5B ). High concentrations of Akt inhibitor VIII (IC50 4.5 ?M) inhibits tRA-induced iodide uptake in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 5C ). Combination treatment of Akt1 and Akt2 siRNAs in MCF-7 cells also decreased tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression about 25%, but it was not a significant reduction ( Fig 5D ). We also performed a selective knockdown of Akt1 or Akt2 separately, but there was a trend in these studies towards increased NIS mRNA induced by tRA (data not shown).  Results Response to natural and synthetic retinoids We utilized isoform-specific retinoid receptor ligands to characterize the isoform specificity of tRA induction of NIS expression. We have reported previously that an RAR ?/? agonist was the most potent retinoid stimulator of NIS expression ( 1 ). We extended these studies and performed iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression with the RAR ?/? agonist, Am80, a pan-RAR agonist, Re80 and pan-RXR agonists PA024 ( Fig. 1A and C ). Although a natural pan-RAR agonist, tRA, and a natural pan-RAR/RXR agonist, 9cRA, induced iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression to the greatest level of expression, Am80 induced NIS to a similar level as Re80. This result, along with those from our previous study ( 1 ), indicates that RAR? plays the major role in NIS induction by tRA. In addition, we performed iodide uptake after treatment with an RAR antagonist, LE540, and an RXR antagonist, HX531. Interestingly, both LE531 and HX531 blocked tRA-stimulated iodide uptake ( Fig. 1B ). The RXR antagonist, HX531, is known to selectively inhibit the activity of RAR-RXR heterodimers ( 25 ). Inhibition of NIS induction by HX531 indicates that heterodimerization of RAR and RXR is required for the tRA-induction of iodide uptake. Nuclear receptor RAR?2 and RXR? is required for the NIS induction by tRA in MCF-7 cells The pharmacological studies demonstrated that RAR? and RXR are important for tRA-mediated NIS induction. We further evaluated the role of RAR? and RXR by determining the influence of loss- and gain-of-function experiments on NIS induction. MCF-7 breast cancer cells express RAR?, ?, ? and RXR? ( 26 , 27 ). RAR? generates multiple variants by using two promoters and alternative splicing ( 26 ). Variants of RAR? has been identified in human breast cancer cells; ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 ( Fig 2A ) ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). RAR?2 encodes the full-length isoform, while RAR?2S, ?4 and ?5 are truncated variants of RAR?2, and the corresponding sequences are indicated by gray boxes ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). Two kinds of protein are translated from these variants. One is the product of RAR?2 and ?2S, which include the receptor domains A to F, and the other is the product from ?4 and ?5, which lack the A, B and C domains ( Fig 2A ). MCF-7 cells express ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 mRNA as determined by RT-PCR (data not shown). We stably transfected MCF7 cells with vectors expressing one of the two RAR? protein product variants, either RAR?2 or ?4, and performed RT-qPCR of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake ( 28 , 29 ). Overexpression of RAR?2 significantly increased tRA-induction of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake (data not shown), while RAR?4 expression reduced both ( Fig 2B ). Selective knockdown of RAR?2, as well as RXR?, significantly decreased RA-induced NIS mRNA expression in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 2C ). These data indicate that tRA-induced NIS expression utilizes RAR?2 and RXR?, likely as heterodimers, while the truncated RAR?4 functions as an inhibitor. Activation of PI3K is required for NIS induction by tRA The specific inhibitor of PI3K, LY294002, blocked the induction of NIS mRNA expression by tRA in a time-dependent manner ( Figure 3A ). LY294002 treatment also inhibited NIS protein expression on the membrane in a dose-dependent fashion ( Fig 3B ). This is consistent with our recent study showing that LY294002 blocked the RA-induction of iodide uptake at an IC50 of 7.87 ± 1.1 ?M ( 14 ). Furthermore, tRA-induction of NIS mRNA did not require de novo protein synthesis, because co-treatment of tRA and cycloheximide did not influence NIS mRNA expression (data not shown). These pharmacological data, as well as our previous studies in which a functional RARE was not identified in the NIS gene locus or adjacent sequences ( 14 ), suggest that tRA treatment induces NIS expression in MCF-7 cells by modulating the PI3K signal transduction pathway. We further investigated the involvement of PI3K in NIS induction by tRA, by utilizing siRNA targeting p85?, one of the regulatory subunit of class IA PI3Ks. Knockdown of p85? significantly decreased the NIS mRNA induced by tRA compared to the control cells ( Fig 3C ). RAR?2 and RXR? forms a complex with p85? To determine the mechanism of PI3K activation by tRA, we investigated whether RAR?2 and RXR? directly interact with p85?, by performing co-immunoprecipitation and “pull-down” assays. Immunoprecipitation experiments using COS-7 cells transfected with RAR?2, p85? and RXR? demonstrated a direct interaction between RAR?2 and p85? in a tRA ligand-independent manner ( Fig 4A ). Conversely, a similar stable interaction between RAR?2 and p85? was observed with immunoprecipitation performed with anti-p85? antibody ( Fig 4B ). These finding demonstrate direct ligand-independent binding of RAR?2 and p85?. We then examined the interaction between RXR? and p85? in a cell-free system by performing a “pull-down” assay using GST- p85? fusion protein. GST-p85? fusion protein bound to the human recombinant RXR?, but GST alone did not. Interestingly, both pan-RAR and -RXR antagonist inhibited the binding of RXR? to p85? ( Fig 4D ). This is consistent with findings from the functional studies using pharmacological antagonists that blocked tRA-induced NIS expression ( Fig 1B ). Furthermore, using the co-immunoprecipitation assay with endogenous p85? and RXR? from cell lysates of MCF-7 cells, we found that tRA increases the association of p85? and RXR? ( Fig 4C ). Akt, downstream of PI3K pathway, is rapidly activated after treatment with tRA in MCF-7 cells Several nuclear receptors have been shown to rapidly activate Akt following PI3K activation. We determined whether tRA activates Akt in MCF-7 cells. The cells were serum-starved for 24–48 h before tRA treatment. Treatment with 1 ?M tRA rapidly increased Ser-473 phosphorylation of Akt at 5-10 min and then decreased to the basal level at 20 min ( Fig 5A ). Treatment with an Akt inhibitor VIII, an isozyme-specific inhibitor that inhibits Akt1 and Akt2 selectively, reduced NIS mRNA induced by tRA ( Fig 5B ). Combining Akt inhibition with PI3 kinase inhibition did not further reduce NIS mRNA ( Fig 5B ). High concentrations of Akt inhibitor VIII (IC50 4.5 ?M) inhibits tRA-induced iodide uptake in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 5C ). Combination treatment of Akt1 and Akt2 siRNAs in MCF-7 cells also decreased tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression about 25%, but it was not a significant reduction ( Fig 5D ). We also performed a selective knockdown of Akt1 or Akt2 separately, but there was a trend in these studies towards increased NIS mRNA induced by tRA (data not shown).  Response to natural and synthetic retinoids We utilized isoform-specific retinoid receptor ligands to characterize the isoform specificity of tRA induction of NIS expression. We have reported previously that an RAR ?/? agonist was the most potent retinoid stimulator of NIS expression ( 1 ). We extended these studies and performed iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression with the RAR ?/? agonist, Am80, a pan-RAR agonist, Re80 and pan-RXR agonists PA024 ( Fig. 1A and C ). Although a natural pan-RAR agonist, tRA, and a natural pan-RAR/RXR agonist, 9cRA, induced iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression to the greatest level of expression, Am80 induced NIS to a similar level as Re80. This result, along with those from our previous study ( 1 ), indicates that RAR? plays the major role in NIS induction by tRA. In addition, we performed iodide uptake after treatment with an RAR antagonist, LE540, and an RXR antagonist, HX531. Interestingly, both LE531 and HX531 blocked tRA-stimulated iodide uptake ( Fig. 1B ). The RXR antagonist, HX531, is known to selectively inhibit the activity of RAR-RXR heterodimers ( 25 ). Inhibition of NIS induction by HX531 indicates that heterodimerization of RAR and RXR is required for the tRA-induction of iodide uptake.  Response to natural and synthetic retinoids We utilized isoform-specific retinoid receptor ligands to characterize the isoform specificity of tRA induction of NIS expression. We have reported previously that an RAR ?/? agonist was the most potent retinoid stimulator of NIS expression ( 1 ). We extended these studies and performed iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression with the RAR ?/? agonist, Am80, a pan-RAR agonist, Re80 and pan-RXR agonists PA024 ( Fig. 1A and C ). Although a natural pan-RAR agonist, tRA, and a natural pan-RAR/RXR agonist, 9cRA, induced iodide uptake and NIS mRNA expression to the greatest level of expression, Am80 induced NIS to a similar level as Re80. This result, along with those from our previous study ( 1 ), indicates that RAR? plays the major role in NIS induction by tRA. In addition, we performed iodide uptake after treatment with an RAR antagonist, LE540, and an RXR antagonist, HX531. Interestingly, both LE531 and HX531 blocked tRA-stimulated iodide uptake ( Fig. 1B ). The RXR antagonist, HX531, is known to selectively inhibit the activity of RAR-RXR heterodimers ( 25 ). Inhibition of NIS induction by HX531 indicates that heterodimerization of RAR and RXR is required for the tRA-induction of iodide uptake.  Nuclear receptor RAR?2 and RXR? is required for the NIS induction by tRA in MCF-7 cells The pharmacological studies demonstrated that RAR? and RXR are important for tRA-mediated NIS induction. We further evaluated the role of RAR? and RXR by determining the influence of loss- and gain-of-function experiments on NIS induction. MCF-7 breast cancer cells express RAR?, ?, ? and RXR? ( 26 , 27 ). RAR? generates multiple variants by using two promoters and alternative splicing ( 26 ). Variants of RAR? has been identified in human breast cancer cells; ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 ( Fig 2A ) ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). RAR?2 encodes the full-length isoform, while RAR?2S, ?4 and ?5 are truncated variants of RAR?2, and the corresponding sequences are indicated by gray boxes ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). Two kinds of protein are translated from these variants. One is the product of RAR?2 and ?2S, which include the receptor domains A to F, and the other is the product from ?4 and ?5, which lack the A, B and C domains ( Fig 2A ). MCF-7 cells express ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 mRNA as determined by RT-PCR (data not shown). We stably transfected MCF7 cells with vectors expressing one of the two RAR? protein product variants, either RAR?2 or ?4, and performed RT-qPCR of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake ( 28 , 29 ). Overexpression of RAR?2 significantly increased tRA-induction of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake (data not shown), while RAR?4 expression reduced both ( Fig 2B ). Selective knockdown of RAR?2, as well as RXR?, significantly decreased RA-induced NIS mRNA expression in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 2C ). These data indicate that tRA-induced NIS expression utilizes RAR?2 and RXR?, likely as heterodimers, while the truncated RAR?4 functions as an inhibitor.  Nuclear receptor RAR?2 and RXR? is required for the NIS induction by tRA in MCF-7 cells The pharmacological studies demonstrated that RAR? and RXR are important for tRA-mediated NIS induction. We further evaluated the role of RAR? and RXR by determining the influence of loss- and gain-of-function experiments on NIS induction. MCF-7 breast cancer cells express RAR?, ?, ? and RXR? ( 26 , 27 ). RAR? generates multiple variants by using two promoters and alternative splicing ( 26 ). Variants of RAR? has been identified in human breast cancer cells; ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 ( Fig 2A ) ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). RAR?2 encodes the full-length isoform, while RAR?2S, ?4 and ?5 are truncated variants of RAR?2, and the corresponding sequences are indicated by gray boxes ( 26 , 28 , 29 ). Two kinds of protein are translated from these variants. One is the product of RAR?2 and ?2S, which include the receptor domains A to F, and the other is the product from ?4 and ?5, which lack the A, B and C domains ( Fig 2A ). MCF-7 cells express ?2, ?2S, ?4 and ?5 mRNA as determined by RT-PCR (data not shown). We stably transfected MCF7 cells with vectors expressing one of the two RAR? protein product variants, either RAR?2 or ?4, and performed RT-qPCR of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake ( 28 , 29 ). Overexpression of RAR?2 significantly increased tRA-induction of NIS mRNA and iodide uptake (data not shown), while RAR?4 expression reduced both ( Fig 2B ). Selective knockdown of RAR?2, as well as RXR?, significantly decreased RA-induced NIS mRNA expression in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 2C ). These data indicate that tRA-induced NIS expression utilizes RAR?2 and RXR?, likely as heterodimers, while the truncated RAR?4 functions as an inhibitor.  Activation of PI3K is required for NIS induction by tRA The specific inhibitor of PI3K, LY294002, blocked the induction of NIS mRNA expression by tRA in a time-dependent manner ( Figure 3A ). LY294002 treatment also inhibited NIS protein expression on the membrane in a dose-dependent fashion ( Fig 3B ). This is consistent with our recent study showing that LY294002 blocked the RA-induction of iodide uptake at an IC50 of 7.87 ± 1.1 ?M ( 14 ). Furthermore, tRA-induction of NIS mRNA did not require de novo protein synthesis, because co-treatment of tRA and cycloheximide did not influence NIS mRNA expression (data not shown). These pharmacological data, as well as our previous studies in which a functional RARE was not identified in the NIS gene locus or adjacent sequences ( 14 ), suggest that tRA treatment induces NIS expression in MCF-7 cells by modulating the PI3K signal transduction pathway. We further investigated the involvement of PI3K in NIS induction by tRA, by utilizing siRNA targeting p85?, one of the regulatory subunit of class IA PI3Ks. Knockdown of p85? significantly decreased the NIS mRNA induced by tRA compared to the control cells ( Fig 3C ).  Activation of PI3K is required for NIS induction by tRA The specific inhibitor of PI3K, LY294002, blocked the induction of NIS mRNA expression by tRA in a time-dependent manner ( Figure 3A ). LY294002 treatment also inhibited NIS protein expression on the membrane in a dose-dependent fashion ( Fig 3B ). This is consistent with our recent study showing that LY294002 blocked the RA-induction of iodide uptake at an IC50 of 7.87 ± 1.1 ?M ( 14 ). Furthermore, tRA-induction of NIS mRNA did not require de novo protein synthesis, because co-treatment of tRA and cycloheximide did not influence NIS mRNA expression (data not shown). These pharmacological data, as well as our previous studies in which a functional RARE was not identified in the NIS gene locus or adjacent sequences ( 14 ), suggest that tRA treatment induces NIS expression in MCF-7 cells by modulating the PI3K signal transduction pathway. We further investigated the involvement of PI3K in NIS induction by tRA, by utilizing siRNA targeting p85?, one of the regulatory subunit of class IA PI3Ks. Knockdown of p85? significantly decreased the NIS mRNA induced by tRA compared to the control cells ( Fig 3C ).  RAR?2 and RXR? forms a complex with p85? To determine the mechanism of PI3K activation by tRA, we investigated whether RAR?2 and RXR? directly interact with p85?, by performing co-immunoprecipitation and “pull-down” assays. Immunoprecipitation experiments using COS-7 cells transfected with RAR?2, p85? and RXR? demonstrated a direct interaction between RAR?2 and p85? in a tRA ligand-independent manner ( Fig 4A ). Conversely, a similar stable interaction between RAR?2 and p85? was observed with immunoprecipitation performed with anti-p85? antibody ( Fig 4B ). These finding demonstrate direct ligand-independent binding of RAR?2 and p85?. We then examined the interaction between RXR? and p85? in a cell-free system by performing a “pull-down” assay using GST- p85? fusion protein. GST-p85? fusion protein bound to the human recombinant RXR?, but GST alone did not. Interestingly, both pan-RAR and -RXR antagonist inhibited the binding of RXR? to p85? ( Fig 4D ). This is consistent with findings from the functional studies using pharmacological antagonists that blocked tRA-induced NIS expression ( Fig 1B ). Furthermore, using the co-immunoprecipitation assay with endogenous p85? and RXR? from cell lysates of MCF-7 cells, we found that tRA increases the association of p85? and RXR? ( Fig 4C ).  RAR?2 and RXR? forms a complex with p85? To determine the mechanism of PI3K activation by tRA, we investigated whether RAR?2 and RXR? directly interact with p85?, by performing co-immunoprecipitation and “pull-down” assays. Immunoprecipitation experiments using COS-7 cells transfected with RAR?2, p85? and RXR? demonstrated a direct interaction between RAR?2 and p85? in a tRA ligand-independent manner ( Fig 4A ). Conversely, a similar stable interaction between RAR?2 and p85? was observed with immunoprecipitation performed with anti-p85? antibody ( Fig 4B ). These finding demonstrate direct ligand-independent binding of RAR?2 and p85?. We then examined the interaction between RXR? and p85? in a cell-free system by performing a “pull-down” assay using GST- p85? fusion protein. GST-p85? fusion protein bound to the human recombinant RXR?, but GST alone did not. Interestingly, both pan-RAR and -RXR antagonist inhibited the binding of RXR? to p85? ( Fig 4D ). This is consistent with findings from the functional studies using pharmacological antagonists that blocked tRA-induced NIS expression ( Fig 1B ). Furthermore, using the co-immunoprecipitation assay with endogenous p85? and RXR? from cell lysates of MCF-7 cells, we found that tRA increases the association of p85? and RXR? ( Fig 4C ).  Akt, downstream of PI3K pathway, is rapidly activated after treatment with tRA in MCF-7 cells Several nuclear receptors have been shown to rapidly activate Akt following PI3K activation. We determined whether tRA activates Akt in MCF-7 cells. The cells were serum-starved for 24–48 h before tRA treatment. Treatment with 1 ?M tRA rapidly increased Ser-473 phosphorylation of Akt at 5-10 min and then decreased to the basal level at 20 min ( Fig 5A ). Treatment with an Akt inhibitor VIII, an isozyme-specific inhibitor that inhibits Akt1 and Akt2 selectively, reduced NIS mRNA induced by tRA ( Fig 5B ). Combining Akt inhibition with PI3 kinase inhibition did not further reduce NIS mRNA ( Fig 5B ). High concentrations of Akt inhibitor VIII (IC50 4.5 ?M) inhibits tRA-induced iodide uptake in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 5C ). Combination treatment of Akt1 and Akt2 siRNAs in MCF-7 cells also decreased tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression about 25%, but it was not a significant reduction ( Fig 5D ). We also performed a selective knockdown of Akt1 or Akt2 separately, but there was a trend in these studies towards increased NIS mRNA induced by tRA (data not shown).  Akt, downstream of PI3K pathway, is rapidly activated after treatment with tRA in MCF-7 cells Several nuclear receptors have been shown to rapidly activate Akt following PI3K activation. We determined whether tRA activates Akt in MCF-7 cells. The cells were serum-starved for 24–48 h before tRA treatment. Treatment with 1 ?M tRA rapidly increased Ser-473 phosphorylation of Akt at 5-10 min and then decreased to the basal level at 20 min ( Fig 5A ). Treatment with an Akt inhibitor VIII, an isozyme-specific inhibitor that inhibits Akt1 and Akt2 selectively, reduced NIS mRNA induced by tRA ( Fig 5B ). Combining Akt inhibition with PI3 kinase inhibition did not further reduce NIS mRNA ( Fig 5B ). High concentrations of Akt inhibitor VIII (IC50 4.5 ?M) inhibits tRA-induced iodide uptake in MCF-7 cells ( Fig 5C ). Combination treatment of Akt1 and Akt2 siRNAs in MCF-7 cells also decreased tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression about 25%, but it was not a significant reduction ( Fig 5D ). We also performed a selective knockdown of Akt1 or Akt2 separately, but there was a trend in these studies towards increased NIS mRNA induced by tRA (data not shown).  Discussion A high fraction, approximately 70%, of breast cancers express NIS, but functional iodide concentration is rare ( 4 , 5 ). Selective induction of NIS provides the potential for developing NIS-mediated radionuclide therapy as a safe and effective treatment for breast cancer. Baseline iodide transport in breast cancer, however, is insufficient and stimulation of expression is necessary. Identification of the mechanism(s) of RA induction of NIS expression is essential to determine approaches to augment functional uptake. The involvement of signal transduction pathways, including PI3K, in NIS induction in breast cancer has been suggested by several previous studies ( 15 , 16 ). The current study shows that liganded RAR directly induces the rapid activation of PI3K/Akt pathway, leading to the activation of a yet unknown transcription factor, which then induces NIS mRNA expression ( Fig 6 ). The activation of PI3K/Akt has been reported by other nuclear receptors, including estrogen, thyroid hormone and glucocorticoid receptors ( 20 - 23 , 30 , 31 ). Recently, it has been reported that RA can activate PI3K/Akt pathway through interaction between RAR? and p85? ( 22 , 32 ). In this study, we have identified a novel ligand-dependent interaction between RAR?2, RXR? and p85?. Ligand binding in MCF7 cells facilitates the association of RXR?, subsequently activating PI3K and Akt. Although we were able to observe ligand-dependent interaction of RXR? and p85? by immunoprecipitation assay, we weren't able to observe the same result in GST-p85? pull-down assay. This may be due to the differences between the in vitro and in vivo conditions. The interaction between RAR?2 and p85?, however, was ligand-independent. This finding is consistent with previous reports showing the interaction of thyroid hormone receptor and RAR? with p85? ( 20 , 22 ). Inhibitor for PI3K and Akt, as well as siRNAs for p85? and Akt1/Akt2 decreased tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression. We have also found that Akt was rapidly phosphorylated within 5-10 minutes after tRA stimulation. These results indicate that the rapid activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway by tRA led to an increase in NIS mRNA expression and iodide uptake. Several studies have shown that tRA has a negative effects on PI3K activity in MCF-7 cells ( 33 , 34 ). One group showed that long-term treatment with tRA induced growth inhibition of MCF-7 cells, mediated by down regulation of IRS-1/PI3K/Akt pathway ( 33 ). The different influences of tRA on PI3K may be due to short-term rather than long-term treatment. Inhibition of tRA-induction of NIS required high concentrations of the Akt inhibitor. The IC50 for Akt inhibitor VIII utilizing the in vitro kinase assay, has been reported to be 58 nM and 210 nM for Akt1 and Akt2, respectively ( 35 ). Even the high concentration of Akt inhibitor VIII, 10 ?M, only inhibited NIS mRNA expression by 50%. This indicates that Akt is likely not the only pathway required for the NIS induction by tRA. Indeed, our previous study using various kinds of signal transduction inhibitors showed that JAK, Rac and p38 inhibitors also partially inhibited the induction of NIS by tRA ( 14 ). Akt inhibition also reduced iodide uptake, suggesting actions of Akt activation on NIS protein processing or membrane insertion. The combination knockdown of Akt1 and Akt2 decreased the NIS expression, but knockdown of each Akt1 or Akt2 did not decrease but rather increased the tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression. Blocking either Akt1 or Akt2 pathway may activate the other pathway and increase the overall Akt activation, resulting in an increase in NIS expression. Growing evidence shows that rapid nongenomic actions of nuclear receptors are initiated outside the nucleus, however, considerable controversy about these actions remain ( 11 , 13 , 36 ). Transfection of a chimeric RAR?, which was targeted to plasma membrane, in mouse embryonic fibroblast-RAR(???)L-/L- null cells and COS-7 cells resulted in strong activation of PI3K/Akt signaling, indicating that interaction of RAR? and p85? can occur at the plasma membrane ( 22 ). The interaction among RAR?2, RXR? and p85? might also take place in the cytoplasm or near the plasma membrane, even though p85? is localized in both cytoplasm and nucleus. Phosphorylation of RAR? in promyelocytic leukemia cells reduces transcriptional activation, and RAR/RXR phosphorylation may influence signal transduction ( 37 ). Further studies are required to determine the underlying mechanism. Due to their role in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation in preclinical models, retinoids are being extensively evaluated in clinical trials of cancer prevention and therapy, including breast cancer ( 8 ). Retinoid receptors are expressed in normal and malignant epithelial breast cells and are critical for normal development. It has been suggested that biological effects of tRA are partially mediated through multiple signal transduction pathways. These nongenomic actions of RAR? may play an important role in indirectly regulating gene expression, not only for NIS induction but also for other tRA-regulated influences on cancer growth and differentiation.  Discussion A high fraction, approximately 70%, of breast cancers express NIS, but functional iodide concentration is rare ( 4 , 5 ). Selective induction of NIS provides the potential for developing NIS-mediated radionuclide therapy as a safe and effective treatment for breast cancer. Baseline iodide transport in breast cancer, however, is insufficient and stimulation of expression is necessary. Identification of the mechanism(s) of RA induction of NIS expression is essential to determine approaches to augment functional uptake. The involvement of signal transduction pathways, including PI3K, in NIS induction in breast cancer has been suggested by several previous studies ( 15 , 16 ). The current study shows that liganded RAR directly induces the rapid activation of PI3K/Akt pathway, leading to the activation of a yet unknown transcription factor, which then induces NIS mRNA expression ( Fig 6 ). The activation of PI3K/Akt has been reported by other nuclear receptors, including estrogen, thyroid hormone and glucocorticoid receptors ( 20 - 23 , 30 , 31 ). Recently, it has been reported that RA can activate PI3K/Akt pathway through interaction between RAR? and p85? ( 22 , 32 ). In this study, we have identified a novel ligand-dependent interaction between RAR?2, RXR? and p85?. Ligand binding in MCF7 cells facilitates the association of RXR?, subsequently activating PI3K and Akt. Although we were able to observe ligand-dependent interaction of RXR? and p85? by immunoprecipitation assay, we weren't able to observe the same result in GST-p85? pull-down assay. This may be due to the differences between the in vitro and in vivo conditions. The interaction between RAR?2 and p85?, however, was ligand-independent. This finding is consistent with previous reports showing the interaction of thyroid hormone receptor and RAR? with p85? ( 20 , 22 ). Inhibitor for PI3K and Akt, as well as siRNAs for p85? and Akt1/Akt2 decreased tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression. We have also found that Akt was rapidly phosphorylated within 5-10 minutes after tRA stimulation. These results indicate that the rapid activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway by tRA led to an increase in NIS mRNA expression and iodide uptake. Several studies have shown that tRA has a negative effects on PI3K activity in MCF-7 cells ( 33 , 34 ). One group showed that long-term treatment with tRA induced growth inhibition of MCF-7 cells, mediated by down regulation of IRS-1/PI3K/Akt pathway ( 33 ). The different influences of tRA on PI3K may be due to short-term rather than long-term treatment. Inhibition of tRA-induction of NIS required high concentrations of the Akt inhibitor. The IC50 for Akt inhibitor VIII utilizing the in vitro kinase assay, has been reported to be 58 nM and 210 nM for Akt1 and Akt2, respectively ( 35 ). Even the high concentration of Akt inhibitor VIII, 10 ?M, only inhibited NIS mRNA expression by 50%. This indicates that Akt is likely not the only pathway required for the NIS induction by tRA. Indeed, our previous study using various kinds of signal transduction inhibitors showed that JAK, Rac and p38 inhibitors also partially inhibited the induction of NIS by tRA ( 14 ). Akt inhibition also reduced iodide uptake, suggesting actions of Akt activation on NIS protein processing or membrane insertion. The combination knockdown of Akt1 and Akt2 decreased the NIS expression, but knockdown of each Akt1 or Akt2 did not decrease but rather increased the tRA-induced NIS mRNA expression. Blocking either Akt1 or Akt2 pathway may activate the other pathway and increase the overall Akt activation, resulting in an increase in NIS expression. Growing evidence shows that rapid nongenomic actions of nuclear receptors are initiated outside the nucleus, however, considerable controversy about these actions remain ( 11 , 13 , 36 ). Transfection of a chimeric RAR?, which was targeted to plasma membrane, in mouse embryonic fibroblast-RAR(???)L-/L- null cells and COS-7 cells resulted in strong activation of PI3K/Akt signaling, indicating that interaction of RAR? and p85? can occur at the plasma membrane ( 22 ). The interaction among RAR?2, RXR? and p85? might also take place in the cytoplasm or near the plasma membrane, even though p85? is localized in both cytoplasm and nucleus. Phosphorylation of RAR? in promyelocytic leukemia cells reduces transcriptional activation, and RAR/RXR phosphorylation may influence signal transduction ( 37 ). Further studies are required to determine the underlying mechanism. Due to their role in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation in preclinical models, retinoids are being extensively evaluated in clinical trials of cancer prevention and therapy, including breast cancer ( 8 ). Retinoid receptors are expressed in normal and malignant epithelial breast cells and are critical for normal development. It has been suggested that biological effects of tRA are partially mediated through multiple signal transduction pathways. These nongenomic actions of RAR? may play an important role in indirectly regulating gene expression, not only for NIS induction but also for other tRA-regulated influences on cancer growth and differentiation.  Supplementary Material SupplData  Supplementary Material SupplData  Figures Figure 1 Influence of retinoids on NIS mRNA expression and iodide uptake in MCF-7 cells. A . Response to treatment with natural and synthetic RAR/RXR ligands. MCF7 cells were incubated with each ligand at a concentration of 1 ?M for 24 h and iodide uptake was measured. Perchlorate (ClO4) (30 ?M) is a specific inhibitor of NIS function, and was used to determine NIS-independent 125I-transport. *, statistical significane at a P value of <0.05; NS, not significant. B . pan-RAR and -RXR antagonists block the iodide uptake induced by tRA and 9cRA. MCF7 cells were incubated with a combination of RA (0.1 ?M) and an antagonist (5 ?M) for 24 h and iodide uptake was measured. C . Effect of RAR/RXR ligands on NIS mRNA expression. MCF7 cells were incubated with each ligand at a concentration of 1 ?M for 12 h, and RT-qPCR of NIS and GAPDH mRNA was performed. The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Figure 2 RAR?2 and RXR? are required for NIS induction by tRA. A . Schematic representation of RAR? variants expressed in MCF-7 cells. B . Stable transfection (Tx) of RAR?2 and ?4 expression vectors. RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH mRNA was performed with transfected cells treated with or without tRA (1 ?M) for 12 h (left panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. *, statistical significance from empty vector transfected cells ( P <0.01). RT-PCR confirming the expression of RAR? variants in stable transfected cells (right panel). Lower right panel shows the position of PCR primers used in B. RAR?2 primers detect RAR?2 only (left arrow below RAR?2), while RAR? primers detect both ?2 and ?4 (right arrow below both RAR?2 and ?4). C . MCF-7 cells transfected with siRNAs against RAR?2 and/or RXR? were treated with 1 ?M tRA for 12 h and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed (left panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Control siRNA; non-targeting siRNAs; *, statistical significance compared to control ( P <0.01). Efficiency of the knockdown is shown by RT-PCR of RAR?2, RXR? and ?-actin mRNA (right panel). Figure 3 The PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, blocks NIS induction by tRA in MCF-7 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. A . LY294002 blocks tRA-induction of NIS mRNA. Cells were incubated with tRA (1 ?M) with/without 10 ?M LY294002 for indicated time and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed. B . LY294002 blocks tRA-induction of NIS protein expression in a dose-dependent fashion. Cells were incubated with 1 ?M tRA with and without the indicated concentration of LY294002 for 24 h. The postnuclear membrane fraction was prepared with the tRA and LY294002 treated cells. Protein (30 ?g) was applied to each lane for Western blot analysis, position of NIS protein shown by arrow. The same blot was stripped and incubated with ?-actin antibody. C . MCF-7 cells transfected with p85? siRNA were treated with/without tRA (1 ?M) for 12 h and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed (left panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Control siRNA; non-targeting siRNAs; *, statistical significance compared to control ( P <0.01). Efficiency of the knockdown is shown by RT-PCR of p85? and ?-actin (right panel). Figure 4 RAR?2 and RXR? interact with p85?. A and B . COS-7 cells were grown in 100 mm culture dishes and transfected with the indicated expression vector (total 4.5 ?g). Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were serum starved and treated with 1 ?M tRA for 30 min. Whole-cell extracts (3 mg) were immunoprecipitated with either anti-FLAG antibody (A) or anti-p85? antibody (B) and then immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. Immunoprecipitation with a goat anti-rabbit IgG was used to show the nonspecific binding, and the samples without immunoprecipitation (input) were used to confirm the expression of each protein. C . Increased association of RXR? with p85? by treatment with 1 ?M tRA in co-immunoprecipitation study. Cells were serum starved and treated with 1 ?M tRA for 30 min. Whole-cell extracts (3 mg) were immunoprecipitated with anti-p85? antibody and then immunoblotted with RXR? and p85?. D . Effect of natural and synthetic retinoids on human recombinant RXR? and p85? association in GST-p85? pull-down assay. RXR? was incubated with GST-p85? fusion protein in the presence of 1 ?M of an RXR ligand (9cRA and HX630), a pan-RAR antagonist (LE540) or a pan-RXR antagonist (HX531). Figure 5 Rapid activation of Akt is involved in tRA-induction of NIS. A . Time-dependent effects of treatment with 1 ?M tRA on Ser-473 phosphorylation of Akt. MCF-7 cells were serum-starved and treated with 1 ?M tRA for the indicated time period. Whole cell lysates (20 ?g) were used for Western blot analysis. Band density was measured by ImageJ software. B . Akt inhibitor VIII or PI3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 reduces RA-induction of NIS. MCF-7 cells were incubated with 1 ?M tRA and the addition of Akt and/or PI3kinase inhibitor (10 ?M) for 12 h, and then RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH were performed. The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. *, statistical significance compared to RA-treated cells ( P <0.01). C . Influence of the Akt inhibitor VIII at increasing concentration on iodide uptake in MCF7 cells (IC50 4.5 ?M). D. MCF-7 cells transfected with siRNAs targeted for Akt1 and Akt2 were treated with/without 1 ?M tRA for 12 h and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed (right panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Control siRNA, non-targeting siRNAs; NS, not significant. Efficiency of the knockdown is shown by RT-PCR of Akt 1/Akt2 and ?-actin (right panel). Figure 6 Model for the mechanisms of retinoid induction of NIS expression in MCF-7 cells. Factors that stimulate expression are shown with a “+” and those that inhibit are shown by a “-”.  Figures Figure 1 Influence of retinoids on NIS mRNA expression and iodide uptake in MCF-7 cells. A . Response to treatment with natural and synthetic RAR/RXR ligands. MCF7 cells were incubated with each ligand at a concentration of 1 ?M for 24 h and iodide uptake was measured. Perchlorate (ClO4) (30 ?M) is a specific inhibitor of NIS function, and was used to determine NIS-independent 125I-transport. *, statistical significane at a P value of <0.05; NS, not significant. B . pan-RAR and -RXR antagonists block the iodide uptake induced by tRA and 9cRA. MCF7 cells were incubated with a combination of RA (0.1 ?M) and an antagonist (5 ?M) for 24 h and iodide uptake was measured. C . Effect of RAR/RXR ligands on NIS mRNA expression. MCF7 cells were incubated with each ligand at a concentration of 1 ?M for 12 h, and RT-qPCR of NIS and GAPDH mRNA was performed. The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Figure 2 RAR?2 and RXR? are required for NIS induction by tRA. A . Schematic representation of RAR? variants expressed in MCF-7 cells. B . Stable transfection (Tx) of RAR?2 and ?4 expression vectors. RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH mRNA was performed with transfected cells treated with or without tRA (1 ?M) for 12 h (left panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. *, statistical significance from empty vector transfected cells ( P <0.01). RT-PCR confirming the expression of RAR? variants in stable transfected cells (right panel). Lower right panel shows the position of PCR primers used in B. RAR?2 primers detect RAR?2 only (left arrow below RAR?2), while RAR? primers detect both ?2 and ?4 (right arrow below both RAR?2 and ?4). C . MCF-7 cells transfected with siRNAs against RAR?2 and/or RXR? were treated with 1 ?M tRA for 12 h and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed (left panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Control siRNA; non-targeting siRNAs; *, statistical significance compared to control ( P <0.01). Efficiency of the knockdown is shown by RT-PCR of RAR?2, RXR? and ?-actin mRNA (right panel). Figure 3 The PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, blocks NIS induction by tRA in MCF-7 cells in a time- and dose-dependent manner. A . LY294002 blocks tRA-induction of NIS mRNA. Cells were incubated with tRA (1 ?M) with/without 10 ?M LY294002 for indicated time and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed. B . LY294002 blocks tRA-induction of NIS protein expression in a dose-dependent fashion. Cells were incubated with 1 ?M tRA with and without the indicated concentration of LY294002 for 24 h. The postnuclear membrane fraction was prepared with the tRA and LY294002 treated cells. Protein (30 ?g) was applied to each lane for Western blot analysis, position of NIS protein shown by arrow. The same blot was stripped and incubated with ?-actin antibody. C . MCF-7 cells transfected with p85? siRNA were treated with/without tRA (1 ?M) for 12 h and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed (left panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Control siRNA; non-targeting siRNAs; *, statistical significance compared to control ( P <0.01). Efficiency of the knockdown is shown by RT-PCR of p85? and ?-actin (right panel). Figure 4 RAR?2 and RXR? interact with p85?. A and B . COS-7 cells were grown in 100 mm culture dishes and transfected with the indicated expression vector (total 4.5 ?g). Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were serum starved and treated with 1 ?M tRA for 30 min. Whole-cell extracts (3 mg) were immunoprecipitated with either anti-FLAG antibody (A) or anti-p85? antibody (B) and then immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. Immunoprecipitation with a goat anti-rabbit IgG was used to show the nonspecific binding, and the samples without immunoprecipitation (input) were used to confirm the expression of each protein. C . Increased association of RXR? with p85? by treatment with 1 ?M tRA in co-immunoprecipitation study. Cells were serum starved and treated with 1 ?M tRA for 30 min. Whole-cell extracts (3 mg) were immunoprecipitated with anti-p85? antibody and then immunoblotted with RXR? and p85?. D . Effect of natural and synthetic retinoids on human recombinant RXR? and p85? association in GST-p85? pull-down assay. RXR? was incubated with GST-p85? fusion protein in the presence of 1 ?M of an RXR ligand (9cRA and HX630), a pan-RAR antagonist (LE540) or a pan-RXR antagonist (HX531). Figure 5 Rapid activation of Akt is involved in tRA-induction of NIS. A . Time-dependent effects of treatment with 1 ?M tRA on Ser-473 phosphorylation of Akt. MCF-7 cells were serum-starved and treated with 1 ?M tRA for the indicated time period. Whole cell lysates (20 ?g) were used for Western blot analysis. Band density was measured by ImageJ software. B . Akt inhibitor VIII or PI3 kinase inhibitor LY294002 reduces RA-induction of NIS. MCF-7 cells were incubated with 1 ?M tRA and the addition of Akt and/or PI3kinase inhibitor (10 ?M) for 12 h, and then RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH were performed. The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. *, statistical significance compared to RA-treated cells ( P <0.01). C . Influence of the Akt inhibitor VIII at increasing concentration on iodide uptake in MCF7 cells (IC50 4.5 ?M). D. MCF-7 cells transfected with siRNAs targeted for Akt1 and Akt2 were treated with/without 1 ?M tRA for 12 h and RT-qPCR for NIS and GAPDH was performed (right panel). The average ratio of NIS/GAPDH in untreated cells was set as 1. Control siRNA, non-targeting siRNAs; NS, not significant. Efficiency of the knockdown is shown by RT-PCR of Akt 1/Akt2 and ?-actin (right panel). Figure 6 Model for the mechanisms of retinoid induction of NIS expression in MCF-7 cells. Factors that stimulate expression are shown with a “+” and those that inhibit are shown by a “-”. 