The antiretroviral nucleoside analogue Abacavir reduces cell growth and promotes differentiation of human medulloblastoma cells Abacavir is one of the most efficacious nucleoside analogues, with a well-characterized inhibitory activity on reverse transcriptase enzymes of retroviral origin, and has been clinically approved for the treatment of AIDS. Recently, Abacavir has been shown to inhibit also the human telomerase activity. Telomerase activity seems to be required in essentially all tumours for the immortalization of a subset of cells, including cancer stem cells. In fact, many cancer cells are dependent on telomerase for their continued replication and therefore telomerase is an attractive target for cancer therapy. Telomerase expression is upregulated in primary primitive neuroectodermal tumours and in the majority of medulloblastomas suggesting that its activation is associated with the development of these diseases. Therefore, we decided to test Abacavir activity on human medulloblastoma cell lines with high telomerase activity. We report that exposure to Abacavir induces a dose-dependent decrease in the proliferation rate of medulloblastoma cells. This is associated with a cell accumulation in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle in the Daoy cell line, and with increased cell death in the D283-MED cell line, and is likely to be dependent on the inhibition of telomerase activity. Interestingly, both cell lines showed features of senescence after Abacavir treatment. Moreover, following Abacavir exposure we detected, by immunofluorescence staining, increased protein expression of the glial marker glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and the neuronal marker synaptophysin (SYN) in both medulloblastoma cell lines. In conclusion, our results suggest that Abacavir reduces proliferation and induces differentiation of human medulloblastoma cells through the downregulation of telomerase activity. Thus, using Abacavir, alone or in combination with current therapies, might be an effective therapeutic strategy for the treatment of medulloblastoma.  Material and Methods Cell cultures and Abacavir treatment The human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Daoy cell line was established from a desmoplastic medulloblastoma from a 4-year-old male and grows as attached polygonal cells with a population doubling time of 30,5 h (He et al. 20 ). D283-MED was established from the peritoneal metastasis of a 6-year-old male with medulloblastoma and grows as a mixed culture of both attached and suspension cells 21 . These cell lines were routinely cultured in DMEM (CellGro, Mediatech, Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biological, Norcross, GA) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air, according to the ATCC recommendations. Abacavir was purified from commercially available Ziagen (GlaxoWellcome) by Dr Raffaele La Montagna and dissolved in DMEM to make a 1mg/ml stock solution. Cells were plated at the initial density of 700 × 103/100mm diameter plate and 24h later were exposed to the drug. Cells were harvested by trypsinization at different time points and cell viability was assessed using the trypan blue dye exclusion method in a Burker chamber (three counts per sample). Cell cycle analysis For cell cycle analysis, 1 × 106-aliquots of cells were harvested and washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 70% ethanol and stored at 4°C until the analysis. Following centrifugation at 1000rpm, the resulting cell pellet was incubated, in the dark, in 0,3ml of freshly prepared PBS containing 0,02mg/ml propidium iodide and 0,25mg/ml ribonuclease A (Sigma, Sigma-Aldrich). The DNA content of the cells was analyzed using a FACStar Plus flow-cytometer (Beckton-Dickinson) (10000 events/sample). Telomerase activity assay Telomerase activity was determined by the telomeric repeat amplification protocol (TRAP) 22 . To this purpose, cells were treated with 750?M of Abacavir for 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 days and were washed once in PBS. Then the pellets (?1 × 105 cells) were suspended in 400?l of TRAPeze CHAPS lysis buffer (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA). The samples were incubated for 30 min on ice and then centrifugated for 30 min (14000 RPM, 4°C). The supernatant was collected, snap-frozen and stored at -80°C. Protein concentration of the extract was measured using the Quick Start Bradford Dye Reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc, Hercules, CA). For each sample 4?g of proteins were incubated with 75mM Tris-HCL (pH8.8 at 25°C), 20mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.01% Tween 20, 200?M dNTPs, 100ng of TS primer (5?-AATCCGTCGAGCAGAGTT-3?) in a thermocycler for 31 min at 30°C for the generation of telomeric repeats. After heating at 94°C for 5 min and cooling at 72°C, 2.5 U of Taq DNA polymerase (Fermentas, Life Sciences), 100ng ACX return primer (5?-GCGCGG(CTTACC)3CTAACC-3?), 100ng of NT internal control primer (5?-ATCGCTTCTCGGCCTTTT-3?), and 0,02amol of TSNT internal control (5?-AATCCGTCGAGCAGAGTTAAAAGGCCGAGAAGCGAT-3?) were added to a total reaction volume of 50?l. Thirty PCR cycles (94°C for 40 s, 56°C for 55 s and 72°C for 55s) were performed and the PCR products were electrophoresed on a 10% polyacrylamide nondenaturing gel in TBE. Electrophoresis was carried out at 200V in TBE at room temperature until the bromophenol blue just ran off the gel. Then, the gel was analyzed following silver staining according to Dalla Torre CA et al. 23 The appearance of a 6-nucleotide ladder starting at 50bp indicates the presence of telomerase activity. The TRAP assay included the amplification of an internal telomerase assay standard band (ITAS), a primer-dimer/PCR contamination control and a negative control from Daoy and D283-MED cell lines after heat inactivation (85°C for 10 min). Immunofluorescence detection of glial and neuronal differentiation markers After 96h of treatment with ABC, Daoy and D283-MED cells were fixed in 3.7% (v/v) formaldehyde/PBS and permeabilized with 90% methanol/PBS (v/v). Then, cells were incubated with 1?g/ml of monoclonal antibody against the glial marker GFAP or polyclonal antibody against the neuronal marker SYN (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), washed and incubated with secondary FITC-conjugated antibodies (1/1000, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). The samples were mounted in Vectashield (Vector laboratories) containing 4,6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole (DAPI) in order to visualize the nuclei, then analyzed by fluorescence microscopy. Real Time RT-PCR To analyze the expression levels of GFAP, SYN and hTERT mRNAs during the treatment of ABC, real-time RT-PCR was performed with Power SYBR green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster city, CA) in Real-Time PCR Systems 7500 Fast (Applied Biosystems, Foster city, CA). Daoy and D283-MED cells were harvested after 4, 8, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours of treatment with Abacavir (750?M) and total RNAs were extracted with Nucleospin RNA II (Macherey-Nagel) in diethyl pyrocarbonate-treated water. cDNA was synthetized with M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase RNase H- (Finnzymes, Finland) and 100ng random hexamers in a total volume of 20?l from 1?g of total RNA. For PCR the following primers were used: for GFAP (accession No.:NM_002055) forward 5?-TGGAAGCCGAGAACAACCT-3?, reverse 5?-CCTCCAGCGACTCAATCTTC-3?; for SYN (accession No.:NM_003179.1) forward 5?-GTGACCTCGGGACTCAACAC-3?, reverse 5?-AGCCTGTCTCCTTAAACACGAA-3? and for hTERT (accession No.:NM_198253) forward 5?-CGGAAGAGTGTCTGGAGCAA-3?, reverse 5?-GGATGAAGCGGAGTCTGGA-3?. Gene expression level was normalized to the value of the internal standard HPRT1 (accession No.:NM_000194) forward 5?-AGCCAGACTTTGTTGGATTTG-3?, reverse 5?-TTTACTGGCGATGTCAATAAG-3?, and the differences in gene expression were calculated by the standard ??Ct method. All the reactions were performed twice in triplicate and the specificity was assessed by analysis of the dissociation curve generated from each reaction and electrophoretic run on a 2% agarose gel. Senescence-associated ?-galactosidase activity SA-?-Gal activity was determinated using ?-galactosidase staining. Cells were washed in PBS, fixed for 3-5 min (room temperature) in 3% formaldehyde, washed, and incubated at 37°C (in absence of CO2) with fresh SA-?-Gal stain solution: 1 mg/ml of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl ?-D-galactoside (X-Gal) (Promega), 40 mM citric acid, sodium phosphate, pH 6.0, 5 mM potassium ferrocyanide, 5 mM potassium ferricyanide, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2. Staining was evident in 12-16 hr. Statistical analysis Data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of three independent experiments and statistical significance was evaluated using Student's t test. For each statistical analysis, the associated probability (p value) of <5% was considered significant. Statistical differences between controls and samples were indicated by * for P <0.05 or ** for P <0.01.  Cell cultures and Abacavir treatment The human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Daoy cell line was established from a desmoplastic medulloblastoma from a 4-year-old male and grows as attached polygonal cells with a population doubling time of 30,5 h (He et al. 20 ). D283-MED was established from the peritoneal metastasis of a 6-year-old male with medulloblastoma and grows as a mixed culture of both attached and suspension cells 21 . These cell lines were routinely cultured in DMEM (CellGro, Mediatech, Inc., Herndon, VA) supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (Atlanta Biological, Norcross, GA) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air, according to the ATCC recommendations. Abacavir was purified from commercially available Ziagen (GlaxoWellcome) by Dr Raffaele La Montagna and dissolved in DMEM to make a 1mg/ml stock solution. Cells were plated at the initial density of 700 × 103/100mm diameter plate and 24h later were exposed to the drug. Cells were harvested by trypsinization at different time points and cell viability was assessed using the trypan blue dye exclusion method in a Burker chamber (three counts per sample).  Cell cycle analysis For cell cycle analysis, 1 × 106-aliquots of cells were harvested and washed twice with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 70% ethanol and stored at 4°C until the analysis. Following centrifugation at 1000rpm, the resulting cell pellet was incubated, in the dark, in 0,3ml of freshly prepared PBS containing 0,02mg/ml propidium iodide and 0,25mg/ml ribonuclease A (Sigma, Sigma-Aldrich). The DNA content of the cells was analyzed using a FACStar Plus flow-cytometer (Beckton-Dickinson) (10000 events/sample).  Telomerase activity assay Telomerase activity was determined by the telomeric repeat amplification protocol (TRAP) 22 . To this purpose, cells were treated with 750?M of Abacavir for 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 days and were washed once in PBS. Then the pellets (?1 × 105 cells) were suspended in 400?l of TRAPeze CHAPS lysis buffer (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA). The samples were incubated for 30 min on ice and then centrifugated for 30 min (14000 RPM, 4°C). The supernatant was collected, snap-frozen and stored at -80°C. Protein concentration of the extract was measured using the Quick Start Bradford Dye Reagent (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc, Hercules, CA). For each sample 4?g of proteins were incubated with 75mM Tris-HCL (pH8.8 at 25°C), 20mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.01% Tween 20, 200?M dNTPs, 100ng of TS primer (5?-AATCCGTCGAGCAGAGTT-3?) in a thermocycler for 31 min at 30°C for the generation of telomeric repeats. After heating at 94°C for 5 min and cooling at 72°C, 2.5 U of Taq DNA polymerase (Fermentas, Life Sciences), 100ng ACX return primer (5?-GCGCGG(CTTACC)3CTAACC-3?), 100ng of NT internal control primer (5?-ATCGCTTCTCGGCCTTTT-3?), and 0,02amol of TSNT internal control (5?-AATCCGTCGAGCAGAGTTAAAAGGCCGAGAAGCGAT-3?) were added to a total reaction volume of 50?l. Thirty PCR cycles (94°C for 40 s, 56°C for 55 s and 72°C for 55s) were performed and the PCR products were electrophoresed on a 10% polyacrylamide nondenaturing gel in TBE. Electrophoresis was carried out at 200V in TBE at room temperature until the bromophenol blue just ran off the gel. Then, the gel was analyzed following silver staining according to Dalla Torre CA et al. 23 The appearance of a 6-nucleotide ladder starting at 50bp indicates the presence of telomerase activity. The TRAP assay included the amplification of an internal telomerase assay standard band (ITAS), a primer-dimer/PCR contamination control and a negative control from Daoy and D283-MED cell lines after heat inactivation (85°C for 10 min).  Immunofluorescence detection of glial and neuronal differentiation markers After 96h of treatment with ABC, Daoy and D283-MED cells were fixed in 3.7% (v/v) formaldehyde/PBS and permeabilized with 90% methanol/PBS (v/v). Then, cells were incubated with 1?g/ml of monoclonal antibody against the glial marker GFAP or polyclonal antibody against the neuronal marker SYN (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), washed and incubated with secondary FITC-conjugated antibodies (1/1000, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). The samples were mounted in Vectashield (Vector laboratories) containing 4,6-Diamidino-2-Phenylindole (DAPI) in order to visualize the nuclei, then analyzed by fluorescence microscopy.  Real Time RT-PCR To analyze the expression levels of GFAP, SYN and hTERT mRNAs during the treatment of ABC, real-time RT-PCR was performed with Power SYBR green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster city, CA) in Real-Time PCR Systems 7500 Fast (Applied Biosystems, Foster city, CA). Daoy and D283-MED cells were harvested after 4, 8, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours of treatment with Abacavir (750?M) and total RNAs were extracted with Nucleospin RNA II (Macherey-Nagel) in diethyl pyrocarbonate-treated water. cDNA was synthetized with M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase RNase H- (Finnzymes, Finland) and 100ng random hexamers in a total volume of 20?l from 1?g of total RNA. For PCR the following primers were used: for GFAP (accession No.:NM_002055) forward 5?-TGGAAGCCGAGAACAACCT-3?, reverse 5?-CCTCCAGCGACTCAATCTTC-3?; for SYN (accession No.:NM_003179.1) forward 5?-GTGACCTCGGGACTCAACAC-3?, reverse 5?-AGCCTGTCTCCTTAAACACGAA-3? and for hTERT (accession No.:NM_198253) forward 5?-CGGAAGAGTGTCTGGAGCAA-3?, reverse 5?-GGATGAAGCGGAGTCTGGA-3?. Gene expression level was normalized to the value of the internal standard HPRT1 (accession No.:NM_000194) forward 5?-AGCCAGACTTTGTTGGATTTG-3?, reverse 5?-TTTACTGGCGATGTCAATAAG-3?, and the differences in gene expression were calculated by the standard ??Ct method. All the reactions were performed twice in triplicate and the specificity was assessed by analysis of the dissociation curve generated from each reaction and electrophoretic run on a 2% agarose gel.  Senescence-associated ?-galactosidase activity SA-?-Gal activity was determinated using ?-galactosidase staining. Cells were washed in PBS, fixed for 3-5 min (room temperature) in 3% formaldehyde, washed, and incubated at 37°C (in absence of CO2) with fresh SA-?-Gal stain solution: 1 mg/ml of 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl ?-D-galactoside (X-Gal) (Promega), 40 mM citric acid, sodium phosphate, pH 6.0, 5 mM potassium ferrocyanide, 5 mM potassium ferricyanide, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2. Staining was evident in 12-16 hr.  Statistical analysis Data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of three independent experiments and statistical significance was evaluated using Student's t test. For each statistical analysis, the associated probability (p value) of <5% was considered significant. Statistical differences between controls and samples were indicated by * for P <0.05 or ** for P <0.01.  Results Abacavir inhibits the growth of medulloblastoma cells in vitro As a first step to test the effect of ABC in the human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED, we analyzed the growth rate of cells exposed to different doses of the drug compared with non-exposed controls. We decided to start with the doses used for the non nucleosidic RT inhibitor nevirapine, which has demonstrated cytotoxicity in vitro in melanoma and prostate cancer 24 . As shown in Figure 1a , a dose-dependent effect of ABC on the cell growth rate of cells was observed, with the maximal growth suppression at the 550-750?M dose range, an intermediate response at 350?M, and no suppressive effect below the 250?M dose (data not shown), in the cell lines tested. At the doses of 550 and 750?M of ABC we observed a massive decrease in cell density at early time points, which was accompanied by an evident change in morphology. Cells appeared much larger in size and grew as monolayer with evidence of neurite formations ( Fig. 1b ). Next, we analyzed by flow cytometry the cell cycle of cells treated with the different doses of ABC, in order to test whether the exposure to the drug has also effects on the cell cycle. Figure 2 shows the cell distribution across the phases of cell cycle at different time points during ABC treatment. At 48 h of exposure to ABC, Daoy cells accumulated in the S and G2/M phases of cell cycle, in a dose-dependent manner. At the maximal dose of the drug we observed: 32.3% in S phase, 37.3% in G2/M phase for ABC-treated cells vs 21.5% and 21.8% respectively for untreated cells. Interestingly, at 72 h interval, we observed a complete shift of treated cells into G2/M phase: 26.9% in S phase, 37.8% in G2/M phase vs 16.8% in S phase and 19.0% in G2/M phase in control cells and, after 2 weeks of treatment, ABC induced cell death ( Figure 2b ). The cytotoxic effect was more pronounced in D283-MED. In fact, as evidenced by FACS analysis, cells with a sub G1 DNA content accumulated after 48h of treatment with all doses of ABC. A maximal effect was observed with 750?M dose of ABC in both cell lines ( Figure 2b ). Therefore, we focused our studies on the 750?M dose of ABC. To test the effect of ABC and its eventual cytotoxicity on normal cells, we used primary cultures of rat neurons. We did not observe morphological changes such as loss of neuronal processes, at the doses of 550 and 750?M, as evidenced by the photographs in figure 1c obtained before and after exposure to 750?M ABC. Given that neurons are non proliferative cells, we have also tested whether ABC has effects in the cell cycle of the immortalized neuronal cell line, HT22, from mouse hippocampus. No effect was observed in the cell cycle profile of ABC-treated cells compared to untreated cells, also at the higher dose tested ( Fig. 2c ). Abacavir induces the downregulation of telomerase activity in medulloblastoma cells To assess the effect of ABC on telomerase activity, we performed a TRAP assay in both cell lines at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 days after treatment with 750?M of ABC. We found that the antiproliferative effect of ABC is accompanied by the inhibition of telomerase activity as evaluated by the decrease of the 6bp ladder beginning from 1 d of treatment ( Fig. 3a ). Interestingly, also the level of hTERT mRNA, encoding the catalytic subunit of telomerase, was downregulated as early as 1 d following ABC treatment, as shown by real-Time RT-PCR ( Fig. 3b ). This finding suggests that ABC might inhibit telomerase activity not only by acting as guanosine analogue in DNA synthesis at the telomeres, as previously reported 13 , but also through the downregulation of hTERT mRNA transcription. Exposure to Abacavir promotes differentiation in medulloblastoma cells According to Gao K. et al. 25 telomerase is repressed during lineage stem cell maturation in embryonic development and during differentiation of various immortal cells, 26 , 27 , 28 suggesting that differentiation is associated to the downregulation of telomerase activity. Therefore, we investigated whether ABC is able to influence also the process of differentiation in Daoy and D283-MED cells. Medulloblastoma cells express various markers of cell differentiation, such as those of the neuronal and glial lineage, but also of cartilage, muscle, fat and mesenchyme 29 , 30 . Furthermore, it was shown that adjuvant therapy can induce extensive or complete neuronal maturation in medulloblastoma in two medulloblastoma cases, suggesting that these tumour cells can differentiate 31 . Following ABC exposure, we detected in both cell lines analyzed, by immunofluorescence staining, increased protein expression of SYN and GFAP, which is one of the intermediate filaments found in mature normal astrocytes and differentiated glioma cells. SYN and GFAP increase became apparent in cells after 3 days of exposure to 550 and 750?M of ABC, as indicated in figure 4a . Whereas, at lower doses (350?M), the drug causes only a marginal increase in GFAP and SYN protein levels after 1 week (data not shown). As expected, no or low levels of protein expression were found, instead, in untreated cells. Real-Time RT-PCR confirmed the pattern of increased gene expression of both GFAP and SYN in Daoy cells following 2 days of exposure and in D283-MED at earlier time of treatment ( Fig. 4b ). These data are consistent with the morphologic changes and the neurite formation described above and showed in figure 1b . Abacavir induces senescence in medulloblastoma cell lines Telomerase inhibition gives rise in cells to a telomere-induced senescence that is triggered by the formation of critically short and dysfunctional telomeres 27 . Cellular senescence is a tumour suppressive mechanism that mediates the anticancer effects of many chemotherapies 32 . Interestingly, one of the morphologic changes that was observed in our ABC-treated cells is the flattening of cells, which is a typical morphologic change associated with cellular senescence 32 . By ?-galactosidase staining, we confirmed that cellular senescence was induced in D283-MED and Daoy cells by ABC in a time- and dose-dependent manner beginning from 1 week of treatment. Both cell lines showed a substantial senescent phenotype also at the dose of 350?M as shown in figure 4c .  Results Abacavir inhibits the growth of medulloblastoma cells in vitro As a first step to test the effect of ABC in the human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED, we analyzed the growth rate of cells exposed to different doses of the drug compared with non-exposed controls. We decided to start with the doses used for the non nucleosidic RT inhibitor nevirapine, which has demonstrated cytotoxicity in vitro in melanoma and prostate cancer 24 . As shown in Figure 1a , a dose-dependent effect of ABC on the cell growth rate of cells was observed, with the maximal growth suppression at the 550-750?M dose range, an intermediate response at 350?M, and no suppressive effect below the 250?M dose (data not shown), in the cell lines tested. At the doses of 550 and 750?M of ABC we observed a massive decrease in cell density at early time points, which was accompanied by an evident change in morphology. Cells appeared much larger in size and grew as monolayer with evidence of neurite formations ( Fig. 1b ). Next, we analyzed by flow cytometry the cell cycle of cells treated with the different doses of ABC, in order to test whether the exposure to the drug has also effects on the cell cycle. Figure 2 shows the cell distribution across the phases of cell cycle at different time points during ABC treatment. At 48 h of exposure to ABC, Daoy cells accumulated in the S and G2/M phases of cell cycle, in a dose-dependent manner. At the maximal dose of the drug we observed: 32.3% in S phase, 37.3% in G2/M phase for ABC-treated cells vs 21.5% and 21.8% respectively for untreated cells. Interestingly, at 72 h interval, we observed a complete shift of treated cells into G2/M phase: 26.9% in S phase, 37.8% in G2/M phase vs 16.8% in S phase and 19.0% in G2/M phase in control cells and, after 2 weeks of treatment, ABC induced cell death ( Figure 2b ). The cytotoxic effect was more pronounced in D283-MED. In fact, as evidenced by FACS analysis, cells with a sub G1 DNA content accumulated after 48h of treatment with all doses of ABC. A maximal effect was observed with 750?M dose of ABC in both cell lines ( Figure 2b ). Therefore, we focused our studies on the 750?M dose of ABC. To test the effect of ABC and its eventual cytotoxicity on normal cells, we used primary cultures of rat neurons. We did not observe morphological changes such as loss of neuronal processes, at the doses of 550 and 750?M, as evidenced by the photographs in figure 1c obtained before and after exposure to 750?M ABC. Given that neurons are non proliferative cells, we have also tested whether ABC has effects in the cell cycle of the immortalized neuronal cell line, HT22, from mouse hippocampus. No effect was observed in the cell cycle profile of ABC-treated cells compared to untreated cells, also at the higher dose tested ( Fig. 2c ). Abacavir induces the downregulation of telomerase activity in medulloblastoma cells To assess the effect of ABC on telomerase activity, we performed a TRAP assay in both cell lines at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 days after treatment with 750?M of ABC. We found that the antiproliferative effect of ABC is accompanied by the inhibition of telomerase activity as evaluated by the decrease of the 6bp ladder beginning from 1 d of treatment ( Fig. 3a ). Interestingly, also the level of hTERT mRNA, encoding the catalytic subunit of telomerase, was downregulated as early as 1 d following ABC treatment, as shown by real-Time RT-PCR ( Fig. 3b ). This finding suggests that ABC might inhibit telomerase activity not only by acting as guanosine analogue in DNA synthesis at the telomeres, as previously reported 13 , but also through the downregulation of hTERT mRNA transcription. Exposure to Abacavir promotes differentiation in medulloblastoma cells According to Gao K. et al. 25 telomerase is repressed during lineage stem cell maturation in embryonic development and during differentiation of various immortal cells, 26 , 27 , 28 suggesting that differentiation is associated to the downregulation of telomerase activity. Therefore, we investigated whether ABC is able to influence also the process of differentiation in Daoy and D283-MED cells. Medulloblastoma cells express various markers of cell differentiation, such as those of the neuronal and glial lineage, but also of cartilage, muscle, fat and mesenchyme 29 , 30 . Furthermore, it was shown that adjuvant therapy can induce extensive or complete neuronal maturation in medulloblastoma in two medulloblastoma cases, suggesting that these tumour cells can differentiate 31 . Following ABC exposure, we detected in both cell lines analyzed, by immunofluorescence staining, increased protein expression of SYN and GFAP, which is one of the intermediate filaments found in mature normal astrocytes and differentiated glioma cells. SYN and GFAP increase became apparent in cells after 3 days of exposure to 550 and 750?M of ABC, as indicated in figure 4a . Whereas, at lower doses (350?M), the drug causes only a marginal increase in GFAP and SYN protein levels after 1 week (data not shown). As expected, no or low levels of protein expression were found, instead, in untreated cells. Real-Time RT-PCR confirmed the pattern of increased gene expression of both GFAP and SYN in Daoy cells following 2 days of exposure and in D283-MED at earlier time of treatment ( Fig. 4b ). These data are consistent with the morphologic changes and the neurite formation described above and showed in figure 1b . Abacavir induces senescence in medulloblastoma cell lines Telomerase inhibition gives rise in cells to a telomere-induced senescence that is triggered by the formation of critically short and dysfunctional telomeres 27 . Cellular senescence is a tumour suppressive mechanism that mediates the anticancer effects of many chemotherapies 32 . Interestingly, one of the morphologic changes that was observed in our ABC-treated cells is the flattening of cells, which is a typical morphologic change associated with cellular senescence 32 . By ?-galactosidase staining, we confirmed that cellular senescence was induced in D283-MED and Daoy cells by ABC in a time- and dose-dependent manner beginning from 1 week of treatment. Both cell lines showed a substantial senescent phenotype also at the dose of 350?M as shown in figure 4c .  Abacavir inhibits the growth of medulloblastoma cells in vitro As a first step to test the effect of ABC in the human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED, we analyzed the growth rate of cells exposed to different doses of the drug compared with non-exposed controls. We decided to start with the doses used for the non nucleosidic RT inhibitor nevirapine, which has demonstrated cytotoxicity in vitro in melanoma and prostate cancer 24 . As shown in Figure 1a , a dose-dependent effect of ABC on the cell growth rate of cells was observed, with the maximal growth suppression at the 550-750?M dose range, an intermediate response at 350?M, and no suppressive effect below the 250?M dose (data not shown), in the cell lines tested. At the doses of 550 and 750?M of ABC we observed a massive decrease in cell density at early time points, which was accompanied by an evident change in morphology. Cells appeared much larger in size and grew as monolayer with evidence of neurite formations ( Fig. 1b ). Next, we analyzed by flow cytometry the cell cycle of cells treated with the different doses of ABC, in order to test whether the exposure to the drug has also effects on the cell cycle. Figure 2 shows the cell distribution across the phases of cell cycle at different time points during ABC treatment. At 48 h of exposure to ABC, Daoy cells accumulated in the S and G2/M phases of cell cycle, in a dose-dependent manner. At the maximal dose of the drug we observed: 32.3% in S phase, 37.3% in G2/M phase for ABC-treated cells vs 21.5% and 21.8% respectively for untreated cells. Interestingly, at 72 h interval, we observed a complete shift of treated cells into G2/M phase: 26.9% in S phase, 37.8% in G2/M phase vs 16.8% in S phase and 19.0% in G2/M phase in control cells and, after 2 weeks of treatment, ABC induced cell death ( Figure 2b ). The cytotoxic effect was more pronounced in D283-MED. In fact, as evidenced by FACS analysis, cells with a sub G1 DNA content accumulated after 48h of treatment with all doses of ABC. A maximal effect was observed with 750?M dose of ABC in both cell lines ( Figure 2b ). Therefore, we focused our studies on the 750?M dose of ABC. To test the effect of ABC and its eventual cytotoxicity on normal cells, we used primary cultures of rat neurons. We did not observe morphological changes such as loss of neuronal processes, at the doses of 550 and 750?M, as evidenced by the photographs in figure 1c obtained before and after exposure to 750?M ABC. Given that neurons are non proliferative cells, we have also tested whether ABC has effects in the cell cycle of the immortalized neuronal cell line, HT22, from mouse hippocampus. No effect was observed in the cell cycle profile of ABC-treated cells compared to untreated cells, also at the higher dose tested ( Fig. 2c ).  Abacavir inhibits the growth of medulloblastoma cells in vitro As a first step to test the effect of ABC in the human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED, we analyzed the growth rate of cells exposed to different doses of the drug compared with non-exposed controls. We decided to start with the doses used for the non nucleosidic RT inhibitor nevirapine, which has demonstrated cytotoxicity in vitro in melanoma and prostate cancer 24 . As shown in Figure 1a , a dose-dependent effect of ABC on the cell growth rate of cells was observed, with the maximal growth suppression at the 550-750?M dose range, an intermediate response at 350?M, and no suppressive effect below the 250?M dose (data not shown), in the cell lines tested. At the doses of 550 and 750?M of ABC we observed a massive decrease in cell density at early time points, which was accompanied by an evident change in morphology. Cells appeared much larger in size and grew as monolayer with evidence of neurite formations ( Fig. 1b ). Next, we analyzed by flow cytometry the cell cycle of cells treated with the different doses of ABC, in order to test whether the exposure to the drug has also effects on the cell cycle. Figure 2 shows the cell distribution across the phases of cell cycle at different time points during ABC treatment. At 48 h of exposure to ABC, Daoy cells accumulated in the S and G2/M phases of cell cycle, in a dose-dependent manner. At the maximal dose of the drug we observed: 32.3% in S phase, 37.3% in G2/M phase for ABC-treated cells vs 21.5% and 21.8% respectively for untreated cells. Interestingly, at 72 h interval, we observed a complete shift of treated cells into G2/M phase: 26.9% in S phase, 37.8% in G2/M phase vs 16.8% in S phase and 19.0% in G2/M phase in control cells and, after 2 weeks of treatment, ABC induced cell death ( Figure 2b ). The cytotoxic effect was more pronounced in D283-MED. In fact, as evidenced by FACS analysis, cells with a sub G1 DNA content accumulated after 48h of treatment with all doses of ABC. A maximal effect was observed with 750?M dose of ABC in both cell lines ( Figure 2b ). Therefore, we focused our studies on the 750?M dose of ABC. To test the effect of ABC and its eventual cytotoxicity on normal cells, we used primary cultures of rat neurons. We did not observe morphological changes such as loss of neuronal processes, at the doses of 550 and 750?M, as evidenced by the photographs in figure 1c obtained before and after exposure to 750?M ABC. Given that neurons are non proliferative cells, we have also tested whether ABC has effects in the cell cycle of the immortalized neuronal cell line, HT22, from mouse hippocampus. No effect was observed in the cell cycle profile of ABC-treated cells compared to untreated cells, also at the higher dose tested ( Fig. 2c ).  Abacavir induces the downregulation of telomerase activity in medulloblastoma cells To assess the effect of ABC on telomerase activity, we performed a TRAP assay in both cell lines at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 days after treatment with 750?M of ABC. We found that the antiproliferative effect of ABC is accompanied by the inhibition of telomerase activity as evaluated by the decrease of the 6bp ladder beginning from 1 d of treatment ( Fig. 3a ). Interestingly, also the level of hTERT mRNA, encoding the catalytic subunit of telomerase, was downregulated as early as 1 d following ABC treatment, as shown by real-Time RT-PCR ( Fig. 3b ). This finding suggests that ABC might inhibit telomerase activity not only by acting as guanosine analogue in DNA synthesis at the telomeres, as previously reported 13 , but also through the downregulation of hTERT mRNA transcription.  Abacavir induces the downregulation of telomerase activity in medulloblastoma cells To assess the effect of ABC on telomerase activity, we performed a TRAP assay in both cell lines at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 days after treatment with 750?M of ABC. We found that the antiproliferative effect of ABC is accompanied by the inhibition of telomerase activity as evaluated by the decrease of the 6bp ladder beginning from 1 d of treatment ( Fig. 3a ). Interestingly, also the level of hTERT mRNA, encoding the catalytic subunit of telomerase, was downregulated as early as 1 d following ABC treatment, as shown by real-Time RT-PCR ( Fig. 3b ). This finding suggests that ABC might inhibit telomerase activity not only by acting as guanosine analogue in DNA synthesis at the telomeres, as previously reported 13 , but also through the downregulation of hTERT mRNA transcription.  Exposure to Abacavir promotes differentiation in medulloblastoma cells According to Gao K. et al. 25 telomerase is repressed during lineage stem cell maturation in embryonic development and during differentiation of various immortal cells, 26 , 27 , 28 suggesting that differentiation is associated to the downregulation of telomerase activity. Therefore, we investigated whether ABC is able to influence also the process of differentiation in Daoy and D283-MED cells. Medulloblastoma cells express various markers of cell differentiation, such as those of the neuronal and glial lineage, but also of cartilage, muscle, fat and mesenchyme 29 , 30 . Furthermore, it was shown that adjuvant therapy can induce extensive or complete neuronal maturation in medulloblastoma in two medulloblastoma cases, suggesting that these tumour cells can differentiate 31 . Following ABC exposure, we detected in both cell lines analyzed, by immunofluorescence staining, increased protein expression of SYN and GFAP, which is one of the intermediate filaments found in mature normal astrocytes and differentiated glioma cells. SYN and GFAP increase became apparent in cells after 3 days of exposure to 550 and 750?M of ABC, as indicated in figure 4a . Whereas, at lower doses (350?M), the drug causes only a marginal increase in GFAP and SYN protein levels after 1 week (data not shown). As expected, no or low levels of protein expression were found, instead, in untreated cells. Real-Time RT-PCR confirmed the pattern of increased gene expression of both GFAP and SYN in Daoy cells following 2 days of exposure and in D283-MED at earlier time of treatment ( Fig. 4b ). These data are consistent with the morphologic changes and the neurite formation described above and showed in figure 1b .  Exposure to Abacavir promotes differentiation in medulloblastoma cells According to Gao K. et al. 25 telomerase is repressed during lineage stem cell maturation in embryonic development and during differentiation of various immortal cells, 26 , 27 , 28 suggesting that differentiation is associated to the downregulation of telomerase activity. Therefore, we investigated whether ABC is able to influence also the process of differentiation in Daoy and D283-MED cells. Medulloblastoma cells express various markers of cell differentiation, such as those of the neuronal and glial lineage, but also of cartilage, muscle, fat and mesenchyme 29 , 30 . Furthermore, it was shown that adjuvant therapy can induce extensive or complete neuronal maturation in medulloblastoma in two medulloblastoma cases, suggesting that these tumour cells can differentiate 31 . Following ABC exposure, we detected in both cell lines analyzed, by immunofluorescence staining, increased protein expression of SYN and GFAP, which is one of the intermediate filaments found in mature normal astrocytes and differentiated glioma cells. SYN and GFAP increase became apparent in cells after 3 days of exposure to 550 and 750?M of ABC, as indicated in figure 4a . Whereas, at lower doses (350?M), the drug causes only a marginal increase in GFAP and SYN protein levels after 1 week (data not shown). As expected, no or low levels of protein expression were found, instead, in untreated cells. Real-Time RT-PCR confirmed the pattern of increased gene expression of both GFAP and SYN in Daoy cells following 2 days of exposure and in D283-MED at earlier time of treatment ( Fig. 4b ). These data are consistent with the morphologic changes and the neurite formation described above and showed in figure 1b .  Abacavir induces senescence in medulloblastoma cell lines Telomerase inhibition gives rise in cells to a telomere-induced senescence that is triggered by the formation of critically short and dysfunctional telomeres 27 . Cellular senescence is a tumour suppressive mechanism that mediates the anticancer effects of many chemotherapies 32 . Interestingly, one of the morphologic changes that was observed in our ABC-treated cells is the flattening of cells, which is a typical morphologic change associated with cellular senescence 32 . By ?-galactosidase staining, we confirmed that cellular senescence was induced in D283-MED and Daoy cells by ABC in a time- and dose-dependent manner beginning from 1 week of treatment. Both cell lines showed a substantial senescent phenotype also at the dose of 350?M as shown in figure 4c .  Abacavir induces senescence in medulloblastoma cell lines Telomerase inhibition gives rise in cells to a telomere-induced senescence that is triggered by the formation of critically short and dysfunctional telomeres 27 . Cellular senescence is a tumour suppressive mechanism that mediates the anticancer effects of many chemotherapies 32 . Interestingly, one of the morphologic changes that was observed in our ABC-treated cells is the flattening of cells, which is a typical morphologic change associated with cellular senescence 32 . By ?-galactosidase staining, we confirmed that cellular senescence was induced in D283-MED and Daoy cells by ABC in a time- and dose-dependent manner beginning from 1 week of treatment. Both cell lines showed a substantial senescent phenotype also at the dose of 350?M as shown in figure 4c .  Discussion Telomerase is a relatively specific cancer target as normal body cells express little or no telomerase for most of their lifespan and generally have longer telomeres compared with tumour cells 1 . ABC is a specific RT inhibitor that has been approved for clinical use in the treatment of AIDS and is reported to be well tolerated in patients 33 . Furthermore, it has been shown that ABC exerts an inhibitory effect on the telomerase activity. In this report, we showed that ABC inhibits cell growth of the human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED and this effect is associated with the downregulation of telomerase activity. To date, two major therapeutic approaches against telomerase-positive tumour cells are in clinical trials. GRN163L, a direct telomerase inhibitor, is in trial for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, multiple myeloma, solid tumours and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 34 . Several therapeutic vaccines targeting hTERT are in, or have completed, trials for the treatment of leukaemia and renal, prostate, lung, skin, pancreatic and breast cancer 1 . Compared with other tested compounds targeting the telomerase, or telomerase therapeutic vaccines, which are currently in clinical trials, ABC has been used for many years for the treatment of AIDS 10 , 35 . Therefore, the prospect of using this drug in cancer therapy would have obvious advantages given its favourable safety profile and its epidemiological record of generally good tolerance to continued administration. Indeed, we did not observe cellular toxicity, following ABC treatment, in two normal neuronal cell types of murine origin. Here, we observed that the ABC-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation in D283-MED cells is accompanied by a dramatic increase in cell death. This is in accordance to another study showing that morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP7) induces telomerase inhibition, telomere shortening, and cell death by a mechanism involving the repression of hTERT, in cervical cancer cells. 36 Whereas, in the Daoy cell line, along with the decrease in cell proliferation, we observed a significant cell accumulation in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, following exposure to ABC. ABC did neither cause significant cell death nor apoptosis as indicated by FACS measurement of cells with hypodiploid DNA content, suggesting that decreased cell proliferation rather reflects a progressive withdrawal from the cell cycle. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex that adds telomeric repeats onto the ends of chromosomes during the replicative phase of the cell cycle. In fact, the highest levels of telomerase activity are found in cells that are in the S-phase of the cell cycle, whereas cells in G2/M phase have little or no telomerase activity 37 . This is in accordance to other studies showing that the inhibition of telomerase activity is associated to a block in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle 38 . One of these studies showed that phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate induced a cell cycle arrest in G2/M in asynchronously growing NSCLC cells and conferred morphological and biochemical features of senescence, including downregulation of telomerase activity 39 . Our result show that ABC treatment leads Daoy cells to arrest in G2/M whereas it induces cell death in D283-MED, likely through the inhibition of the telomerase. However, further studies to examine the molecules implicated in the regulation of the G2/M phase checkpoint and in the cell death programme are crucial to understand the molecular mechanism of ABC, and they are currently under investigation in our laboratory. Consistent with the central role of telomere shortening in the replicative senescence programme 39 , 32 , 40 , ABC was also able to induce cellular senescence in both medulloblastoma cell lines. This is very interesting considering that senescence is a powerful tumour suppressive mechanism. But whether the senescent phenotype is a direct consequence of telomere erosion, or rather it is due to telomere length-independent changes remains to be established. In fact, it has been reported that following telomerase repression other mechanisms that are independent from telomere erosion can trigger a damage response and abrupt cell-cycle arrest or death 1 , 41 , 42 . Moreover, the elevated expression of GFAP and SYN markers, both at mRNA and protein levels, along with the neurite formation observed in both cell lines following two weeks of treatment with ABC, suggested that a more differentiated phenotype had been induced. The induction of differentiation occurring in our experiments after ABC treatment is typical of others inhibitors of telomerase activity and is likely to be due to an altered pattern of gene expression 43 . According to Damm et al 43 , in fact, the drug-mediated telomerase inhibition in cancer cells has been reported to reduce proliferation and induce changes in gene expression, along with the appearance of senescence hallmarks. Our results are in accordance to another study, in which anticancer effects of aloe-emodin involve G2/M cell accumulation concomitant with the induction of differentiation 44 . In addition, retinoic acid derivatives showed induction of cell differentiation, apoptosis, and growth arrest in some medulloblastoma cells. In particular, the results demonstrated that cell growth arrest was the main mechanism by which RA inhibited cell proliferation in the medulloblastoma cell line Daoy, but not in the others (D283-MED and D341), in which it induces apoptosis. 45 Therefore it is possible that ABC inhibits cell proliferation, by G2/M block or cell death depending on cell type, and induce differentiation through the inhibition of telomerase activity. Even if the molecular mechanism by which ABC inhibits proliferation and induce differentiation are still to be clarified, the finding that ABC can induce the expression of differentiation markers in medulloblastoma cells suggests that it may attenuate the malignant and aggressive phenotype of transformed cells slowing the progression of disease. Molecular oncology studies, in fact, have shown that the genes regulating the differentiation process are not lost in malignant cells but the signals regulating cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation are defective. Thus, it is important to find agents that are able to restore the regulating machinery that will induce tumour cells to differentiate and revert their malignant phenotype. Interestingly, growth inhibition and increased sensitivity to anticancer drugs were observed in Daoy cells transfected with GFAP 46 . Such differentiation could also make tumour cells more responsive to normal growth regulatory signals or more sensitive to chemotherapy and other differentiation agents 47 . For instance, the remarkable success of all- trans -retinoic acid in producing complete remission in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia has attracted interest in differentiation as an alternative form of cancer chemotherapy 48 . Treatment with retinoids can also induce differentiation in astrocytes, together with telomerase activity downregulation and increase of cell sensitivity to taxol 49 . Another hurdle in the treatment of medulloblastoma is that the blood-brain barrier restricts the entry of hydrophilic and large lipophilic compounds into the brain 17 , 35 . The lipophilic nature of ABC, which enables it to pass through the blood-brain barrier more easily 50 , represents yet another advantage of its possible use for the treatment of medulloblastoma. Moreover, given its good tolerability, ABC treatment could be associated to current therapies used for medulloblastoma, including chemotherapeutic alkylating agent, such as cisplatinum and 1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea, or mitotic inhibitors, such as vincristine 17 , 51 . In conclusion, we suggest that the use of ABC, which is currently used in the treatment of AIDS, could be an effective therapeutic strategy, alone or in combination with current therapies, for the treatment of telomerase expressing tumours, such as human medulloblastomas.  Discussion Telomerase is a relatively specific cancer target as normal body cells express little or no telomerase for most of their lifespan and generally have longer telomeres compared with tumour cells 1 . ABC is a specific RT inhibitor that has been approved for clinical use in the treatment of AIDS and is reported to be well tolerated in patients 33 . Furthermore, it has been shown that ABC exerts an inhibitory effect on the telomerase activity. In this report, we showed that ABC inhibits cell growth of the human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED and this effect is associated with the downregulation of telomerase activity. To date, two major therapeutic approaches against telomerase-positive tumour cells are in clinical trials. GRN163L, a direct telomerase inhibitor, is in trial for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, multiple myeloma, solid tumours and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 34 . Several therapeutic vaccines targeting hTERT are in, or have completed, trials for the treatment of leukaemia and renal, prostate, lung, skin, pancreatic and breast cancer 1 . Compared with other tested compounds targeting the telomerase, or telomerase therapeutic vaccines, which are currently in clinical trials, ABC has been used for many years for the treatment of AIDS 10 , 35 . Therefore, the prospect of using this drug in cancer therapy would have obvious advantages given its favourable safety profile and its epidemiological record of generally good tolerance to continued administration. Indeed, we did not observe cellular toxicity, following ABC treatment, in two normal neuronal cell types of murine origin. Here, we observed that the ABC-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation in D283-MED cells is accompanied by a dramatic increase in cell death. This is in accordance to another study showing that morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP7) induces telomerase inhibition, telomere shortening, and cell death by a mechanism involving the repression of hTERT, in cervical cancer cells. 36 Whereas, in the Daoy cell line, along with the decrease in cell proliferation, we observed a significant cell accumulation in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle, following exposure to ABC. ABC did neither cause significant cell death nor apoptosis as indicated by FACS measurement of cells with hypodiploid DNA content, suggesting that decreased cell proliferation rather reflects a progressive withdrawal from the cell cycle. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein complex that adds telomeric repeats onto the ends of chromosomes during the replicative phase of the cell cycle. In fact, the highest levels of telomerase activity are found in cells that are in the S-phase of the cell cycle, whereas cells in G2/M phase have little or no telomerase activity 37 . This is in accordance to other studies showing that the inhibition of telomerase activity is associated to a block in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle 38 . One of these studies showed that phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate induced a cell cycle arrest in G2/M in asynchronously growing NSCLC cells and conferred morphological and biochemical features of senescence, including downregulation of telomerase activity 39 . Our result show that ABC treatment leads Daoy cells to arrest in G2/M whereas it induces cell death in D283-MED, likely through the inhibition of the telomerase. However, further studies to examine the molecules implicated in the regulation of the G2/M phase checkpoint and in the cell death programme are crucial to understand the molecular mechanism of ABC, and they are currently under investigation in our laboratory. Consistent with the central role of telomere shortening in the replicative senescence programme 39 , 32 , 40 , ABC was also able to induce cellular senescence in both medulloblastoma cell lines. This is very interesting considering that senescence is a powerful tumour suppressive mechanism. But whether the senescent phenotype is a direct consequence of telomere erosion, or rather it is due to telomere length-independent changes remains to be established. In fact, it has been reported that following telomerase repression other mechanisms that are independent from telomere erosion can trigger a damage response and abrupt cell-cycle arrest or death 1 , 41 , 42 . Moreover, the elevated expression of GFAP and SYN markers, both at mRNA and protein levels, along with the neurite formation observed in both cell lines following two weeks of treatment with ABC, suggested that a more differentiated phenotype had been induced. The induction of differentiation occurring in our experiments after ABC treatment is typical of others inhibitors of telomerase activity and is likely to be due to an altered pattern of gene expression 43 . According to Damm et al 43 , in fact, the drug-mediated telomerase inhibition in cancer cells has been reported to reduce proliferation and induce changes in gene expression, along with the appearance of senescence hallmarks. Our results are in accordance to another study, in which anticancer effects of aloe-emodin involve G2/M cell accumulation concomitant with the induction of differentiation 44 . In addition, retinoic acid derivatives showed induction of cell differentiation, apoptosis, and growth arrest in some medulloblastoma cells. In particular, the results demonstrated that cell growth arrest was the main mechanism by which RA inhibited cell proliferation in the medulloblastoma cell line Daoy, but not in the others (D283-MED and D341), in which it induces apoptosis. 45 Therefore it is possible that ABC inhibits cell proliferation, by G2/M block or cell death depending on cell type, and induce differentiation through the inhibition of telomerase activity. Even if the molecular mechanism by which ABC inhibits proliferation and induce differentiation are still to be clarified, the finding that ABC can induce the expression of differentiation markers in medulloblastoma cells suggests that it may attenuate the malignant and aggressive phenotype of transformed cells slowing the progression of disease. Molecular oncology studies, in fact, have shown that the genes regulating the differentiation process are not lost in malignant cells but the signals regulating cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation are defective. Thus, it is important to find agents that are able to restore the regulating machinery that will induce tumour cells to differentiate and revert their malignant phenotype. Interestingly, growth inhibition and increased sensitivity to anticancer drugs were observed in Daoy cells transfected with GFAP 46 . Such differentiation could also make tumour cells more responsive to normal growth regulatory signals or more sensitive to chemotherapy and other differentiation agents 47 . For instance, the remarkable success of all- trans -retinoic acid in producing complete remission in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia has attracted interest in differentiation as an alternative form of cancer chemotherapy 48 . Treatment with retinoids can also induce differentiation in astrocytes, together with telomerase activity downregulation and increase of cell sensitivity to taxol 49 . Another hurdle in the treatment of medulloblastoma is that the blood-brain barrier restricts the entry of hydrophilic and large lipophilic compounds into the brain 17 , 35 . The lipophilic nature of ABC, which enables it to pass through the blood-brain barrier more easily 50 , represents yet another advantage of its possible use for the treatment of medulloblastoma. Moreover, given its good tolerability, ABC treatment could be associated to current therapies used for medulloblastoma, including chemotherapeutic alkylating agent, such as cisplatinum and 1-(2-chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea, or mitotic inhibitors, such as vincristine 17 , 51 . In conclusion, we suggest that the use of ABC, which is currently used in the treatment of AIDS, could be an effective therapeutic strategy, alone or in combination with current therapies, for the treatment of telomerase expressing tumours, such as human medulloblastomas.  Figures Figure 1 Proliferation of human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED treated with Abacavir (ABC). (a) Cells were cultured with different doses of ABC (dashed lines) and in drug-free medium (solid line). The cell proliferation rate is indicated as the ratio of cell number at each time point relative to the initial number of seeded cells, taken as 1. These results are expressed as the mean value of at least two independent assays; bars , ± SD. The (*) and (**) symbols denote significance difference of p<0.05 and p<0.001, respectively, from untreated cells control. (b) ABC induces morphologic differentiation in medulloblastoma cells. Daoy and D283-MED cells were cultured in the presence of 750?M ABC for 2 weeks; ABC-containing fresh medium was changed at 72h intervals. arrows , neurite formations. Photographs were obtained by phase contrast microscopy. (c) Morphologic features of neurons in primary culture on phase-contrast microscopy. Cells were treated with ABC (750?M) for 24, 48 and 72 h. Figure 2 Flow cytometric profiles of Daoy and D283-MED medulloblastoma cells and HT22 neuronal cell line before and following exposure to Abacavir (ABC). (a) FACS analysis was performed after 24, 48, 72, 96 h and 2 weeks following 750?M ABC treatment. A consistent shift of the cell population toward the G2/M phase of the cell cycle was observed in treated Daoy cells and an increased percentage of cell death was evidenced in D283-MED. (b) The percentages of cells in the different phases of cell cycle are reported for each representative time point. The data shown are representative of at least two independent experiments. (c) No differences in cell cycle profile were evidenced in HT22 cells treated with 750?M ABC, compared to untreated cell. Figure 3 Abacavir (ABC) inhibits telomerase activity and downregulates hTERT mRNA. (a) Detection of telomerase activity in medulloblastoma cells by TRAP assay. The detection of 6bp ladders indicates the presence of telomerase activity. Daoy and D283-MED cells are telomerase positive and heat treatment of the protein extract abolished the telomerase activity, as assessed by the TRAP assay. A reduction of telomerase activity was observed in both cell lines beginning from 1 d of treatment with 750?M of ABC. Lane 1, heat-treated protein extracts from Daoy or D283-MED; lane 2, untreated cells; lane 3, 4, 5 and 6, cells treated with ABC for 24, 48, 72 and 96 h; lane 7, the primer-dimers/PCR control; lane 8, 100bp DNA ladder. (b) Expression of hTERT mRNA in Daoy and D283-MED cells was determined by real time RT-PCR. Data shown are representative of at least two independent experiments; bars , ± SD. The (*) symbol denotes significance difference of p<0.05 from untreated cells control. Figure 4 Abacavir (ABC) induces differentiation and cellular senescence in medulloblastoma cells. (a) Immunofluorescence staining for GFAP and SYN proteins in Daoy and D283-MED cells. Expression of GFAP and SYN protein was evident in cells treated with 750?M ABC for 3 d (B,D,F,H) respect to untreated cells, which are negative for or have lower levels of these proteins (A,C,E,G). All photomicrographs were taken with the same magnification. (b) GFAP and SYN mRNA levels as detected by real-time RT-PCR in medulloblastoma cells during the treatment with ABC. Both GFAP and SYN mRNA expression increased after exposure to the drug. Data shown are representative of at least two independent experiments; bars , ± SD. The (*) symbol denotes significance difference of p<0.05 from untreated cells control. (c) ?-galactosidase staining in Daoy and D283-MED after 1 week of treatment with 350?M ABC, and the corresponding controls (untreated cells). Blue staining indicates senescent cells.  Figures Figure 1 Proliferation of human medulloblastoma cell lines Daoy and D283-MED treated with Abacavir (ABC). (a) Cells were cultured with different doses of ABC (dashed lines) and in drug-free medium (solid line). The cell proliferation rate is indicated as the ratio of cell number at each time point relative to the initial number of seeded cells, taken as 1. These results are expressed as the mean value of at least two independent assays; bars , ± SD. The (*) and (**) symbols denote significance difference of p<0.05 and p<0.001, respectively, from untreated cells control. (b) ABC induces morphologic differentiation in medulloblastoma cells. Daoy and D283-MED cells were cultured in the presence of 750?M ABC for 2 weeks; ABC-containing fresh medium was changed at 72h intervals. arrows , neurite formations. Photographs were obtained by phase contrast microscopy. (c) Morphologic features of neurons in primary culture on phase-contrast microscopy. Cells were treated with ABC (750?M) for 24, 48 and 72 h. Figure 2 Flow cytometric profiles of Daoy and D283-MED medulloblastoma cells and HT22 neuronal cell line before and following exposure to Abacavir (ABC). (a) FACS analysis was performed after 24, 48, 72, 96 h and 2 weeks following 750?M ABC treatment. A consistent shift of the cell population toward the G2/M phase of the cell cycle was observed in treated Daoy cells and an increased percentage of cell death was evidenced in D283-MED. (b) The percentages of cells in the different phases of cell cycle are reported for each representative time point. The data shown are representative of at least two independent experiments. (c) No differences in cell cycle profile were evidenced in HT22 cells treated with 750?M ABC, compared to untreated cell. Figure 3 Abacavir (ABC) inhibits telomerase activity and downregulates hTERT mRNA. (a) Detection of telomerase activity in medulloblastoma cells by TRAP assay. The detection of 6bp ladders indicates the presence of telomerase activity. Daoy and D283-MED cells are telomerase positive and heat treatment of the protein extract abolished the telomerase activity, as assessed by the TRAP assay. A reduction of telomerase activity was observed in both cell lines beginning from 1 d of treatment with 750?M of ABC. Lane 1, heat-treated protein extracts from Daoy or D283-MED; lane 2, untreated cells; lane 3, 4, 5 and 6, cells treated with ABC for 24, 48, 72 and 96 h; lane 7, the primer-dimers/PCR control; lane 8, 100bp DNA ladder. (b) Expression of hTERT mRNA in Daoy and D283-MED cells was determined by real time RT-PCR. Data shown are representative of at least two independent experiments; bars , ± SD. The (*) symbol denotes significance difference of p<0.05 from untreated cells control. Figure 4 Abacavir (ABC) induces differentiation and cellular senescence in medulloblastoma cells. (a) Immunofluorescence staining for GFAP and SYN proteins in Daoy and D283-MED cells. Expression of GFAP and SYN protein was evident in cells treated with 750?M ABC for 3 d (B,D,F,H) respect to untreated cells, which are negative for or have lower levels of these proteins (A,C,E,G). All photomicrographs were taken with the same magnification. (b) GFAP and SYN mRNA levels as detected by real-time RT-PCR in medulloblastoma cells during the treatment with ABC. Both GFAP and SYN mRNA expression increased after exposure to the drug. Data shown are representative of at least two independent experiments; bars , ± SD. The (*) symbol denotes significance difference of p<0.05 from untreated cells control. (c) ?-galactosidase staining in Daoy and D283-MED after 1 week of treatment with 350?M ABC, and the corresponding controls (untreated cells). Blue staining indicates senescent cells. 