Attenuated TGF? Signaling Promotes Nuclear Factor-?B Activation in Head and Neck Cancer Although constitutively activated NF-?B, attenuated TGF? signaling and TP53 mutations frequently occur in human cancers, how these pathways interact and together contribute to malignancy remains uncertain. Here, we found an association between overexpression of NF-?B related genes, reduced expression of TGF? receptor (T?R) subunits and downstream targets, and TP53 genotype in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). In response to recombinant TGF?1, both growth inhibition and TGF? target gene modulation were attenuated or absent in a panel of human HNSCC lines. However, in HNSCC cells that retained residual TGF? signaling, TGF?1 inhibited both constitutive and TNF?-stimulated NF-?B activity. Furthermore, HNSCC lines overexpressing mutant (mt)TP53 and human tumor specimens with positive TP53 nuclear staining exhibited reduced T?RII, and knocking down mt TP53 induced T?RII , increasing TGF? downstream gene expression while inhibiting proinflammatory NF-?B target gene expression. Transfection of ectopic T?RII directly restored TGF? signaling while inhibiting I?B? degradation and suppressing serine 536 phosphorylation of NF-?B p65 and NF-?B transcriptional activation, linking these alterations. Finally, experiments with T?RII conditional knockout mice demonstrate that abrogation of TGF? signaling promotes the sustained induction of NF-?B and its proinflammatory target genes during HNSCC tumorigenesis and progression. Together, these findings elucidate a regulatory framework in which attenuated TGF? signaling promotes NF-?B activation and squamous epithelial malignancy in the setting of altered TP53 status.  INTRODUCTION The development and progression of cancer are the result of sequential genetic and biological events, including loss of tumor suppressor genes and gain of function in proto-oncogenes. These multiple defects lead to self-sufficient proliferation with limitless replicative potential, evasion of apoptosis, tissue invasion and metastasis, and sustained angiogenesis ( 1 ). Mounting evidence indicates that nuclear factor-?B (NF-?B) is a critical mediator in many of these processes through transcriptional regulation of several hundred downstream genes, the products of which promote the malignant phenotype ( 2 ). In regulating this broad genetic program, NF-?B transcription factors are assembled through dimerization of five subunits: RelA(p65), p50(NF-?B1), p52(NF-?B2), c-Rel and RelB. Each dimer is bound in the cytoplasm by an inhibitor-?B (I?B), which prevents its nuclear translocation ( 3 ). Cell stimulation transiently activates the I?B kinase (IKK) complex, which is composed of two catalytic subunits (IKK? and IKK?) and a regulatory subunit (IKK?). Activated IKK phosphorylates I?B proteins, resulting in their proteosomal degradation and subsequent translocation of NF-?B dimers to the nucleus. NF-?B is constitutively activated in diverse human malignancies, including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), where numerous activating signals have been elucidated, including proinflammatory cytokines TNF? and IL-1, growth factors EGF and HGF, as well as intermediate kinases phosphoinositide 3-kinase, casein kinase 2 and IKK ( 4 ). While previous studies have focused on the positive signals contributing to NF-?B activation in HNSCC, signals that negatively regulate NF-?B activity remain poorly understood ( 5 ). The transforming growth factor beta (TGF?) signaling pathway performs an essential regulatory role in maintaining normal epithelial homeostasis ( 6 ). TGF? signals through three TGF? receptor subunits (T?RI, T?RII and T?RIII), resulting in phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, which, with Smad4, enter the nucleus and regulate transcription. TGF? potently inhibits epithelial proliferation by upregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes p15 INK4b , p21 Cip1 and p57 Kip2 and downregulation of c-MYC and ID1 expression ( 6 ). Thus, TGF? signaling demonstrates potent tumor suppression, and transcriptional inactivation or mutations of T?RI and T?RII have been reported in human epithelial malignancies ( 7 ). While mutation of T?RII is uncommon in HNSCC development, decreased T?RII expression occurs frequently and leads to a less differentiated, more aggressive phenotype ( 8 , 9 ). However, the relationship between alterations in TGF? signaling and NF-?B activation and the mechanisms contributing to reduced T?RII expression in HNSCC have not been elucidated. The TP53 tumor suppressor represents another commonly altered target underlying the development of cancer, including HNSCC. Defects in TP53 function contribute to loss of cell cycle regulation, genomic instability, and therapeutic resistance, promoting the survival of malignant cells. Mutation of TP53 in HNSCC occurs with a frequency of ~50%, resulting in altered TP53 expression and function ( 10 ). In HNSCCs that retain a wild-type (wt) TP53 genotype, approximately one-half exhibit deficient TP53 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC)( 11 , 12 ). Finally, TP53 mutations are not restricted to neoplastic cells, but frequently affect adjacent, normal-appearing keratinocytes, implicating TP53 mutation in the initiation of HNSCC ( 13 ). We recently identified distinct molecular signatures in HNSCCs differing in TP53 status, where genome-wide microarray and bioinformatic analysis revealed activation of NF-?B target gene expression with concomitant downregulation of TGF? pathway genes ( 14 , 15 ). These observations prompted us to hypothesize that a potential relationship exists among TGF? signaling, NF-?B activation and TP53 status, which we define here using HNSCC-derived cell lines, human tissue specimens, and an animal model of HNSCC generated by T?RII deletion from murine head and neck epithelia ( 16 ).  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines and Mice HNSCC cell lines from the University of Michigan squamous cell carcinoma (UM-SCC) series were obtained from Dr. T. E. Carey (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI). UM-SCC cell lines were previously characterized and found to possess molecular and phenotypic alterations expressed in situ and important in the pathogenicity of HNSCC ( 15 ). The tumor and outcome characteristics of patients providing UM-SCC cell lines are shown in Table S1 . The TP53 mutation status of these cell lines was analyzed by bi-directional DNA sequencing of exons 2–9 [ Table S2 ]. UM-SCC lines and primary human epidermal keratinocytes (HeKa) were cultured as previously described ( 12 ). All animal experiments were performed under protocols approved by the IACUC at the Oregon Health and Science University. T?RII floxed mice and K5.CrePR1 transgenic mice were established and maintained as described ( 16 ). Reagents and Transfection Recombinant TNF? and TGF?1 were from R&D Systems. Primary antibodies against the following proteins were used: T?RII (Santa Cruz), p-Smad2 (Cell Signaling), Smad2/3 (BD Biosciences), TP53 (Santa Cruz), serine 536 and serine 276 phosphorylated p65 (Cell Signaling), p65 (Santa Cruz), p50 (Santa Cruz), Oct-1 (Cell Signaling) and ?-actin (Cell Signaling). All transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Transient transfection was performed using constructs for T?RII and pcDNA3 control vector. The expression vector containing the human TP53 open reading frame (pORF-hTP53) and the empty control vector (pORF-mcs) were obtained from InvivoGen. Control siRNA and TP53 siRNA were from Qiagen. Real-time QRT-PCR RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were performed as previously described ( 12 , 16 ). cDNA products were subjected to real-time QRT-PCR using TaqMan Assays-on-Demand probes (Applied Biosystems). An 18S rRNA probe was used as an internal control. Each sample was examined in triplicate. The relative mRNA expression levels were determined by normalizing with the 18S transcripts, the values of which were calculated using the comparative CT method. Further details are available in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures . Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded HNSCC tissue arrays were obtained from Cybrdi as previously described ( 17 ). Each array contained HNSCC tumor tissues from 20 individuals spotted in triplicate, plus normal mucosa tissues from 6 normal subjects, spotted in duplicate. Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence analysis are described in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures .  Cell lines and Mice HNSCC cell lines from the University of Michigan squamous cell carcinoma (UM-SCC) series were obtained from Dr. T. E. Carey (University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI). UM-SCC cell lines were previously characterized and found to possess molecular and phenotypic alterations expressed in situ and important in the pathogenicity of HNSCC ( 15 ). The tumor and outcome characteristics of patients providing UM-SCC cell lines are shown in Table S1 . The TP53 mutation status of these cell lines was analyzed by bi-directional DNA sequencing of exons 2–9 [ Table S2 ]. UM-SCC lines and primary human epidermal keratinocytes (HeKa) were cultured as previously described ( 12 ). All animal experiments were performed under protocols approved by the IACUC at the Oregon Health and Science University. T?RII floxed mice and K5.CrePR1 transgenic mice were established and maintained as described ( 16 ).  Reagents and Transfection Recombinant TNF? and TGF?1 were from R&D Systems. Primary antibodies against the following proteins were used: T?RII (Santa Cruz), p-Smad2 (Cell Signaling), Smad2/3 (BD Biosciences), TP53 (Santa Cruz), serine 536 and serine 276 phosphorylated p65 (Cell Signaling), p65 (Santa Cruz), p50 (Santa Cruz), Oct-1 (Cell Signaling) and ?-actin (Cell Signaling). All transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Transient transfection was performed using constructs for T?RII and pcDNA3 control vector. The expression vector containing the human TP53 open reading frame (pORF-hTP53) and the empty control vector (pORF-mcs) were obtained from InvivoGen. Control siRNA and TP53 siRNA were from Qiagen.  Real-time QRT-PCR RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were performed as previously described ( 12 , 16 ). cDNA products were subjected to real-time QRT-PCR using TaqMan Assays-on-Demand probes (Applied Biosystems). An 18S rRNA probe was used as an internal control. Each sample was examined in triplicate. The relative mRNA expression levels were determined by normalizing with the 18S transcripts, the values of which were calculated using the comparative CT method. Further details are available in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures .  Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded HNSCC tissue arrays were obtained from Cybrdi as previously described ( 17 ). Each array contained HNSCC tumor tissues from 20 individuals spotted in triplicate, plus normal mucosa tissues from 6 normal subjects, spotted in duplicate. Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence analysis are described in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures .  RESULTS Aberrant Expression of TGF? and Activated NF-?B genes in HNSCC Cells with Distinct TP53 Status Previous microarray profiling and bioinformatic analyses of gene expression in a panel of nine HNSCC cell lines ( Supplementary Table 1 ; Ref 18 ) and primary human epidermal keratinocytes (HeKa) predicted potential cross talk among NF-?B, TGF? and TP53 signaling pathways ( 14 ). We performed real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR) to assess the expression of critical components of these pathways and downstream effector genes, generating a cluster-based heatmap, normalized to the expression pattern in primary keratinocytes (HeKa) ( Fig. 1A ). Increased basal expression of NF-?B activating kinase, subunit ( IKKA and C-REL ) and target proto-oncogenes and proinflammatory genes ( CCND1 , cIAP1 , IL-6 , and IL-8 ) were detected ( Fig. 1A ). Conversely, attenuated TGF? signaling was indicated by downregulation of at least one of three essential TGF? receptor subunits and other downstream targets ( Figure 1A and B ). Strikingly, reduction in receptor expression clustered closely with the TP53 genotype and expression signature ( Supplementary Table 2 ; Fig. 1A , bottom row). HNSCC cells deficient in wild-type (wt) TP53 transcript and protein (UM-SCC-1, 6, 9, and 11A) underexpressed T?RI and T?RIII , while most lines expressing mutant (mt) TP53 (UM-SCC-11B, 22A, 22B, 38, and 46) showed reduced T?RII levels. Expression of downstream signaling components SMAD2 , SMAD3 and SMAD4 varied but was not markedly reduced. Additionally, TGF? target genes p15 INK4b , p21 Cip1 ; SMAD7 , HPGD, PAI1 and MMP2 were strongly downregulated in most UM-SCC lines. By contrast, ID1 , previously implicated in metastatic aggressiveness of human SCC, was upregulated in all UM-SCC lines ( 19 ). KRAS or HRAS overexpression was also detected in this panel of human HNSCC cell lines, as previously observed in ~80% of human HNSCC tissue samples ( 16 ). Together, these data suggest that HNSCC exhibit aberrant NF-?B gene signatures in the context of multiple deficiencies in the TGF? signaling network, which are linked to deficient wt or mtTP53 status. HNSCC Cells Exhibit Deficient TGF?-Induced Growth Inhibition and Transcriptional Activity To determine if reduced expression of TGF? receptor subunits affects TGF? signal-induced growth arrest in HNSCC cells, we measured cell proliferation by 5-day MTT assay using five UM-SCC lines of differing TP53 status (UM-SCC-6, 11B, 22A, 22B, and 46) and HeKa control cells under varying concentrations of rTGF?1. TGF?1 significantly inhibited HeKa but not HNSCC cell proliferation ( Fig. 2A , Supplementary Fig. 1A for UM-SCC-11B and 22A). UM-SCC-11B, 22A and 46 exhibited complete resistance to TGF?-induced cytostatic effects. UM-SCC-6 and 22B demonstrated a partial reduction in cell proliferation, suggesting attenuated TGF? signaling and cytostatic activity. We next examined whether a reduction in cellular response to TGF?1 affects expression of TGF? downstream target genes important in growth arrest and other biological functions. In HeKa, TGF?1 exposure strongly induced mRNA expression of PAI1 , MMP2 , p15 INK4b , p57 Kip2 , and SMAD7 and suppressed expression of c-MYC , an NF- ?B target gene ( 20 ) ( Fig. 2B , Supplementary Fig. 1B for UM-SCC-11B and 22A, and data not shown for p57 Kip2 ). By contrast, all HNSCC lines exhibited diminished sensitivity to TGF?-modulated gene expression. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that HNSCC cells with deficient expression of component(s) of the TGF?signaling pathway exhibit functional attenuation of TGF? signaling through loss of TGF?-mediated growth arrest and transcriptional activity. Induction of Residual TGF? Signaling Inhibits NF-?B Activation As our previous bioinformatic analysis ( 14 ) and results in Fig. 1 suggested potential crosstalk and an inverse relationship between the TGF? and NF-?B gene expression, we examined if TGF? could inhibit NF-?B activation. We selected the two HNSCC lines, UM-SCC-6 and 22B, that exhibited residual TGF?-induced growth inhibition, and UM-SCC-46, as a negative control line because of its deficient TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2 ). In Fig. 3A , UM-SCC-6 and UM-SCC-22B exhibited significant detectable TGF?1-induced TGF?-luciferase reporter gene at 12 hr, while UM-SCC-46 was not responsive to TGF?1 treatment. In UM-SCC-6, 22B, and 46 transfected with an NF-?B reporter plasmid and treated ?/+TGF?1 and ?/+TNF?, TGF?1 inhibited constitutive and/or TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity, whereas UM-SCC-46 was unresponsive to TGF?1 treatment ( Fig. 3B ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGF? is able to suppress NF-?B activation in UM-SCC cells. Linkage Between Diminished T?RII Expression and Signaling, mtTP53 Accumulation and NF-?B Target Gene Activation in a subset of HNSCC Given that loss of T?RII gene expression and signaling was observed in a subset of HNSCC cell lines expressing mtTP53 ( Fig. 1 ; Supplemental Table 1 ), we examined if a similar subset is found in HNSCC tumors in situ . Immunostaining for T?RII, phosphorylated (activated) Smad2, and TP53 protein expression was performed using a tissue array with 20 HNSCC specimens and 6 normal oral mucosa specimens ( Fig. 4A ). Sixteen of the 20 HNSCC samples (80%) displayed absent (?) or low T?RII protein, with 11/16 showing absent (?) or low for both p-T?RII and Smad2, and 8/9 completely negative for T?RII also negative or low for Smad2 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Conversely, all normal oral mucosa samples exhibited both strong T?RII and activated p-Smad2 staining. Together, these observations confirm that deficient T?RII expression and p-Smad2 signaling is prevalent in human HNSCC ( 16 ). As TP53 mutations often result in proteins highly resistant to degradation, detection of TP53 nuclear accumulation by IHC is strongly associated with mutations in the TP53 gene ( 21 ). Consistent with an expected mutation rate of ~50% in HNSCC ( 10 ), 11 of the 20 tumors (55%) showed nuclear staining for TP53 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Nine of these 11 (82%) exhibited concomitantly reduced or absent T?RII staining. Of the six HNSCC samples that were most strongly positive for TP53 nuclear staining, 5 (83%) demonstrated a corresponding loss of T?RII staining within the tumor tissue. None of the normal mucosa specimens exhibited significant TP53 staining. Thus, decreased T?RII expression is seen in a subset of HNSCCs exhibiting increased accumulation of TP53 protein, as well as in a subset without TP53 staining. We next investigated whether mtTP53 may have a suppressive role in T?RII expression, by comparing TP53 and T?RII expression in HeKa with wtTP53, two cell lines with a defect in wtTP53 expression (UM-SCC-9 and 11A), and 4 cell lines expressing missense mtTP53s (UM-SCC-11B, 22A &B, and 46) ( Fig. 4B ; Supplemental Table 2 ). While similar levels of T?RII mRNA and protein expression were detected in either HeKa expressing or UM-SCC deficient for wtTP53 protein ( Fig. 1B and Fig. 4B ), diminished T?RII mRNA and protein levels was seen in most UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53, consistent with the pattern observed in a subset of HNSCC tumors above ( Fig. 1B , Fig. 4A, and 4B ). Transfection of wt TP53 into UM-SCC-11A cells deficient in endogenous wtTP53 promoted T?RII and target gene expression ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), suggesting that expression of wtTP53 has an enhancing effect on T?RII expression, while endogenous mtTP53 in the other subset may have a dominant negative effect. To further establish if the mtTP53 in UM-SCC lines contributes to deficient T?RII expression, we tested the effect of TP53 siRNA to inhibit TP53 mRNA expression in UM-SCC lines with mtTP53. TP53 siRNA efficiently inhibited endogenous TP53 expression in UM-SCC-11B and 22A over 96 hours ( Fig. 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Knockdown of mt TP53 resulted in a progressive increase in T?RII gene expression relative to control siRNA ( Figure 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Similar results were seen in UM-SCC-22B and 46 ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Concomitant with enhanced T?RII expression, restoration of TGF? signaling was evident by increased transcription of TGF? downstream genes, SMAD7 and MMP2 , at 72 hr ( Fig. 4C ). We further compared effects of TP53 siRNA on the expression of TP53 , T?RII , and NF-?B REL(p65)-dependent proinflammatory genes IL-6 and IL-8 ( 14 ). Fig. 4D shows that following TP53 siRNA knockdown and increase in T?RII , there is a significant reduction in both IL-8 and IL-6 expression in the mtTP53 line UM-SCC-22B. Collectively, the results above suggest that mtTP53 may be one mechanism contributing to attenuated T?RII gene expression, TGF? signaling, and enhanced NF-?B inflammatory gene expression in HNSCCs. Ectopic T?RII Expression Restores TGF? Signaling and Suppresses NF-?B Activation in HNSCC Cells To directly examine the role of T?RII expression and signaling in inhibition of NF-?B, we determined if transient transfection of a plasmid expressing exogenous T?RII protein could restore TGF? activity and suppress NF-?B signaling in HNSCC lines that demonstrated deficient T?RII. We selected UM-SCC-46, since it had previously exhibited complete attenuation of TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2B ). Upon transfection, ectopic T?RII was successfully transiently expressed between 48 to 96 hr ( Fig. 5A ). Expression of T?RII dramatically induced TGF? signaling in UM-SCC-46, illustrated by enhanced levels of activated phospho-Smad2 at 48 hr ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). This implicated T?RII expression as a critical defect in the TGF? signaling in these HNSCC cells. We further examined the effect of restored T?RII signaling on established mechanisms required for NF-?B target gene transactivation. IKK-dependent signal phosphorylation of p65(RelA) serine-536 and PKA-inducible phosphorylation of serine-276 have been shown to enhance NF-?B gene transactivation following stimulation with TNF? ( 22 ). Increased expression of T?RII strongly suppressed TNF?-induced nuclear p65(RELA) serine-536 phosphorylation, but not serine-276 phosphorylation, or expression of total p65, or Oct-1, an unrelated control ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). Together, these data are consistent with the hypothesis that T?RII in these HNSCC inhibits NF-?B transactivation by a signal dependent mechanism at, or above IKK. To further examine if T?RII modulates IKK-dependent I?B?degradation involved in upstream signal activation and nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( 2 , 23 ), we utilized a plasmid expressing an I?B-luciferase fusion protein ( 24 ), which can serve as a nontranscriptional reporter of kinase activation and degradation. As expected, TNF? enhanced degradation of the I?B?-Luc fusion protein ( Fig. 5C ). Upon transfection of ectopic T?RII, restoration of TGF? signaling resulted in a significant attenuation of TNF?-induced I?B-luciferase protein degradation (~25%; p<0.05), suggesting that a mechanism(s) upstream of IKK-mediated I?B degradation could partially contribute to the attenuating effect of TGF? on NF-?B signaling. Once we demonstrated that exogenous T?RII expression could inhibit NF-?B phosphorylation and I?B degradation, we sought to confirm if transient T?RII expression and signaling suppressed aberrant basal and TNF?-enhanced NF-?B transcriptional activity, using 3 UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53. UM-SCC-46 exhibited the strongest restoration of TGF?-induced luciferase activity at 48 hr upon ectopic expression of T?RII, followed by UM-SCC-22B and 22A ( Fig. 5D ). Restoration of T?RII signaling inhibited both constitutive and TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity in UM-SCC-46. UM-SCC-22A and 22B also exhibited a significant reduction in NF-?B transactivation, but this was most clearly demonstrated after exposure to TNF? ( Supplemental Fig. 5B ). These findings demonstrate that restoration of T?RII signaling not only reduces activated RELA(p65) serine-536 phosphorylation, but can also suppress NF-?B reporter gene transactivation in HNSCC lines expressing different mtTP53s. Loss of TGF? Signaling Promotes NF-?B Activation in Murine HNSCCs with Conditional Deletion of <italic>T?RII</italic> To further examine the role of attenuated TGF? signaling in the aberrant activation of NF-?B, we investigated mucosa and tumors from a murine model in which K5 targeted genetic deletion of T?RII from mucosal stratified epithelia in combination with 7, 12-dimethyl-benz [a] anthracene (DMBA) initiation caused the development of primary and metastatic HNSCCs histolgically and molecularly similar to human HNSCC ( 16 ). Tissue samples were collected from buccal mucosa of 5 T?RII +/+, T?RII ?/?, and HNSCCs from 5 T?RII ?/? mice and compared. Representative H&E stained tumor sections showed atypical hyperproliferative epithelia by 3 months and HNSCC by 6 months in T?RII ?/? mice when compared to their wild-type littermates ( 16 ; Supplementary Fig. 6 ). Immunostaining of T?RII ?/? mucosa and HNSCCs confirmed the loss of T?RII protein and the absence of phosphorylated Smad2, demonstrating abrogation of TGF? signaling, as compared to wt controls ( Supplementary Fig. 6 ). As classical NF-?B signal activation involves the nuclear translocation of p65 and p50, we examined the aforementioned tissues for the presence and localization of these subunits using IF microscopy ( Fig. 6A ). As in human HNSCC lines above, concomitant with loss of TGF? signaling, a corresponding increase was seen in detectable nuclear RELA(p65) phospho-serine-536 as well as p50 staining in 5/5 T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and 5/5 T?RII ?/? HNSCC specimens. By contrast, normal T?RII +/+ mucosa revealed no NF-?B activation in 5 specimens studied. Interestingly, regions in HNSCCs with the strongest NF-?B activation exhibited reduced K14 expression, consistent with previous studies implicating aberrant NF-?B activity and downregulation of K14 in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of high-risk HNSCCs ( 25 ). Given the critical role of NF-?B in inflammation and our findings in Fig. 6A , we investigated the expression of NF-?B-regulated proinflammatory and angiogenic genes in these tissues by QRT-PCR ( Fig. 6B ). T?RII ?/? HNSCCs exhibited a significant induction of NF-?B inducible genes IL-1?, Vegf, Cxcl1 / Gro1 and Cxcl5 / Ena-78 when compared to both T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and normal T?RII +/+ mucosa (students t-test, p<0.05). Increased expression levels of Cxcl1 and Cxcl5 was also detected in T?RII ?/? preneoplastic lesions as compared with T?RII +/+ buccal tissues ( Fig. 6B ). Potentially further reflective of an inflammatory state, we observed previously ( 16 ) and here in the T?RII ?/? underlying stroma the presence of numerous infiltrating cells, which are strongly positive for nuclear NF-?B (p50) immunofluorescence ( Fig. 6A ). Together, these data strongly support a model where abrogation of TGF? signaling in stratified epithelia promotes the aberrant activation of NF-?B, target cytokines, enhanced inflammation, and development and malignant progression of HNSCC ( Fig. 6C ).  RESULTS Aberrant Expression of TGF? and Activated NF-?B genes in HNSCC Cells with Distinct TP53 Status Previous microarray profiling and bioinformatic analyses of gene expression in a panel of nine HNSCC cell lines ( Supplementary Table 1 ; Ref 18 ) and primary human epidermal keratinocytes (HeKa) predicted potential cross talk among NF-?B, TGF? and TP53 signaling pathways ( 14 ). We performed real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR) to assess the expression of critical components of these pathways and downstream effector genes, generating a cluster-based heatmap, normalized to the expression pattern in primary keratinocytes (HeKa) ( Fig. 1A ). Increased basal expression of NF-?B activating kinase, subunit ( IKKA and C-REL ) and target proto-oncogenes and proinflammatory genes ( CCND1 , cIAP1 , IL-6 , and IL-8 ) were detected ( Fig. 1A ). Conversely, attenuated TGF? signaling was indicated by downregulation of at least one of three essential TGF? receptor subunits and other downstream targets ( Figure 1A and B ). Strikingly, reduction in receptor expression clustered closely with the TP53 genotype and expression signature ( Supplementary Table 2 ; Fig. 1A , bottom row). HNSCC cells deficient in wild-type (wt) TP53 transcript and protein (UM-SCC-1, 6, 9, and 11A) underexpressed T?RI and T?RIII , while most lines expressing mutant (mt) TP53 (UM-SCC-11B, 22A, 22B, 38, and 46) showed reduced T?RII levels. Expression of downstream signaling components SMAD2 , SMAD3 and SMAD4 varied but was not markedly reduced. Additionally, TGF? target genes p15 INK4b , p21 Cip1 ; SMAD7 , HPGD, PAI1 and MMP2 were strongly downregulated in most UM-SCC lines. By contrast, ID1 , previously implicated in metastatic aggressiveness of human SCC, was upregulated in all UM-SCC lines ( 19 ). KRAS or HRAS overexpression was also detected in this panel of human HNSCC cell lines, as previously observed in ~80% of human HNSCC tissue samples ( 16 ). Together, these data suggest that HNSCC exhibit aberrant NF-?B gene signatures in the context of multiple deficiencies in the TGF? signaling network, which are linked to deficient wt or mtTP53 status. HNSCC Cells Exhibit Deficient TGF?-Induced Growth Inhibition and Transcriptional Activity To determine if reduced expression of TGF? receptor subunits affects TGF? signal-induced growth arrest in HNSCC cells, we measured cell proliferation by 5-day MTT assay using five UM-SCC lines of differing TP53 status (UM-SCC-6, 11B, 22A, 22B, and 46) and HeKa control cells under varying concentrations of rTGF?1. TGF?1 significantly inhibited HeKa but not HNSCC cell proliferation ( Fig. 2A , Supplementary Fig. 1A for UM-SCC-11B and 22A). UM-SCC-11B, 22A and 46 exhibited complete resistance to TGF?-induced cytostatic effects. UM-SCC-6 and 22B demonstrated a partial reduction in cell proliferation, suggesting attenuated TGF? signaling and cytostatic activity. We next examined whether a reduction in cellular response to TGF?1 affects expression of TGF? downstream target genes important in growth arrest and other biological functions. In HeKa, TGF?1 exposure strongly induced mRNA expression of PAI1 , MMP2 , p15 INK4b , p57 Kip2 , and SMAD7 and suppressed expression of c-MYC , an NF- ?B target gene ( 20 ) ( Fig. 2B , Supplementary Fig. 1B for UM-SCC-11B and 22A, and data not shown for p57 Kip2 ). By contrast, all HNSCC lines exhibited diminished sensitivity to TGF?-modulated gene expression. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that HNSCC cells with deficient expression of component(s) of the TGF?signaling pathway exhibit functional attenuation of TGF? signaling through loss of TGF?-mediated growth arrest and transcriptional activity. Induction of Residual TGF? Signaling Inhibits NF-?B Activation As our previous bioinformatic analysis ( 14 ) and results in Fig. 1 suggested potential crosstalk and an inverse relationship between the TGF? and NF-?B gene expression, we examined if TGF? could inhibit NF-?B activation. We selected the two HNSCC lines, UM-SCC-6 and 22B, that exhibited residual TGF?-induced growth inhibition, and UM-SCC-46, as a negative control line because of its deficient TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2 ). In Fig. 3A , UM-SCC-6 and UM-SCC-22B exhibited significant detectable TGF?1-induced TGF?-luciferase reporter gene at 12 hr, while UM-SCC-46 was not responsive to TGF?1 treatment. In UM-SCC-6, 22B, and 46 transfected with an NF-?B reporter plasmid and treated ?/+TGF?1 and ?/+TNF?, TGF?1 inhibited constitutive and/or TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity, whereas UM-SCC-46 was unresponsive to TGF?1 treatment ( Fig. 3B ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGF? is able to suppress NF-?B activation in UM-SCC cells. Linkage Between Diminished T?RII Expression and Signaling, mtTP53 Accumulation and NF-?B Target Gene Activation in a subset of HNSCC Given that loss of T?RII gene expression and signaling was observed in a subset of HNSCC cell lines expressing mtTP53 ( Fig. 1 ; Supplemental Table 1 ), we examined if a similar subset is found in HNSCC tumors in situ . Immunostaining for T?RII, phosphorylated (activated) Smad2, and TP53 protein expression was performed using a tissue array with 20 HNSCC specimens and 6 normal oral mucosa specimens ( Fig. 4A ). Sixteen of the 20 HNSCC samples (80%) displayed absent (?) or low T?RII protein, with 11/16 showing absent (?) or low for both p-T?RII and Smad2, and 8/9 completely negative for T?RII also negative or low for Smad2 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Conversely, all normal oral mucosa samples exhibited both strong T?RII and activated p-Smad2 staining. Together, these observations confirm that deficient T?RII expression and p-Smad2 signaling is prevalent in human HNSCC ( 16 ). As TP53 mutations often result in proteins highly resistant to degradation, detection of TP53 nuclear accumulation by IHC is strongly associated with mutations in the TP53 gene ( 21 ). Consistent with an expected mutation rate of ~50% in HNSCC ( 10 ), 11 of the 20 tumors (55%) showed nuclear staining for TP53 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Nine of these 11 (82%) exhibited concomitantly reduced or absent T?RII staining. Of the six HNSCC samples that were most strongly positive for TP53 nuclear staining, 5 (83%) demonstrated a corresponding loss of T?RII staining within the tumor tissue. None of the normal mucosa specimens exhibited significant TP53 staining. Thus, decreased T?RII expression is seen in a subset of HNSCCs exhibiting increased accumulation of TP53 protein, as well as in a subset without TP53 staining. We next investigated whether mtTP53 may have a suppressive role in T?RII expression, by comparing TP53 and T?RII expression in HeKa with wtTP53, two cell lines with a defect in wtTP53 expression (UM-SCC-9 and 11A), and 4 cell lines expressing missense mtTP53s (UM-SCC-11B, 22A &B, and 46) ( Fig. 4B ; Supplemental Table 2 ). While similar levels of T?RII mRNA and protein expression were detected in either HeKa expressing or UM-SCC deficient for wtTP53 protein ( Fig. 1B and Fig. 4B ), diminished T?RII mRNA and protein levels was seen in most UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53, consistent with the pattern observed in a subset of HNSCC tumors above ( Fig. 1B , Fig. 4A, and 4B ). Transfection of wt TP53 into UM-SCC-11A cells deficient in endogenous wtTP53 promoted T?RII and target gene expression ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), suggesting that expression of wtTP53 has an enhancing effect on T?RII expression, while endogenous mtTP53 in the other subset may have a dominant negative effect. To further establish if the mtTP53 in UM-SCC lines contributes to deficient T?RII expression, we tested the effect of TP53 siRNA to inhibit TP53 mRNA expression in UM-SCC lines with mtTP53. TP53 siRNA efficiently inhibited endogenous TP53 expression in UM-SCC-11B and 22A over 96 hours ( Fig. 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Knockdown of mt TP53 resulted in a progressive increase in T?RII gene expression relative to control siRNA ( Figure 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Similar results were seen in UM-SCC-22B and 46 ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Concomitant with enhanced T?RII expression, restoration of TGF? signaling was evident by increased transcription of TGF? downstream genes, SMAD7 and MMP2 , at 72 hr ( Fig. 4C ). We further compared effects of TP53 siRNA on the expression of TP53 , T?RII , and NF-?B REL(p65)-dependent proinflammatory genes IL-6 and IL-8 ( 14 ). Fig. 4D shows that following TP53 siRNA knockdown and increase in T?RII , there is a significant reduction in both IL-8 and IL-6 expression in the mtTP53 line UM-SCC-22B. Collectively, the results above suggest that mtTP53 may be one mechanism contributing to attenuated T?RII gene expression, TGF? signaling, and enhanced NF-?B inflammatory gene expression in HNSCCs. Ectopic T?RII Expression Restores TGF? Signaling and Suppresses NF-?B Activation in HNSCC Cells To directly examine the role of T?RII expression and signaling in inhibition of NF-?B, we determined if transient transfection of a plasmid expressing exogenous T?RII protein could restore TGF? activity and suppress NF-?B signaling in HNSCC lines that demonstrated deficient T?RII. We selected UM-SCC-46, since it had previously exhibited complete attenuation of TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2B ). Upon transfection, ectopic T?RII was successfully transiently expressed between 48 to 96 hr ( Fig. 5A ). Expression of T?RII dramatically induced TGF? signaling in UM-SCC-46, illustrated by enhanced levels of activated phospho-Smad2 at 48 hr ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). This implicated T?RII expression as a critical defect in the TGF? signaling in these HNSCC cells. We further examined the effect of restored T?RII signaling on established mechanisms required for NF-?B target gene transactivation. IKK-dependent signal phosphorylation of p65(RelA) serine-536 and PKA-inducible phosphorylation of serine-276 have been shown to enhance NF-?B gene transactivation following stimulation with TNF? ( 22 ). Increased expression of T?RII strongly suppressed TNF?-induced nuclear p65(RELA) serine-536 phosphorylation, but not serine-276 phosphorylation, or expression of total p65, or Oct-1, an unrelated control ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). Together, these data are consistent with the hypothesis that T?RII in these HNSCC inhibits NF-?B transactivation by a signal dependent mechanism at, or above IKK. To further examine if T?RII modulates IKK-dependent I?B?degradation involved in upstream signal activation and nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( 2 , 23 ), we utilized a plasmid expressing an I?B-luciferase fusion protein ( 24 ), which can serve as a nontranscriptional reporter of kinase activation and degradation. As expected, TNF? enhanced degradation of the I?B?-Luc fusion protein ( Fig. 5C ). Upon transfection of ectopic T?RII, restoration of TGF? signaling resulted in a significant attenuation of TNF?-induced I?B-luciferase protein degradation (~25%; p<0.05), suggesting that a mechanism(s) upstream of IKK-mediated I?B degradation could partially contribute to the attenuating effect of TGF? on NF-?B signaling. Once we demonstrated that exogenous T?RII expression could inhibit NF-?B phosphorylation and I?B degradation, we sought to confirm if transient T?RII expression and signaling suppressed aberrant basal and TNF?-enhanced NF-?B transcriptional activity, using 3 UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53. UM-SCC-46 exhibited the strongest restoration of TGF?-induced luciferase activity at 48 hr upon ectopic expression of T?RII, followed by UM-SCC-22B and 22A ( Fig. 5D ). Restoration of T?RII signaling inhibited both constitutive and TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity in UM-SCC-46. UM-SCC-22A and 22B also exhibited a significant reduction in NF-?B transactivation, but this was most clearly demonstrated after exposure to TNF? ( Supplemental Fig. 5B ). These findings demonstrate that restoration of T?RII signaling not only reduces activated RELA(p65) serine-536 phosphorylation, but can also suppress NF-?B reporter gene transactivation in HNSCC lines expressing different mtTP53s. Loss of TGF? Signaling Promotes NF-?B Activation in Murine HNSCCs with Conditional Deletion of <italic>T?RII</italic> To further examine the role of attenuated TGF? signaling in the aberrant activation of NF-?B, we investigated mucosa and tumors from a murine model in which K5 targeted genetic deletion of T?RII from mucosal stratified epithelia in combination with 7, 12-dimethyl-benz [a] anthracene (DMBA) initiation caused the development of primary and metastatic HNSCCs histolgically and molecularly similar to human HNSCC ( 16 ). Tissue samples were collected from buccal mucosa of 5 T?RII +/+, T?RII ?/?, and HNSCCs from 5 T?RII ?/? mice and compared. Representative H&E stained tumor sections showed atypical hyperproliferative epithelia by 3 months and HNSCC by 6 months in T?RII ?/? mice when compared to their wild-type littermates ( 16 ; Supplementary Fig. 6 ). Immunostaining of T?RII ?/? mucosa and HNSCCs confirmed the loss of T?RII protein and the absence of phosphorylated Smad2, demonstrating abrogation of TGF? signaling, as compared to wt controls ( Supplementary Fig. 6 ). As classical NF-?B signal activation involves the nuclear translocation of p65 and p50, we examined the aforementioned tissues for the presence and localization of these subunits using IF microscopy ( Fig. 6A ). As in human HNSCC lines above, concomitant with loss of TGF? signaling, a corresponding increase was seen in detectable nuclear RELA(p65) phospho-serine-536 as well as p50 staining in 5/5 T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and 5/5 T?RII ?/? HNSCC specimens. By contrast, normal T?RII +/+ mucosa revealed no NF-?B activation in 5 specimens studied. Interestingly, regions in HNSCCs with the strongest NF-?B activation exhibited reduced K14 expression, consistent with previous studies implicating aberrant NF-?B activity and downregulation of K14 in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of high-risk HNSCCs ( 25 ). Given the critical role of NF-?B in inflammation and our findings in Fig. 6A , we investigated the expression of NF-?B-regulated proinflammatory and angiogenic genes in these tissues by QRT-PCR ( Fig. 6B ). T?RII ?/? HNSCCs exhibited a significant induction of NF-?B inducible genes IL-1?, Vegf, Cxcl1 / Gro1 and Cxcl5 / Ena-78 when compared to both T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and normal T?RII +/+ mucosa (students t-test, p<0.05). Increased expression levels of Cxcl1 and Cxcl5 was also detected in T?RII ?/? preneoplastic lesions as compared with T?RII +/+ buccal tissues ( Fig. 6B ). Potentially further reflective of an inflammatory state, we observed previously ( 16 ) and here in the T?RII ?/? underlying stroma the presence of numerous infiltrating cells, which are strongly positive for nuclear NF-?B (p50) immunofluorescence ( Fig. 6A ). Together, these data strongly support a model where abrogation of TGF? signaling in stratified epithelia promotes the aberrant activation of NF-?B, target cytokines, enhanced inflammation, and development and malignant progression of HNSCC ( Fig. 6C ).  Aberrant Expression of TGF? and Activated NF-?B genes in HNSCC Cells with Distinct TP53 Status Previous microarray profiling and bioinformatic analyses of gene expression in a panel of nine HNSCC cell lines ( Supplementary Table 1 ; Ref 18 ) and primary human epidermal keratinocytes (HeKa) predicted potential cross talk among NF-?B, TGF? and TP53 signaling pathways ( 14 ). We performed real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR) to assess the expression of critical components of these pathways and downstream effector genes, generating a cluster-based heatmap, normalized to the expression pattern in primary keratinocytes (HeKa) ( Fig. 1A ). Increased basal expression of NF-?B activating kinase, subunit ( IKKA and C-REL ) and target proto-oncogenes and proinflammatory genes ( CCND1 , cIAP1 , IL-6 , and IL-8 ) were detected ( Fig. 1A ). Conversely, attenuated TGF? signaling was indicated by downregulation of at least one of three essential TGF? receptor subunits and other downstream targets ( Figure 1A and B ). Strikingly, reduction in receptor expression clustered closely with the TP53 genotype and expression signature ( Supplementary Table 2 ; Fig. 1A , bottom row). HNSCC cells deficient in wild-type (wt) TP53 transcript and protein (UM-SCC-1, 6, 9, and 11A) underexpressed T?RI and T?RIII , while most lines expressing mutant (mt) TP53 (UM-SCC-11B, 22A, 22B, 38, and 46) showed reduced T?RII levels. Expression of downstream signaling components SMAD2 , SMAD3 and SMAD4 varied but was not markedly reduced. Additionally, TGF? target genes p15 INK4b , p21 Cip1 ; SMAD7 , HPGD, PAI1 and MMP2 were strongly downregulated in most UM-SCC lines. By contrast, ID1 , previously implicated in metastatic aggressiveness of human SCC, was upregulated in all UM-SCC lines ( 19 ). KRAS or HRAS overexpression was also detected in this panel of human HNSCC cell lines, as previously observed in ~80% of human HNSCC tissue samples ( 16 ). Together, these data suggest that HNSCC exhibit aberrant NF-?B gene signatures in the context of multiple deficiencies in the TGF? signaling network, which are linked to deficient wt or mtTP53 status.  Aberrant Expression of TGF? and Activated NF-?B genes in HNSCC Cells with Distinct TP53 Status Previous microarray profiling and bioinformatic analyses of gene expression in a panel of nine HNSCC cell lines ( Supplementary Table 1 ; Ref 18 ) and primary human epidermal keratinocytes (HeKa) predicted potential cross talk among NF-?B, TGF? and TP53 signaling pathways ( 14 ). We performed real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR) to assess the expression of critical components of these pathways and downstream effector genes, generating a cluster-based heatmap, normalized to the expression pattern in primary keratinocytes (HeKa) ( Fig. 1A ). Increased basal expression of NF-?B activating kinase, subunit ( IKKA and C-REL ) and target proto-oncogenes and proinflammatory genes ( CCND1 , cIAP1 , IL-6 , and IL-8 ) were detected ( Fig. 1A ). Conversely, attenuated TGF? signaling was indicated by downregulation of at least one of three essential TGF? receptor subunits and other downstream targets ( Figure 1A and B ). Strikingly, reduction in receptor expression clustered closely with the TP53 genotype and expression signature ( Supplementary Table 2 ; Fig. 1A , bottom row). HNSCC cells deficient in wild-type (wt) TP53 transcript and protein (UM-SCC-1, 6, 9, and 11A) underexpressed T?RI and T?RIII , while most lines expressing mutant (mt) TP53 (UM-SCC-11B, 22A, 22B, 38, and 46) showed reduced T?RII levels. Expression of downstream signaling components SMAD2 , SMAD3 and SMAD4 varied but was not markedly reduced. Additionally, TGF? target genes p15 INK4b , p21 Cip1 ; SMAD7 , HPGD, PAI1 and MMP2 were strongly downregulated in most UM-SCC lines. By contrast, ID1 , previously implicated in metastatic aggressiveness of human SCC, was upregulated in all UM-SCC lines ( 19 ). KRAS or HRAS overexpression was also detected in this panel of human HNSCC cell lines, as previously observed in ~80% of human HNSCC tissue samples ( 16 ). Together, these data suggest that HNSCC exhibit aberrant NF-?B gene signatures in the context of multiple deficiencies in the TGF? signaling network, which are linked to deficient wt or mtTP53 status.  HNSCC Cells Exhibit Deficient TGF?-Induced Growth Inhibition and Transcriptional Activity To determine if reduced expression of TGF? receptor subunits affects TGF? signal-induced growth arrest in HNSCC cells, we measured cell proliferation by 5-day MTT assay using five UM-SCC lines of differing TP53 status (UM-SCC-6, 11B, 22A, 22B, and 46) and HeKa control cells under varying concentrations of rTGF?1. TGF?1 significantly inhibited HeKa but not HNSCC cell proliferation ( Fig. 2A , Supplementary Fig. 1A for UM-SCC-11B and 22A). UM-SCC-11B, 22A and 46 exhibited complete resistance to TGF?-induced cytostatic effects. UM-SCC-6 and 22B demonstrated a partial reduction in cell proliferation, suggesting attenuated TGF? signaling and cytostatic activity. We next examined whether a reduction in cellular response to TGF?1 affects expression of TGF? downstream target genes important in growth arrest and other biological functions. In HeKa, TGF?1 exposure strongly induced mRNA expression of PAI1 , MMP2 , p15 INK4b , p57 Kip2 , and SMAD7 and suppressed expression of c-MYC , an NF- ?B target gene ( 20 ) ( Fig. 2B , Supplementary Fig. 1B for UM-SCC-11B and 22A, and data not shown for p57 Kip2 ). By contrast, all HNSCC lines exhibited diminished sensitivity to TGF?-modulated gene expression. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that HNSCC cells with deficient expression of component(s) of the TGF?signaling pathway exhibit functional attenuation of TGF? signaling through loss of TGF?-mediated growth arrest and transcriptional activity.  HNSCC Cells Exhibit Deficient TGF?-Induced Growth Inhibition and Transcriptional Activity To determine if reduced expression of TGF? receptor subunits affects TGF? signal-induced growth arrest in HNSCC cells, we measured cell proliferation by 5-day MTT assay using five UM-SCC lines of differing TP53 status (UM-SCC-6, 11B, 22A, 22B, and 46) and HeKa control cells under varying concentrations of rTGF?1. TGF?1 significantly inhibited HeKa but not HNSCC cell proliferation ( Fig. 2A , Supplementary Fig. 1A for UM-SCC-11B and 22A). UM-SCC-11B, 22A and 46 exhibited complete resistance to TGF?-induced cytostatic effects. UM-SCC-6 and 22B demonstrated a partial reduction in cell proliferation, suggesting attenuated TGF? signaling and cytostatic activity. We next examined whether a reduction in cellular response to TGF?1 affects expression of TGF? downstream target genes important in growth arrest and other biological functions. In HeKa, TGF?1 exposure strongly induced mRNA expression of PAI1 , MMP2 , p15 INK4b , p57 Kip2 , and SMAD7 and suppressed expression of c-MYC , an NF- ?B target gene ( 20 ) ( Fig. 2B , Supplementary Fig. 1B for UM-SCC-11B and 22A, and data not shown for p57 Kip2 ). By contrast, all HNSCC lines exhibited diminished sensitivity to TGF?-modulated gene expression. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that HNSCC cells with deficient expression of component(s) of the TGF?signaling pathway exhibit functional attenuation of TGF? signaling through loss of TGF?-mediated growth arrest and transcriptional activity.  Induction of Residual TGF? Signaling Inhibits NF-?B Activation As our previous bioinformatic analysis ( 14 ) and results in Fig. 1 suggested potential crosstalk and an inverse relationship between the TGF? and NF-?B gene expression, we examined if TGF? could inhibit NF-?B activation. We selected the two HNSCC lines, UM-SCC-6 and 22B, that exhibited residual TGF?-induced growth inhibition, and UM-SCC-46, as a negative control line because of its deficient TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2 ). In Fig. 3A , UM-SCC-6 and UM-SCC-22B exhibited significant detectable TGF?1-induced TGF?-luciferase reporter gene at 12 hr, while UM-SCC-46 was not responsive to TGF?1 treatment. In UM-SCC-6, 22B, and 46 transfected with an NF-?B reporter plasmid and treated ?/+TGF?1 and ?/+TNF?, TGF?1 inhibited constitutive and/or TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity, whereas UM-SCC-46 was unresponsive to TGF?1 treatment ( Fig. 3B ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGF? is able to suppress NF-?B activation in UM-SCC cells.  Induction of Residual TGF? Signaling Inhibits NF-?B Activation As our previous bioinformatic analysis ( 14 ) and results in Fig. 1 suggested potential crosstalk and an inverse relationship between the TGF? and NF-?B gene expression, we examined if TGF? could inhibit NF-?B activation. We selected the two HNSCC lines, UM-SCC-6 and 22B, that exhibited residual TGF?-induced growth inhibition, and UM-SCC-46, as a negative control line because of its deficient TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2 ). In Fig. 3A , UM-SCC-6 and UM-SCC-22B exhibited significant detectable TGF?1-induced TGF?-luciferase reporter gene at 12 hr, while UM-SCC-46 was not responsive to TGF?1 treatment. In UM-SCC-6, 22B, and 46 transfected with an NF-?B reporter plasmid and treated ?/+TGF?1 and ?/+TNF?, TGF?1 inhibited constitutive and/or TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity, whereas UM-SCC-46 was unresponsive to TGF?1 treatment ( Fig. 3B ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TGF? is able to suppress NF-?B activation in UM-SCC cells.  Linkage Between Diminished T?RII Expression and Signaling, mtTP53 Accumulation and NF-?B Target Gene Activation in a subset of HNSCC Given that loss of T?RII gene expression and signaling was observed in a subset of HNSCC cell lines expressing mtTP53 ( Fig. 1 ; Supplemental Table 1 ), we examined if a similar subset is found in HNSCC tumors in situ . Immunostaining for T?RII, phosphorylated (activated) Smad2, and TP53 protein expression was performed using a tissue array with 20 HNSCC specimens and 6 normal oral mucosa specimens ( Fig. 4A ). Sixteen of the 20 HNSCC samples (80%) displayed absent (?) or low T?RII protein, with 11/16 showing absent (?) or low for both p-T?RII and Smad2, and 8/9 completely negative for T?RII also negative or low for Smad2 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Conversely, all normal oral mucosa samples exhibited both strong T?RII and activated p-Smad2 staining. Together, these observations confirm that deficient T?RII expression and p-Smad2 signaling is prevalent in human HNSCC ( 16 ). As TP53 mutations often result in proteins highly resistant to degradation, detection of TP53 nuclear accumulation by IHC is strongly associated with mutations in the TP53 gene ( 21 ). Consistent with an expected mutation rate of ~50% in HNSCC ( 10 ), 11 of the 20 tumors (55%) showed nuclear staining for TP53 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Nine of these 11 (82%) exhibited concomitantly reduced or absent T?RII staining. Of the six HNSCC samples that were most strongly positive for TP53 nuclear staining, 5 (83%) demonstrated a corresponding loss of T?RII staining within the tumor tissue. None of the normal mucosa specimens exhibited significant TP53 staining. Thus, decreased T?RII expression is seen in a subset of HNSCCs exhibiting increased accumulation of TP53 protein, as well as in a subset without TP53 staining. We next investigated whether mtTP53 may have a suppressive role in T?RII expression, by comparing TP53 and T?RII expression in HeKa with wtTP53, two cell lines with a defect in wtTP53 expression (UM-SCC-9 and 11A), and 4 cell lines expressing missense mtTP53s (UM-SCC-11B, 22A &B, and 46) ( Fig. 4B ; Supplemental Table 2 ). While similar levels of T?RII mRNA and protein expression were detected in either HeKa expressing or UM-SCC deficient for wtTP53 protein ( Fig. 1B and Fig. 4B ), diminished T?RII mRNA and protein levels was seen in most UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53, consistent with the pattern observed in a subset of HNSCC tumors above ( Fig. 1B , Fig. 4A, and 4B ). Transfection of wt TP53 into UM-SCC-11A cells deficient in endogenous wtTP53 promoted T?RII and target gene expression ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), suggesting that expression of wtTP53 has an enhancing effect on T?RII expression, while endogenous mtTP53 in the other subset may have a dominant negative effect. To further establish if the mtTP53 in UM-SCC lines contributes to deficient T?RII expression, we tested the effect of TP53 siRNA to inhibit TP53 mRNA expression in UM-SCC lines with mtTP53. TP53 siRNA efficiently inhibited endogenous TP53 expression in UM-SCC-11B and 22A over 96 hours ( Fig. 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Knockdown of mt TP53 resulted in a progressive increase in T?RII gene expression relative to control siRNA ( Figure 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Similar results were seen in UM-SCC-22B and 46 ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Concomitant with enhanced T?RII expression, restoration of TGF? signaling was evident by increased transcription of TGF? downstream genes, SMAD7 and MMP2 , at 72 hr ( Fig. 4C ). We further compared effects of TP53 siRNA on the expression of TP53 , T?RII , and NF-?B REL(p65)-dependent proinflammatory genes IL-6 and IL-8 ( 14 ). Fig. 4D shows that following TP53 siRNA knockdown and increase in T?RII , there is a significant reduction in both IL-8 and IL-6 expression in the mtTP53 line UM-SCC-22B. Collectively, the results above suggest that mtTP53 may be one mechanism contributing to attenuated T?RII gene expression, TGF? signaling, and enhanced NF-?B inflammatory gene expression in HNSCCs.  Linkage Between Diminished T?RII Expression and Signaling, mtTP53 Accumulation and NF-?B Target Gene Activation in a subset of HNSCC Given that loss of T?RII gene expression and signaling was observed in a subset of HNSCC cell lines expressing mtTP53 ( Fig. 1 ; Supplemental Table 1 ), we examined if a similar subset is found in HNSCC tumors in situ . Immunostaining for T?RII, phosphorylated (activated) Smad2, and TP53 protein expression was performed using a tissue array with 20 HNSCC specimens and 6 normal oral mucosa specimens ( Fig. 4A ). Sixteen of the 20 HNSCC samples (80%) displayed absent (?) or low T?RII protein, with 11/16 showing absent (?) or low for both p-T?RII and Smad2, and 8/9 completely negative for T?RII also negative or low for Smad2 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Conversely, all normal oral mucosa samples exhibited both strong T?RII and activated p-Smad2 staining. Together, these observations confirm that deficient T?RII expression and p-Smad2 signaling is prevalent in human HNSCC ( 16 ). As TP53 mutations often result in proteins highly resistant to degradation, detection of TP53 nuclear accumulation by IHC is strongly associated with mutations in the TP53 gene ( 21 ). Consistent with an expected mutation rate of ~50% in HNSCC ( 10 ), 11 of the 20 tumors (55%) showed nuclear staining for TP53 ( Supplemental Fig. 2A ). Nine of these 11 (82%) exhibited concomitantly reduced or absent T?RII staining. Of the six HNSCC samples that were most strongly positive for TP53 nuclear staining, 5 (83%) demonstrated a corresponding loss of T?RII staining within the tumor tissue. None of the normal mucosa specimens exhibited significant TP53 staining. Thus, decreased T?RII expression is seen in a subset of HNSCCs exhibiting increased accumulation of TP53 protein, as well as in a subset without TP53 staining. We next investigated whether mtTP53 may have a suppressive role in T?RII expression, by comparing TP53 and T?RII expression in HeKa with wtTP53, two cell lines with a defect in wtTP53 expression (UM-SCC-9 and 11A), and 4 cell lines expressing missense mtTP53s (UM-SCC-11B, 22A &B, and 46) ( Fig. 4B ; Supplemental Table 2 ). While similar levels of T?RII mRNA and protein expression were detected in either HeKa expressing or UM-SCC deficient for wtTP53 protein ( Fig. 1B and Fig. 4B ), diminished T?RII mRNA and protein levels was seen in most UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53, consistent with the pattern observed in a subset of HNSCC tumors above ( Fig. 1B , Fig. 4A, and 4B ). Transfection of wt TP53 into UM-SCC-11A cells deficient in endogenous wtTP53 promoted T?RII and target gene expression ( Supplemental Fig. 3 ), suggesting that expression of wtTP53 has an enhancing effect on T?RII expression, while endogenous mtTP53 in the other subset may have a dominant negative effect. To further establish if the mtTP53 in UM-SCC lines contributes to deficient T?RII expression, we tested the effect of TP53 siRNA to inhibit TP53 mRNA expression in UM-SCC lines with mtTP53. TP53 siRNA efficiently inhibited endogenous TP53 expression in UM-SCC-11B and 22A over 96 hours ( Fig. 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Knockdown of mt TP53 resulted in a progressive increase in T?RII gene expression relative to control siRNA ( Figure 4C , Supplemental Fig. 2B ). Similar results were seen in UM-SCC-22B and 46 ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Concomitant with enhanced T?RII expression, restoration of TGF? signaling was evident by increased transcription of TGF? downstream genes, SMAD7 and MMP2 , at 72 hr ( Fig. 4C ). We further compared effects of TP53 siRNA on the expression of TP53 , T?RII , and NF-?B REL(p65)-dependent proinflammatory genes IL-6 and IL-8 ( 14 ). Fig. 4D shows that following TP53 siRNA knockdown and increase in T?RII , there is a significant reduction in both IL-8 and IL-6 expression in the mtTP53 line UM-SCC-22B. Collectively, the results above suggest that mtTP53 may be one mechanism contributing to attenuated T?RII gene expression, TGF? signaling, and enhanced NF-?B inflammatory gene expression in HNSCCs.  Ectopic T?RII Expression Restores TGF? Signaling and Suppresses NF-?B Activation in HNSCC Cells To directly examine the role of T?RII expression and signaling in inhibition of NF-?B, we determined if transient transfection of a plasmid expressing exogenous T?RII protein could restore TGF? activity and suppress NF-?B signaling in HNSCC lines that demonstrated deficient T?RII. We selected UM-SCC-46, since it had previously exhibited complete attenuation of TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2B ). Upon transfection, ectopic T?RII was successfully transiently expressed between 48 to 96 hr ( Fig. 5A ). Expression of T?RII dramatically induced TGF? signaling in UM-SCC-46, illustrated by enhanced levels of activated phospho-Smad2 at 48 hr ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). This implicated T?RII expression as a critical defect in the TGF? signaling in these HNSCC cells. We further examined the effect of restored T?RII signaling on established mechanisms required for NF-?B target gene transactivation. IKK-dependent signal phosphorylation of p65(RelA) serine-536 and PKA-inducible phosphorylation of serine-276 have been shown to enhance NF-?B gene transactivation following stimulation with TNF? ( 22 ). Increased expression of T?RII strongly suppressed TNF?-induced nuclear p65(RELA) serine-536 phosphorylation, but not serine-276 phosphorylation, or expression of total p65, or Oct-1, an unrelated control ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). Together, these data are consistent with the hypothesis that T?RII in these HNSCC inhibits NF-?B transactivation by a signal dependent mechanism at, or above IKK. To further examine if T?RII modulates IKK-dependent I?B?degradation involved in upstream signal activation and nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( 2 , 23 ), we utilized a plasmid expressing an I?B-luciferase fusion protein ( 24 ), which can serve as a nontranscriptional reporter of kinase activation and degradation. As expected, TNF? enhanced degradation of the I?B?-Luc fusion protein ( Fig. 5C ). Upon transfection of ectopic T?RII, restoration of TGF? signaling resulted in a significant attenuation of TNF?-induced I?B-luciferase protein degradation (~25%; p<0.05), suggesting that a mechanism(s) upstream of IKK-mediated I?B degradation could partially contribute to the attenuating effect of TGF? on NF-?B signaling. Once we demonstrated that exogenous T?RII expression could inhibit NF-?B phosphorylation and I?B degradation, we sought to confirm if transient T?RII expression and signaling suppressed aberrant basal and TNF?-enhanced NF-?B transcriptional activity, using 3 UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53. UM-SCC-46 exhibited the strongest restoration of TGF?-induced luciferase activity at 48 hr upon ectopic expression of T?RII, followed by UM-SCC-22B and 22A ( Fig. 5D ). Restoration of T?RII signaling inhibited both constitutive and TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity in UM-SCC-46. UM-SCC-22A and 22B also exhibited a significant reduction in NF-?B transactivation, but this was most clearly demonstrated after exposure to TNF? ( Supplemental Fig. 5B ). These findings demonstrate that restoration of T?RII signaling not only reduces activated RELA(p65) serine-536 phosphorylation, but can also suppress NF-?B reporter gene transactivation in HNSCC lines expressing different mtTP53s.  Ectopic T?RII Expression Restores TGF? Signaling and Suppresses NF-?B Activation in HNSCC Cells To directly examine the role of T?RII expression and signaling in inhibition of NF-?B, we determined if transient transfection of a plasmid expressing exogenous T?RII protein could restore TGF? activity and suppress NF-?B signaling in HNSCC lines that demonstrated deficient T?RII. We selected UM-SCC-46, since it had previously exhibited complete attenuation of TGF? signaling ( Fig. 2B ). Upon transfection, ectopic T?RII was successfully transiently expressed between 48 to 96 hr ( Fig. 5A ). Expression of T?RII dramatically induced TGF? signaling in UM-SCC-46, illustrated by enhanced levels of activated phospho-Smad2 at 48 hr ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). This implicated T?RII expression as a critical defect in the TGF? signaling in these HNSCC cells. We further examined the effect of restored T?RII signaling on established mechanisms required for NF-?B target gene transactivation. IKK-dependent signal phosphorylation of p65(RelA) serine-536 and PKA-inducible phosphorylation of serine-276 have been shown to enhance NF-?B gene transactivation following stimulation with TNF? ( 22 ). Increased expression of T?RII strongly suppressed TNF?-induced nuclear p65(RELA) serine-536 phosphorylation, but not serine-276 phosphorylation, or expression of total p65, or Oct-1, an unrelated control ( Fig. 5B ; Supplemental Fig. 4A ). Together, these data are consistent with the hypothesis that T?RII in these HNSCC inhibits NF-?B transactivation by a signal dependent mechanism at, or above IKK. To further examine if T?RII modulates IKK-dependent I?B?degradation involved in upstream signal activation and nuclear translocation of NF-?B ( 2 , 23 ), we utilized a plasmid expressing an I?B-luciferase fusion protein ( 24 ), which can serve as a nontranscriptional reporter of kinase activation and degradation. As expected, TNF? enhanced degradation of the I?B?-Luc fusion protein ( Fig. 5C ). Upon transfection of ectopic T?RII, restoration of TGF? signaling resulted in a significant attenuation of TNF?-induced I?B-luciferase protein degradation (~25%; p<0.05), suggesting that a mechanism(s) upstream of IKK-mediated I?B degradation could partially contribute to the attenuating effect of TGF? on NF-?B signaling. Once we demonstrated that exogenous T?RII expression could inhibit NF-?B phosphorylation and I?B degradation, we sought to confirm if transient T?RII expression and signaling suppressed aberrant basal and TNF?-enhanced NF-?B transcriptional activity, using 3 UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53. UM-SCC-46 exhibited the strongest restoration of TGF?-induced luciferase activity at 48 hr upon ectopic expression of T?RII, followed by UM-SCC-22B and 22A ( Fig. 5D ). Restoration of T?RII signaling inhibited both constitutive and TNF?-induced NF-?B transcriptional activity in UM-SCC-46. UM-SCC-22A and 22B also exhibited a significant reduction in NF-?B transactivation, but this was most clearly demonstrated after exposure to TNF? ( Supplemental Fig. 5B ). These findings demonstrate that restoration of T?RII signaling not only reduces activated RELA(p65) serine-536 phosphorylation, but can also suppress NF-?B reporter gene transactivation in HNSCC lines expressing different mtTP53s.  Loss of TGF? Signaling Promotes NF-?B Activation in Murine HNSCCs with Conditional Deletion of <italic>T?RII</italic> To further examine the role of attenuated TGF? signaling in the aberrant activation of NF-?B, we investigated mucosa and tumors from a murine model in which K5 targeted genetic deletion of T?RII from mucosal stratified epithelia in combination with 7, 12-dimethyl-benz [a] anthracene (DMBA) initiation caused the development of primary and metastatic HNSCCs histolgically and molecularly similar to human HNSCC ( 16 ). Tissue samples were collected from buccal mucosa of 5 T?RII +/+, T?RII ?/?, and HNSCCs from 5 T?RII ?/? mice and compared. Representative H&E stained tumor sections showed atypical hyperproliferative epithelia by 3 months and HNSCC by 6 months in T?RII ?/? mice when compared to their wild-type littermates ( 16 ; Supplementary Fig. 6 ). Immunostaining of T?RII ?/? mucosa and HNSCCs confirmed the loss of T?RII protein and the absence of phosphorylated Smad2, demonstrating abrogation of TGF? signaling, as compared to wt controls ( Supplementary Fig. 6 ). As classical NF-?B signal activation involves the nuclear translocation of p65 and p50, we examined the aforementioned tissues for the presence and localization of these subunits using IF microscopy ( Fig. 6A ). As in human HNSCC lines above, concomitant with loss of TGF? signaling, a corresponding increase was seen in detectable nuclear RELA(p65) phospho-serine-536 as well as p50 staining in 5/5 T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and 5/5 T?RII ?/? HNSCC specimens. By contrast, normal T?RII +/+ mucosa revealed no NF-?B activation in 5 specimens studied. Interestingly, regions in HNSCCs with the strongest NF-?B activation exhibited reduced K14 expression, consistent with previous studies implicating aberrant NF-?B activity and downregulation of K14 in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of high-risk HNSCCs ( 25 ). Given the critical role of NF-?B in inflammation and our findings in Fig. 6A , we investigated the expression of NF-?B-regulated proinflammatory and angiogenic genes in these tissues by QRT-PCR ( Fig. 6B ). T?RII ?/? HNSCCs exhibited a significant induction of NF-?B inducible genes IL-1?, Vegf, Cxcl1 / Gro1 and Cxcl5 / Ena-78 when compared to both T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and normal T?RII +/+ mucosa (students t-test, p<0.05). Increased expression levels of Cxcl1 and Cxcl5 was also detected in T?RII ?/? preneoplastic lesions as compared with T?RII +/+ buccal tissues ( Fig. 6B ). Potentially further reflective of an inflammatory state, we observed previously ( 16 ) and here in the T?RII ?/? underlying stroma the presence of numerous infiltrating cells, which are strongly positive for nuclear NF-?B (p50) immunofluorescence ( Fig. 6A ). Together, these data strongly support a model where abrogation of TGF? signaling in stratified epithelia promotes the aberrant activation of NF-?B, target cytokines, enhanced inflammation, and development and malignant progression of HNSCC ( Fig. 6C ).  Loss of TGF? Signaling Promotes NF-?B Activation in Murine HNSCCs with Conditional Deletion of <italic>T?RII</italic> To further examine the role of attenuated TGF? signaling in the aberrant activation of NF-?B, we investigated mucosa and tumors from a murine model in which K5 targeted genetic deletion of T?RII from mucosal stratified epithelia in combination with 7, 12-dimethyl-benz [a] anthracene (DMBA) initiation caused the development of primary and metastatic HNSCCs histolgically and molecularly similar to human HNSCC ( 16 ). Tissue samples were collected from buccal mucosa of 5 T?RII +/+, T?RII ?/?, and HNSCCs from 5 T?RII ?/? mice and compared. Representative H&E stained tumor sections showed atypical hyperproliferative epithelia by 3 months and HNSCC by 6 months in T?RII ?/? mice when compared to their wild-type littermates ( 16 ; Supplementary Fig. 6 ). Immunostaining of T?RII ?/? mucosa and HNSCCs confirmed the loss of T?RII protein and the absence of phosphorylated Smad2, demonstrating abrogation of TGF? signaling, as compared to wt controls ( Supplementary Fig. 6 ). As classical NF-?B signal activation involves the nuclear translocation of p65 and p50, we examined the aforementioned tissues for the presence and localization of these subunits using IF microscopy ( Fig. 6A ). As in human HNSCC lines above, concomitant with loss of TGF? signaling, a corresponding increase was seen in detectable nuclear RELA(p65) phospho-serine-536 as well as p50 staining in 5/5 T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and 5/5 T?RII ?/? HNSCC specimens. By contrast, normal T?RII +/+ mucosa revealed no NF-?B activation in 5 specimens studied. Interestingly, regions in HNSCCs with the strongest NF-?B activation exhibited reduced K14 expression, consistent with previous studies implicating aberrant NF-?B activity and downregulation of K14 in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of high-risk HNSCCs ( 25 ). Given the critical role of NF-?B in inflammation and our findings in Fig. 6A , we investigated the expression of NF-?B-regulated proinflammatory and angiogenic genes in these tissues by QRT-PCR ( Fig. 6B ). T?RII ?/? HNSCCs exhibited a significant induction of NF-?B inducible genes IL-1?, Vegf, Cxcl1 / Gro1 and Cxcl5 / Ena-78 when compared to both T?RII ?/? buccal mucosa and normal T?RII +/+ mucosa (students t-test, p<0.05). Increased expression levels of Cxcl1 and Cxcl5 was also detected in T?RII ?/? preneoplastic lesions as compared with T?RII +/+ buccal tissues ( Fig. 6B ). Potentially further reflective of an inflammatory state, we observed previously ( 16 ) and here in the T?RII ?/? underlying stroma the presence of numerous infiltrating cells, which are strongly positive for nuclear NF-?B (p50) immunofluorescence ( Fig. 6A ). Together, these data strongly support a model where abrogation of TGF? signaling in stratified epithelia promotes the aberrant activation of NF-?B, target cytokines, enhanced inflammation, and development and malignant progression of HNSCC ( Fig. 6C ).  DISCUSSION Herein, we demonstrate that altered expression of TGF? receptor subunits and deficient TGF? signaling are common in human HNSCC lines and tissues, which exhibit enhanced activation of NF-?B. We show that restoration of TGF? signaling inhibits such aberrant NF-?B signaling and transcriptional activity, indicating that deficient TGF? signaling is a critical event leading to the activation of NF-?B in HNSCC. Our data further suggest that TP53 mutation may be one mechanism that contributes to attenuated TGF? signaling in a subset of HNSCCs through its ability to suppress T?RII expression. Finally, T?RII ?/? conditional knockout mice that develop HNSCC with enhanced inflammation exhibited increased NF-?B activation and proinflammatory gene expression with tumor development, marking a significant connection between deficient TGF? signaling and NF-?B activation in tumorigenesis. Whereas we have previously demonstrated that sustained induction of NF-?B plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of HNSCC, we now implicate loss of a negative regulatory signaling pathway, TGF?, as an integral step in this activation. We previously reported that NF-?B-regulated gene signatures are differentially upregulated in HNSCCs with distinct TP53 status, and that overexpression of either K-RAS or H-RAS at the transcriptional level frequently occurs in human HNSCC tissues with concomitant reduction of T?RII mRNA levels ( 14 , 16 , 17 ). Here, we found a reduced T?RII gene expression with concurrent RAS overexpression in a panel of human HNSCC cell lines, and report additional TGF? receptor and biological alterations, including those involving the NF-?B and TP53 pathways ( Fig. 1, A and B ). Notably, expression of certain genes clustered according to TP53 status, including the TGF? receptor subunits, SMAD3 , SMAD7 , TGFB1 , TGFB2 , HPGD , p21 Cip1 and MMP2 , as well as the NF-?B related genes C-REL , IL-8 , and cIAP1 , suggesting that differential regulatory mechanisms exist that are directly or indirectly affected by TP53 genotype. Furthermore, the aforementioned genes serve as critical effectors commonly involved in the progression of aggressive HNSCCs ( 4 , 16 , 26 , 27 ). Although it has been suggested that inactivation of T?RI and T?RII expression occurs more frequently than genetic disruption in human HNSCC tissues ( 16 , 28 ), the mechanisms by which this inhibition takes place in HNSCC have not been well defined. Our findings provide evidence that overexpression of mtTP53 can contribute to decreased expression of T?RII and signaling in a subset of HNSCC. Other mechanisms independent of mtTP53 accumulation may contribute to the deficient expression of T?RII in other HNSCC, such as those detected in tumor tissue array that lack TP53 staining. Here, we also detected reduced T?RI or T?RIII expression in a subset of HNSCC tumor lines deficient in wtTP53, representing other potential defects which merit further investigation. Downregulation of T?RIII transcript levels has been recently reported in breast and prostate cancers, in which it was related to more aggressive phenotypes and metastatic dissemination ( 29 ). A connection between TP53 and TGF? signaling was suggested in thyroid epithelial cells, where inactivation of wtTP53 induced a loss of responsiveness to TGF?1 treatment, accompanied by a partial reduction in TGF? receptor expression ( 30 ). Subsequent studies revealed that ectopic overexpression of wtTP53 proteins induced resistance of squamous carcinoma cells to TGF?-mediated growth inhibition ( 31 , 32 ). Here we provide further evidence for these relationships in distinct subsets of the same tumor type. Although T?RII expression is not dependent nor significantly attenuated in the UMSCC cell lines deficient in endogenous wtTP53, transfection of wt TP53 into these cells further enhanced T?RII expression and TGF? downstream signaling ( Supplementary Fig. 3 ), while in UMSCC lines with mtTP53, RNAi-mediated TP53 inhibition enhanced T?RII and downstream SMAD7 gene expression, supporting a dominant negative role of mtTP53 in T?RII signaling ( Fig. 4C ). Mutant TP53 knockdown and enhanced T?RII expression was also followed by attenuation in expression of prototypical NF-?B target genes IL-6 and IL-8 ( Fig. 4D ). In a murine squamous cell carcinoma model, we previously observed increased expression of mtTP53 protein accompanied by a corresponding reduction in T?RII expression, TGF?1 responsiveness, and increased activation of NF-?B and target genes as tumors progressed to a metastatic phenotype ( 33 , 34 ). Furthermore, in a TP53-null cell system, a recent study demonstrated that ectopic mtTP53 can interact with the promoter of T?RII , contributing to diminished T?RII gene expression ( 35 ). Together, these observations suggest that mtTP53 represents one mechanism that can reduce the expression of T?RII and TGF? signaling in a subset of SCCs and other cancers. However, as there are likely genetic and epigenetic mechanisms contributing to reduced or absent TP53 and T?RII expression in HNSCCs, it is not surprising that certain HNSCC specimens summarized in Suplementary Fig. 2 which exhibit reduced T?RII expression do not also exhibit nuclear TP53 staining. Although this is the first demonstration of a relationship between TGF? and NF-?B signaling in HNSCC, these findings are supported by other studies demonstrating crosstalk. In human intestinal mononuclear cells, pretreatment with TGF?1 diminished TNF?-induced activation of p65 ( 36 ), while in a transgenic mouse model of renal inflammation, TGF? target gene Smad7 promoted induction of I?B? , inhibiting an NF-?B-driven inflammatory response ( 37 ). Here we demonstrate that restored TGF? signaling partially reduces degradation of I?B? and strongly inhibits IKK?-dependent serine 536 phosphorylation of p65, localizing such crosstalk at or above the level of IKK. In HNSCC, IL-1-IL-1R, TNF-TNFR1 and TGF?-EGFR and PI3K-CK2-IKK signaling pathways have been shown to promote IKK and NF-?B activation ( 39 – 41 ), and these pathways have been reported to include components that may be modulated by TGF? signaling, such as TGF? Activating Kinase (TAK1), TAK1 binding kinase (TAB1), CK2, and ID1 mediated-PI3K-Akt activation ( 23 , 41 – 42 ). Studies are underway to determine if these or other mechanisms enhance cytokine and growth factor activation of NF-?B and inflammation in HNSCC. The potential relationship between reduced expression of T?RII and NF-?B activation was of particular interest because of our previous demonstration that conditional targeting of T?RII in murine aerodigestive epithelia results in HNSCCs exhibiting dramatic inflammation ( 16 ). Here, we show that both T?RII ?/? preneoplastic mucosa and HNSCCs demonstrate sustained induction of nuclear activation of classical NF-?B1/RelA (p50/p65) and its proinflammatory target genes ( Fig. 6A, B ). Most of these factors are significant mediators of the human NF-?B-regulated genetic program, critical in inflammation, angiogenesis, tumorigenesis and progression of human cancers ( 2 , 26 , 43 – 46 ). Together, our findings suggest a novel regulatory framework whereby abrogation of TGF? signaling in epithelial cells enhances NF-?B activation, tumorigenesis and a deleterious inflammatory signaling circuit through recruitment of infiltrating immune and angiogenic cells. Further, we demonstrate that mtTP53 may serve as an upstream repressor of T?RII expression, contributing to TGF? inhibition ( Fig. 6C ). It is notable that alterations in TP53, abrogated TGF? signaling and activation of NF-?B are facets of many cancers, raising the possibility that the mechanisms we have uncovered may extend beyond HNSCCs. Indeed, agents such as heat shock protein 90 inhibitors, which simultaneously inhibit both NF-?B and mtTP53, are under investigation and show promise in numerous preclinical models ( 47 ). Thus, NF-?B and mtTP53 may represent concomitant pharmacologic targets in tumors where compromised TGF? signaling leads to enhanced NF-?B activation and resultant malignant progression.  DISCUSSION Herein, we demonstrate that altered expression of TGF? receptor subunits and deficient TGF? signaling are common in human HNSCC lines and tissues, which exhibit enhanced activation of NF-?B. We show that restoration of TGF? signaling inhibits such aberrant NF-?B signaling and transcriptional activity, indicating that deficient TGF? signaling is a critical event leading to the activation of NF-?B in HNSCC. Our data further suggest that TP53 mutation may be one mechanism that contributes to attenuated TGF? signaling in a subset of HNSCCs through its ability to suppress T?RII expression. Finally, T?RII ?/? conditional knockout mice that develop HNSCC with enhanced inflammation exhibited increased NF-?B activation and proinflammatory gene expression with tumor development, marking a significant connection between deficient TGF? signaling and NF-?B activation in tumorigenesis. Whereas we have previously demonstrated that sustained induction of NF-?B plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of HNSCC, we now implicate loss of a negative regulatory signaling pathway, TGF?, as an integral step in this activation. We previously reported that NF-?B-regulated gene signatures are differentially upregulated in HNSCCs with distinct TP53 status, and that overexpression of either K-RAS or H-RAS at the transcriptional level frequently occurs in human HNSCC tissues with concomitant reduction of T?RII mRNA levels ( 14 , 16 , 17 ). Here, we found a reduced T?RII gene expression with concurrent RAS overexpression in a panel of human HNSCC cell lines, and report additional TGF? receptor and biological alterations, including those involving the NF-?B and TP53 pathways ( Fig. 1, A and B ). Notably, expression of certain genes clustered according to TP53 status, including the TGF? receptor subunits, SMAD3 , SMAD7 , TGFB1 , TGFB2 , HPGD , p21 Cip1 and MMP2 , as well as the NF-?B related genes C-REL , IL-8 , and cIAP1 , suggesting that differential regulatory mechanisms exist that are directly or indirectly affected by TP53 genotype. Furthermore, the aforementioned genes serve as critical effectors commonly involved in the progression of aggressive HNSCCs ( 4 , 16 , 26 , 27 ). Although it has been suggested that inactivation of T?RI and T?RII expression occurs more frequently than genetic disruption in human HNSCC tissues ( 16 , 28 ), the mechanisms by which this inhibition takes place in HNSCC have not been well defined. Our findings provide evidence that overexpression of mtTP53 can contribute to decreased expression of T?RII and signaling in a subset of HNSCC. Other mechanisms independent of mtTP53 accumulation may contribute to the deficient expression of T?RII in other HNSCC, such as those detected in tumor tissue array that lack TP53 staining. Here, we also detected reduced T?RI or T?RIII expression in a subset of HNSCC tumor lines deficient in wtTP53, representing other potential defects which merit further investigation. Downregulation of T?RIII transcript levels has been recently reported in breast and prostate cancers, in which it was related to more aggressive phenotypes and metastatic dissemination ( 29 ). A connection between TP53 and TGF? signaling was suggested in thyroid epithelial cells, where inactivation of wtTP53 induced a loss of responsiveness to TGF?1 treatment, accompanied by a partial reduction in TGF? receptor expression ( 30 ). Subsequent studies revealed that ectopic overexpression of wtTP53 proteins induced resistance of squamous carcinoma cells to TGF?-mediated growth inhibition ( 31 , 32 ). Here we provide further evidence for these relationships in distinct subsets of the same tumor type. Although T?RII expression is not dependent nor significantly attenuated in the UMSCC cell lines deficient in endogenous wtTP53, transfection of wt TP53 into these cells further enhanced T?RII expression and TGF? downstream signaling ( Supplementary Fig. 3 ), while in UMSCC lines with mtTP53, RNAi-mediated TP53 inhibition enhanced T?RII and downstream SMAD7 gene expression, supporting a dominant negative role of mtTP53 in T?RII signaling ( Fig. 4C ). Mutant TP53 knockdown and enhanced T?RII expression was also followed by attenuation in expression of prototypical NF-?B target genes IL-6 and IL-8 ( Fig. 4D ). In a murine squamous cell carcinoma model, we previously observed increased expression of mtTP53 protein accompanied by a corresponding reduction in T?RII expression, TGF?1 responsiveness, and increased activation of NF-?B and target genes as tumors progressed to a metastatic phenotype ( 33 , 34 ). Furthermore, in a TP53-null cell system, a recent study demonstrated that ectopic mtTP53 can interact with the promoter of T?RII , contributing to diminished T?RII gene expression ( 35 ). Together, these observations suggest that mtTP53 represents one mechanism that can reduce the expression of T?RII and TGF? signaling in a subset of SCCs and other cancers. However, as there are likely genetic and epigenetic mechanisms contributing to reduced or absent TP53 and T?RII expression in HNSCCs, it is not surprising that certain HNSCC specimens summarized in Suplementary Fig. 2 which exhibit reduced T?RII expression do not also exhibit nuclear TP53 staining. Although this is the first demonstration of a relationship between TGF? and NF-?B signaling in HNSCC, these findings are supported by other studies demonstrating crosstalk. In human intestinal mononuclear cells, pretreatment with TGF?1 diminished TNF?-induced activation of p65 ( 36 ), while in a transgenic mouse model of renal inflammation, TGF? target gene Smad7 promoted induction of I?B? , inhibiting an NF-?B-driven inflammatory response ( 37 ). Here we demonstrate that restored TGF? signaling partially reduces degradation of I?B? and strongly inhibits IKK?-dependent serine 536 phosphorylation of p65, localizing such crosstalk at or above the level of IKK. In HNSCC, IL-1-IL-1R, TNF-TNFR1 and TGF?-EGFR and PI3K-CK2-IKK signaling pathways have been shown to promote IKK and NF-?B activation ( 39 – 41 ), and these pathways have been reported to include components that may be modulated by TGF? signaling, such as TGF? Activating Kinase (TAK1), TAK1 binding kinase (TAB1), CK2, and ID1 mediated-PI3K-Akt activation ( 23 , 41 – 42 ). Studies are underway to determine if these or other mechanisms enhance cytokine and growth factor activation of NF-?B and inflammation in HNSCC. The potential relationship between reduced expression of T?RII and NF-?B activation was of particular interest because of our previous demonstration that conditional targeting of T?RII in murine aerodigestive epithelia results in HNSCCs exhibiting dramatic inflammation ( 16 ). Here, we show that both T?RII ?/? preneoplastic mucosa and HNSCCs demonstrate sustained induction of nuclear activation of classical NF-?B1/RelA (p50/p65) and its proinflammatory target genes ( Fig. 6A, B ). Most of these factors are significant mediators of the human NF-?B-regulated genetic program, critical in inflammation, angiogenesis, tumorigenesis and progression of human cancers ( 2 , 26 , 43 – 46 ). Together, our findings suggest a novel regulatory framework whereby abrogation of TGF? signaling in epithelial cells enhances NF-?B activation, tumorigenesis and a deleterious inflammatory signaling circuit through recruitment of infiltrating immune and angiogenic cells. Further, we demonstrate that mtTP53 may serve as an upstream repressor of T?RII expression, contributing to TGF? inhibition ( Fig. 6C ). It is notable that alterations in TP53, abrogated TGF? signaling and activation of NF-?B are facets of many cancers, raising the possibility that the mechanisms we have uncovered may extend beyond HNSCCs. Indeed, agents such as heat shock protein 90 inhibitors, which simultaneously inhibit both NF-?B and mtTP53, are under investigation and show promise in numerous preclinical models ( 47 ). Thus, NF-?B and mtTP53 may represent concomitant pharmacologic targets in tumors where compromised TGF? signaling leads to enhanced NF-?B activation and resultant malignant progression.  Supplementary Material SuppData  Supplementary Material SuppData  Figures Figure 1 Aberrant NF-?B and deficient TGF? Pathway Gene Expression Signatures in HNSCCs with Distinct TP53 Status (A) Gene expression heatmap of important genes related to TGF?, NF-?B, TP53 and RAS signaling pathways in nine HNSCC (UM-SCC) cell lines, normalized to normal primary human keratinocytes (HeKa). Red, increased expression; green, decreased expression. Clustering was associated with TP53 genotype and mRNA levels of wt TP53 and mt TP53 . (B ) Reduced TGF? pathway component expression in HNSCC cells. Quantitative comparison of relative mRNA levels for eight TGF? signal pathway genes are shown. Expression levels of individual genes in HeKa cells were set to the value of 1 arbitrary unit. Error bars are ±SD between triplicate samples. Figure 2 Attenuated TGF?-Induced Growth Inhibition and Target Gene Expression in HNSCC Cells (A) Functional attenuation of TGF?-mediated growth arrest in UMSCC lines. Cell proliferation was measured in 5-day MTT assay in HeKa cells and UM-SCC lines of differing TP53 status. Cells were treated with 1, 10 or 20 ng/ml of rTGF?1. Cell growth rates were analyzed in quadruplicate, mean±SD, *p<0.05. (B) Attenuated TGF?-induced activation of PAI1 , MMP2 , and p15INK4b and suppression of c-MYC in UM-SCC. UM-SCC lines and HeKa cells were stimulated with 10 ng/ml for indicated time-points, and total RNA was isolated and assayed for TGF? target gene mRNA levels by QRT-PCR. Expression of individual genes at 0 hr were set to the value of 1 arbitrary unit. Means±SD between triplicate samples are shown. Figure 3 Stimulation of Residual TGF? Signaling Suppresses NF-?B Activation in UM-SCC Cells (A) TGF? reporter gene activity in UM-SCC-6, 22B, and 46 cotransfected with a TGF?-induced reporter plasmid and ?-galactosidase reporter plasmid, and cultured ?/+TGF?1 (10 ng/ml) for 12 hr. (B) NF-?B reporter gene activity in the same three lines cotransfected with NF-?B and ?-galactosidase reporter plasmids, and treated with different concentrations of TNF?, TGF?1, or the combination for 12 hr. Luciferase values are normalized to ?-galactosidase activity. Means±SD between triplicate samples are shown; *p<0.05 vs untreated control cells. **p<0.05 vs TNF?-stimulated cells. Figure 4 Linkage Between Diminished T?RII Expression and Signaling, Mutant TP53 Accumulation and NF-?B Target Gene Activation in a subset of HNSCC (A) Photomicrographs show diminished T?RII and phosphorylated (activated) Smad2 with TP53 accumulation in a representative HNSCC, compared with the opposite pattern in normal oral mucosa. Semi-quantitative scoring and classification of T?RII, p-Smad2 and TP53 protein staining of 20 tumors is described in Supplementary methods and Fig. 2 : (?), negative; (low), reduced; (+), strong staining. (B) Diminished T?RII expression is detected in a subset of UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53. Western blot analysis of T?RII, TP53 and ?-actin in HeKa, wt and mt TP53 UM-SCC cell lines. (C) TP53 siRNA knockdown enhances T?RII and target genes SMAD7 and MMP2 mRNA expression in mt TP53 UM-SCC-22A. (D) TP53 siRNA knockdown enhances T?RII and inhibits NF-?B target gene IL-8 and IL-6 mRNA expression in UM-SCC-22B. UM-SCC lines were transfected with either control or TP53 siRNA. Quantitation of mtTP53 inhibition and target genes was assessed using QRT-PCR at the indicated time points. The expression level in each control siRNA-treated sample is designated as 1.0. Means±SD between triplicate samples, *p<0.05 are shown. Figure 5 T?RII Transfection Restores TGF? Signaling and Inhibits NF-?B Activation in HNSCC (A) Transient transfection with T?RII expression vector enhances expression of T?RII protein. Western blots were performed using whole cell lysates from UM-SCC-46 cells at the indicated times. (B) Western analysis of nuclear extracts from UM-SCC-46 showing re-expression of T?RII restores TGF? phospho-Smad2 signaling, and suppresses IKK-dependent serine-536 but not PKA-mediated serine-276 phsophorylation of RELA(p65) NF-?B subunit after TNF? (10 ng/ml). UM-SCC-46 cells were transfected with a T?RII expression plasmid or control vector and nuclear extracts were harvested after 48 hr for immunoblotting. Oct-1, loading control. Densitometric quantification of p-Smad2 and T?RII protein is shown. (C) T?RII attenuates TNF?-induced degradation of I?B?-luciferase fusion protein. UM-SCC-46 cells transfected with an I?B-luciferase fusion protein ?/+control or T?RII expression vector for 24 hr, and ± TNF? (50 ng/ml) for 30 min. (D) T?RII induces TGF?and attenuates NF-?B reporter gene transactivation in UM-SCC. HNSCC lines were co-transfected with the respective reporter plasmid plus a T?RII expression or control vector, and cultured ±TNF? (10 ng/ml) for 12 hr prior to the indicated time-points. All luciferase values are normalized to ?-galactosidase. Bar graphs indicate mean±SD of triplicate samples, *p<0.05. Figure 6 Abrogation of TGF? Signaling Promotes NF-?B Activation and Proinflammatory Target Gene Expression in HNSCCs of <italic>T?RII</italic><sup>?/?</sup> Mice (A) NF-?B p65 and p50 subunit IF staining of buccal squamous mucosa from T?RII+/+, T?RII?/? and HNSCC from T?RII?/? mice. Buccal tissues representative of 5 T?RII +/+ and T?RII ?/? mice at 3 months and HNSCC from 5 T?RII ?/? mice at 6 months following DMBA initiation are shown. Green, nuclear phospho-p65 and p50; Red, epithelial K14). Arrowheads, p50+ nuclei in T?RII ?/? buccal stroma. Asterisks, NF-?B in regions with reduced K14. (B) QRT-PCR analysis of NF-?B pro-inflammatory gene mRNA expression from T?RII +/+ and T?RII ?/? buccal, and T?RII ?/? HNSCC tissue samples. Expression of genes in T?RII +/+ buccal tissue were set to 1 arbitrary unit. Results are presented as the mean±SE on triplicate samples of mRNA from five mice/group. *p<0.05 vs DMBA-initiated T?RII +/+ buccal tissue; †p<0.05 vs DMBA-initiated T?RII ?/? preneoplastic buccal tissue. (C) Proposed model for enhanced tumorigenesis and malignant progression resulting from loss of TGF? signaling and resultant NF-?B and gene activation. mtTP53 represses T?RII expression, while deficient wtTP53 is associated with diminished T?RI and T?RIII expression, attenuating TGF? signaling in HNSCC subsets. Deficient TGF? signaling renders epithelia resistant to TGF? cytostatic and anti-inflammatory programs while enhancing aberrant activation of NF-?B target prosurvival and inflammatory gene programs.  Figures Figure 1 Aberrant NF-?B and deficient TGF? Pathway Gene Expression Signatures in HNSCCs with Distinct TP53 Status (A) Gene expression heatmap of important genes related to TGF?, NF-?B, TP53 and RAS signaling pathways in nine HNSCC (UM-SCC) cell lines, normalized to normal primary human keratinocytes (HeKa). Red, increased expression; green, decreased expression. Clustering was associated with TP53 genotype and mRNA levels of wt TP53 and mt TP53 . (B ) Reduced TGF? pathway component expression in HNSCC cells. Quantitative comparison of relative mRNA levels for eight TGF? signal pathway genes are shown. Expression levels of individual genes in HeKa cells were set to the value of 1 arbitrary unit. Error bars are ±SD between triplicate samples. Figure 2 Attenuated TGF?-Induced Growth Inhibition and Target Gene Expression in HNSCC Cells (A) Functional attenuation of TGF?-mediated growth arrest in UMSCC lines. Cell proliferation was measured in 5-day MTT assay in HeKa cells and UM-SCC lines of differing TP53 status. Cells were treated with 1, 10 or 20 ng/ml of rTGF?1. Cell growth rates were analyzed in quadruplicate, mean±SD, *p<0.05. (B) Attenuated TGF?-induced activation of PAI1 , MMP2 , and p15INK4b and suppression of c-MYC in UM-SCC. UM-SCC lines and HeKa cells were stimulated with 10 ng/ml for indicated time-points, and total RNA was isolated and assayed for TGF? target gene mRNA levels by QRT-PCR. Expression of individual genes at 0 hr were set to the value of 1 arbitrary unit. Means±SD between triplicate samples are shown. Figure 3 Stimulation of Residual TGF? Signaling Suppresses NF-?B Activation in UM-SCC Cells (A) TGF? reporter gene activity in UM-SCC-6, 22B, and 46 cotransfected with a TGF?-induced reporter plasmid and ?-galactosidase reporter plasmid, and cultured ?/+TGF?1 (10 ng/ml) for 12 hr. (B) NF-?B reporter gene activity in the same three lines cotransfected with NF-?B and ?-galactosidase reporter plasmids, and treated with different concentrations of TNF?, TGF?1, or the combination for 12 hr. Luciferase values are normalized to ?-galactosidase activity. Means±SD between triplicate samples are shown; *p<0.05 vs untreated control cells. **p<0.05 vs TNF?-stimulated cells. Figure 4 Linkage Between Diminished T?RII Expression and Signaling, Mutant TP53 Accumulation and NF-?B Target Gene Activation in a subset of HNSCC (A) Photomicrographs show diminished T?RII and phosphorylated (activated) Smad2 with TP53 accumulation in a representative HNSCC, compared with the opposite pattern in normal oral mucosa. Semi-quantitative scoring and classification of T?RII, p-Smad2 and TP53 protein staining of 20 tumors is described in Supplementary methods and Fig. 2 : (?), negative; (low), reduced; (+), strong staining. (B) Diminished T?RII expression is detected in a subset of UM-SCC lines expressing mtTP53. Western blot analysis of T?RII, TP53 and ?-actin in HeKa, wt and mt TP53 UM-SCC cell lines. (C) TP53 siRNA knockdown enhances T?RII and target genes SMAD7 and MMP2 mRNA expression in mt TP53 UM-SCC-22A. (D) TP53 siRNA knockdown enhances T?RII and inhibits NF-?B target gene IL-8 and IL-6 mRNA expression in UM-SCC-22B. UM-SCC lines were transfected with either control or TP53 siRNA. Quantitation of mtTP53 inhibition and target genes was assessed using QRT-PCR at the indicated time points. The expression level in each control siRNA-treated sample is designated as 1.0. Means±SD between triplicate samples, *p<0.05 are shown. Figure 5 T?RII Transfection Restores TGF? Signaling and Inhibits NF-?B Activation in HNSCC (A) Transient transfection with T?RII expression vector enhances expression of T?RII protein. Western blots were performed using whole cell lysates from UM-SCC-46 cells at the indicated times. (B) Western analysis of nuclear extracts from UM-SCC-46 showing re-expression of T?RII restores TGF? phospho-Smad2 signaling, and suppresses IKK-dependent serine-536 but not PKA-mediated serine-276 phsophorylation of RELA(p65) NF-?B subunit after TNF? (10 ng/ml). UM-SCC-46 cells were transfected with a T?RII expression plasmid or control vector and nuclear extracts were harvested after 48 hr for immunoblotting. Oct-1, loading control. Densitometric quantification of p-Smad2 and T?RII protein is shown. (C) T?RII attenuates TNF?-induced degradation of I?B?-luciferase fusion protein. UM-SCC-46 cells transfected with an I?B-luciferase fusion protein ?/+control or T?RII expression vector for 24 hr, and ± TNF? (50 ng/ml) for 30 min. (D) T?RII induces TGF?and attenuates NF-?B reporter gene transactivation in UM-SCC. HNSCC lines were co-transfected with the respective reporter plasmid plus a T?RII expression or control vector, and cultured ±TNF? (10 ng/ml) for 12 hr prior to the indicated time-points. All luciferase values are normalized to ?-galactosidase. Bar graphs indicate mean±SD of triplicate samples, *p<0.05. Figure 6 Abrogation of TGF? Signaling Promotes NF-?B Activation and Proinflammatory Target Gene Expression in HNSCCs of <italic>T?RII</italic><sup>?/?</sup> Mice (A) NF-?B p65 and p50 subunit IF staining of buccal squamous mucosa from T?RII+/+, T?RII?/? and HNSCC from T?RII?/? mice. Buccal tissues representative of 5 T?RII +/+ and T?RII ?/? mice at 3 months and HNSCC from 5 T?RII ?/? mice at 6 months following DMBA initiation are shown. Green, nuclear phospho-p65 and p50; Red, epithelial K14). Arrowheads, p50+ nuclei in T?RII ?/? buccal stroma. Asterisks, NF-?B in regions with reduced K14. (B) QRT-PCR analysis of NF-?B pro-inflammatory gene mRNA expression from T?RII +/+ and T?RII ?/? buccal, and T?RII ?/? HNSCC tissue samples. Expression of genes in T?RII +/+ buccal tissue were set to 1 arbitrary unit. Results are presented as the mean±SE on triplicate samples of mRNA from five mice/group. *p<0.05 vs DMBA-initiated T?RII +/+ buccal tissue; †p<0.05 vs DMBA-initiated T?RII ?/? preneoplastic buccal tissue. (C) Proposed model for enhanced tumorigenesis and malignant progression resulting from loss of TGF? signaling and resultant NF-?B and gene activation. mtTP53 represses T?RII expression, while deficient wtTP53 is associated with diminished T?RI and T?RIII expression, attenuating TGF? signaling in HNSCC subsets. Deficient TGF? signaling renders epithelia resistant to TGF? cytostatic and anti-inflammatory programs while enhancing aberrant activation of NF-?B target prosurvival and inflammatory gene programs. 