Translating the Metastasis Paradigm from Scientific Theory to Clinical Oncology Cancer metastasis contributes to significant morbidity and mortality. Patients with metastatic cancer, often considered incurable, are provided with either supportive care or aggressive management without curative intent. Despite decades of research toward unraveling cancer progression mechanisms, the current body of knowledge has not translated into effective anti-metastasis therapies, but recent findings challenge the classic notion that metastases develop during late stages of carcinogenesis. Here, we evaluate the scientific evidence in the context of the multistage metastasis model. The resolution of current controversies has implications on both the prognostic value of molecular technology and the future of targeted therapies for the clinical benefit of metastasis patients.  Implications for prognosis and targeted therapy Understanding the mechanisms behind metastasis has clear implications for the future of clinical oncology. Early reports have already established gene expression profiles that are able to predict metastasis and outcome, including metastasis profiles identified in our laboratory based on the expression of mRNA and microRNA patterns in primary hepatocellular carcinoma specimens and in their surrounding non-cancerous tissues ( 16 , 33 , 34 ). These models may be useful for prognosis and identifying patients who require systemic therapy, but further validation is necessary to establish their value in comparison to existing clinical parameters. Additionally, understanding the sequence of molecular events at various stages of metastasis may aid the identification of therapeutic targets. In particular, a patient who develops metastasis likely has disease that has undergone distant colonization at the time of diagnosis; therefore, only the mechanisms governing growth at the distant site are of clinical significance to his or her treatment. This reinforces the need to develop therapeutic targets with specificity for the metastasis itself. There have many attempts to develop HCC therapeutic agents, however many are geared towards processes shared between tumorigenesis and growth rather than a particular metastasis specific event ( Table 1 ). A lesson may be taken from the failed phase III trials of inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Although MMPs have been shown to have multiple roles in the metastatic process, their most important functions may be in facilitating the escape of the cancer from the primary site. In addition, a growth factor family targeted in HCC is epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) or human epidermal growth factor (HER). These receptors are involved in a signaling pathway which eventually leads to the activation of a tyrosine kinase intracellular domain which serves as a docking location for intracellular signaling molecules that bind to phoshotyrosine and lead to modulation of cell proliferation, invasion, apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. Small molecule compounds such as erlotinib and lapatinib ( 35 , 36 ), which inhibit tyrosine phosphorylation have been reported in clinical trials for HCC. Although these compounds were well tolerated, their anti-tumor affect was only modest. Cetuximab is a chimaeric monoclonal antibody directed against EGFR and blocks the binding of this receptor to its ligands. Although Cetuximab leads to growth inhibition, its anti-tumor activity has been found to be quite low ( 37 ). These drugs however are mainly targeting tumor growth and not the process of metastasis. In contrast the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab targets angiogenesis in the growth of metastatic cancer following colonization and is currently used as a first-line agent against metastatic colorectal cancer ( 38 ). The use of this drug in an adjuvant setting and in combination with other therapeutics is also warranted. Other VEGF related agents include sorafenib (an oral multikinase inhibitor which blocks tumor cell proliferation/angiogenesis mainly by targeting Raf/MAPK-ERK kinase), sunitinib and TSU-68 (oral anti-angiogenesis compounds). Sorafenib has recently been described to improve survival in a recent randomized control trial in advanced HCC, however the survival benefit is only by an extension of three months and thus other drugs which provide longer prognosis are needed ( 39 ). Sunitinib has also shown promise in phase-II trials of advanced HCC and warrants a large scale randomized trial ( 40 ). Clinical trial results using individual or combined therapeutic agents suggests that synergistic effects may be achieved when drug regimens are combined. In fact, combinations of EGFR and VEGF inhibitors such as erlotinib and bevacizumab show promising results ( 41 ). Thus, drugs targeting more specific alterations associated with metastasis, such as angiogenesis are more likely to be beneficial in blocking this phenotype. The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is another important target for development of novel HCC therapeutics. A large percentage of HCCs show activation of this pathway which leads to nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and upregulation of downstream transcription factors. Various strategies are being developed and tested in preclinical studies to target this signaling pathway. These include blocking the interaction between beta-catenin and TCF and monoclonal antibodies against Wnt-1 and Wnt-2. In our laboratory, we have found that an HCC subtype correlating with stem-cell-like features and poor prognosis displays a molecular profile consistent with activation of the Wnt-beta catenin pathway ( 42 - 44 ). This suggests that certain patients with a stem-cell-like HCC subtype and activation of Wnt-beta catenin signaling may specifically benefit from Wnt-beta-catenin inhibitor regimens. This would allow for more beneficial stratification of patients for the most appropriate treatment regimens, a notion which requires further studies. Although Wnt-pathway antagonists have not been efficacious in HCC, the importance of this signaling pathway in HCC warrants future investigation and development of therapies geared towards modulating Wnt-signaling.  Implications for prognosis and targeted therapy Understanding the mechanisms behind metastasis has clear implications for the future of clinical oncology. Early reports have already established gene expression profiles that are able to predict metastasis and outcome, including metastasis profiles identified in our laboratory based on the expression of mRNA and microRNA patterns in primary hepatocellular carcinoma specimens and in their surrounding non-cancerous tissues ( 16 , 33 , 34 ). These models may be useful for prognosis and identifying patients who require systemic therapy, but further validation is necessary to establish their value in comparison to existing clinical parameters. Additionally, understanding the sequence of molecular events at various stages of metastasis may aid the identification of therapeutic targets. In particular, a patient who develops metastasis likely has disease that has undergone distant colonization at the time of diagnosis; therefore, only the mechanisms governing growth at the distant site are of clinical significance to his or her treatment. This reinforces the need to develop therapeutic targets with specificity for the metastasis itself. There have many attempts to develop HCC therapeutic agents, however many are geared towards processes shared between tumorigenesis and growth rather than a particular metastasis specific event ( Table 1 ). A lesson may be taken from the failed phase III trials of inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Although MMPs have been shown to have multiple roles in the metastatic process, their most important functions may be in facilitating the escape of the cancer from the primary site. In addition, a growth factor family targeted in HCC is epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) or human epidermal growth factor (HER). These receptors are involved in a signaling pathway which eventually leads to the activation of a tyrosine kinase intracellular domain which serves as a docking location for intracellular signaling molecules that bind to phoshotyrosine and lead to modulation of cell proliferation, invasion, apoptosis, angiogenesis and metastasis. Small molecule compounds such as erlotinib and lapatinib ( 35 , 36 ), which inhibit tyrosine phosphorylation have been reported in clinical trials for HCC. Although these compounds were well tolerated, their anti-tumor affect was only modest. Cetuximab is a chimaeric monoclonal antibody directed against EGFR and blocks the binding of this receptor to its ligands. Although Cetuximab leads to growth inhibition, its anti-tumor activity has been found to be quite low ( 37 ). These drugs however are mainly targeting tumor growth and not the process of metastasis. In contrast the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab targets angiogenesis in the growth of metastatic cancer following colonization and is currently used as a first-line agent against metastatic colorectal cancer ( 38 ). The use of this drug in an adjuvant setting and in combination with other therapeutics is also warranted. Other VEGF related agents include sorafenib (an oral multikinase inhibitor which blocks tumor cell proliferation/angiogenesis mainly by targeting Raf/MAPK-ERK kinase), sunitinib and TSU-68 (oral anti-angiogenesis compounds). Sorafenib has recently been described to improve survival in a recent randomized control trial in advanced HCC, however the survival benefit is only by an extension of three months and thus other drugs which provide longer prognosis are needed ( 39 ). Sunitinib has also shown promise in phase-II trials of advanced HCC and warrants a large scale randomized trial ( 40 ). Clinical trial results using individual or combined therapeutic agents suggests that synergistic effects may be achieved when drug regimens are combined. In fact, combinations of EGFR and VEGF inhibitors such as erlotinib and bevacizumab show promising results ( 41 ). Thus, drugs targeting more specific alterations associated with metastasis, such as angiogenesis are more likely to be beneficial in blocking this phenotype. The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is another important target for development of novel HCC therapeutics. A large percentage of HCCs show activation of this pathway which leads to nuclear translocation of beta-catenin and upregulation of downstream transcription factors. Various strategies are being developed and tested in preclinical studies to target this signaling pathway. These include blocking the interaction between beta-catenin and TCF and monoclonal antibodies against Wnt-1 and Wnt-2. In our laboratory, we have found that an HCC subtype correlating with stem-cell-like features and poor prognosis displays a molecular profile consistent with activation of the Wnt-beta catenin pathway ( 42 - 44 ). This suggests that certain patients with a stem-cell-like HCC subtype and activation of Wnt-beta catenin signaling may specifically benefit from Wnt-beta-catenin inhibitor regimens. This would allow for more beneficial stratification of patients for the most appropriate treatment regimens, a notion which requires further studies. Although Wnt-pathway antagonists have not been efficacious in HCC, the importance of this signaling pathway in HCC warrants future investigation and development of therapies geared towards modulating Wnt-signaling.  Summary The identification of clinically useful drug targets is possible with current technology and careful study design. The challenge is to identify molecular changes that distinguish the metastasis from the matched primary tumor. Current reports comparing samples from patients lack statistical power due to the difficulty in obtaining metastatic tissue for analysis. Moreover, to be truly comparative and to ascertain metastasis changes that are not confounded by tumor/sample heterogeneity, experiments comparing primary tumors and metastases must be conducted in a paired/matched fashion. However, the evidence from profiling studies thus far has shed light on the metastatic process and suggests that metastasis may occur through the alteration of rare metastasis promoting genes and by changes in the nature of the environment for it to thrive. We suggest that molecular profiling of the bulk tissue, which can dually ascertain tumor and microenvironment associated changes may delineate the factors that distinguish a primary tumor mass from its metastasis. We suspect that such analysis will reveal the molecular mechanisms of metastasis and essential genetic changes that allow for survival and drive proliferation within a foreign microenvironment. If these pathways can be targeted with specificity, there will be rekindled hope of finding a cure for metastatic cancer.  Figure and Table Figure 1 The evolution of metastasis theories A timeline is presented outlining the major conceptual advances in our understanding of the origins and mechanisms of metastasis from Paget’s seminal “seed vs. soil” hypothesis to more recent theories regarding the role of stem cells and early developmental transitions. Table 1 Clinical targets for hepatocellular carcinoma Therapeutic Agent Molecular Target Mechanism/Pathway Bevacizumab VEGF Angiogenesis Sorafenib (TKI), Sunitinib (TKI), Brivanib, Cediranib, Valatanib, TSU-68 VEGFR Angiogenesis Sorafenib (TKI), Imatinib (TKI), Sunitinib (TKI) PDGFR Angiogenesis Sorafenib (TKI) RAF Signal Transduction Vandetanib MEK Signal Transduction Gefitinib (TKI), Cetuximab (mAb), Erlotinib (TKI), Panitumumab (mAb) EGFR Signal Transduction Imatinib, Sunitinib (TKI), Sirafenib PDGFR Signal Transduction Sunitinib (TKI) FLT3 Signal Transduction Dasatinib SRC Migration/Invasion Imatinib (TKI), Dasatinib c-KIT Signal Transduction Trastuzumab (mAb), Lapatinib (TKI) HER2 Signal Transduction Farnesyl transferase inhibitor tipifamib RAS Signal Transduction Rapamycin mTOR Signal Transduction Wnt (mAb), SMI Wnt, b-catenin Siagnal Transduction Apomab, rhApo/TRAIL, Mapatumumab Apo2/TRAIL Apoptosis Flavopiridol CDKs Cell Cycle TKI: tyrosine kinase Inhibitor; mAb: monoclonal antibody; SMI: small molecule inhibitor 