Hepatitis C Virus and Disrupted Interferon Signaling Promote Lymphoproliferation via Type II CD95 and Interleukins BACKGROUND & AIMS The molecular mechanisms of lymphoproliferation associated with the disruption of interferon (IFN) signaling and chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection are poorly understood. Lymphomas are extrahepatic manifestations of HCV infection; we sought to clarify the molecular mechanisms of these processes. METHODS We established interferon regulatory factor-1– null (irf-1?/?) mice with inducible and persistent expression of HCV structural proteins (irf-1/CN2 mice). All the mice (n = 900) were observed for at least 600 days after Cre/loxP switching. Histologic analyses, as well as analyses of lymphoproliferation, sensitivity to Fas-induced apoptosis, colony formation, and cytokine production, were performed. Proteins associated with these processes were also assessed. RESULTS Irf-1 /CN2 mice had extremely high incidences of lymphomas and lymphoproliferative disorders and displayed increased mortality. Disruption of irf-1 reduced the sensitivity to Fas-induced apoptosis and decreased the levels of caspases-3/7 and caspase-9 messenger RNA species and enzymatic activities. Furthermore, the irf-1 /CN2 mice showed decreased activation of caspases-3/7 and caspase-9 and increased levels of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-10, and Bcl-2, as well as increased Bcl-2 expression, which promoted oncogenic transformation of lymphocytes. IL-2 and IL-10 were induced by the HCV core protein in splenocytes. CONCLUSIONS Disruption of IFN signaling resulted in development of lymphoma, indicating that differential signaling occurs in lymphocytes compared with liver. This mouse model, in which HCV expression and disruption of IFN signaling synergize to promote lymphoproliferation, will be an important tool for the development of therapeutic agents that target the lymphoproliferative pathway.  Materials and Methods Animal Experiments Wild-type (WT), CN2, irf-1 ?/?, and Mx1-cre mice were maintained in conventional animal housing under specific pathogen-free conditions. AxCANCre and Ax-CAw1 were obtained from Dr Izumu Saito (University of Tokyo). 15 To elicit Fas-induced liver damage, adult mice were injected intravenously with 10 ? g of purified hamster monoclonal antibody against mouse Fas (clone Jo2; BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) in 200 ? L of phosphate-buffered saline. All animal experiments were performed according to the guidelines of the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science or Kumamoto University Subcommittee for Laboratory Animal Care. The protocol was approved by an institutional review board. Detailed procedures, including induction of the HCV transgene by poly(I:C) in CN2-29 Mx1-Cre mice, are described in Supplementary Materials and Methods . Measurements of Caspase Activities The cytosolic splenocyte fractions were isolated as described, 16 and the detailed procedures are described in the Supplementary Material and Methods . Lentiviral Vectors and Infection Isolated splenocytes from WT or irf-1 ?/? mice (total of 107 cells) were infected with recombinant lentiviruses that express HCV core, E1, E2, NS2, lacZ , and empty vector, respectively. One day after infection, cells were selected with puromycin (final concentration of 1 ? g/ mL). After 5 days of puromycin selection, viable cells were examined. Baculovirus Expression and Purification of HCV Core, E1, and E2 Proteins The E1 and E2 sequences from a genotype 1a isolate (strain H77) 19 and a genotype 1b isolate (strain HC-J4), 20 without the C-terminal transmembrane domains but containing the His6 tag at the C terminus, were cloned into a transfer vector (pBlueBacHis2; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The expression of recombinant core, E1, and E2 proteins in insect cells and their purification have been described previously. 21  Animal Experiments Wild-type (WT), CN2, irf-1 ?/?, and Mx1-cre mice were maintained in conventional animal housing under specific pathogen-free conditions. AxCANCre and Ax-CAw1 were obtained from Dr Izumu Saito (University of Tokyo). 15 To elicit Fas-induced liver damage, adult mice were injected intravenously with 10 ? g of purified hamster monoclonal antibody against mouse Fas (clone Jo2; BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) in 200 ? L of phosphate-buffered saline. All animal experiments were performed according to the guidelines of the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science or Kumamoto University Subcommittee for Laboratory Animal Care. The protocol was approved by an institutional review board. Detailed procedures, including induction of the HCV transgene by poly(I:C) in CN2-29 Mx1-Cre mice, are described in Supplementary Materials and Methods .  Measurements of Caspase Activities The cytosolic splenocyte fractions were isolated as described, 16 and the detailed procedures are described in the Supplementary Material and Methods .  Lentiviral Vectors and Infection Isolated splenocytes from WT or irf-1 ?/? mice (total of 107 cells) were infected with recombinant lentiviruses that express HCV core, E1, E2, NS2, lacZ , and empty vector, respectively. One day after infection, cells were selected with puromycin (final concentration of 1 ? g/ mL). After 5 days of puromycin selection, viable cells were examined.  Baculovirus Expression and Purification of HCV Core, E1, and E2 Proteins The E1 and E2 sequences from a genotype 1a isolate (strain H77) 19 and a genotype 1b isolate (strain HC-J4), 20 without the C-terminal transmembrane domains but containing the His6 tag at the C terminus, were cloned into a transfer vector (pBlueBacHis2; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The expression of recombinant core, E1, and E2 proteins in insect cells and their purification have been described previously. 21  Results Viral Protein Expression and Disruption of irf-1 Synergistically Increase the Development of Lymphoproliferative Disorders To clarify the in vivo effects of HCV protein expression, we examined the survival of mice that carry the CN2 transgene (CN2-8, CN2-29). 15 The experimental design is shown in Figure 1 A (total number of mice, 900). Without Cre/ lox P switching, the animals that carry the HCV transgene (CN2-8 and CN2-29: core, E1, E2, and NS2 proteins) appeared healthy and developed normally. 15 All of the transgene carriers were observed for at least 600 days after Cre/ lox P switching ( Figure 1 A ). Administration of a recombinant adenovirus that expresses cre (AxCANCre) induced the efficient recombination of CN2 transgenes in the hepatocytes from CN2 and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice ( Figure 1 B ). Recombination produced the floxed CN2 transgene (3.3 kilobases) and was completed within 4–7 days; it diminished before day 21 in CN2 mice but persisted in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. The expression of core protein in the hepatocytes of CN2 mice peaked on day 7 and decreased to an undetectable level by day 21 ( Supplementary Figure 1 A ). The expression of core protein in hepatocytes coincided with a high level of inflammation, as determined by measurements of serum alanine aminotransferase activity ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and data not shown). The HCV core protein was detected in CN2-8 mice 4–14 days after the administration of Ax-CANCre, and disruption of irf-1 ensured core protein expression for more than 500 days ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and 1 B ). Therefore, irf-1 disruption allowed efficient and persistent expression of HCV proteins. HCV core protein gene expression was confirmed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of livers, splenocytes, and peripheral blood monocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). AxCANCre administration to the transgenic mouse induced the efficient expression of HCV transgenes in lymphocytes and splenocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). The survival rate of WT mice injected with the cre adenovirus (AxCANCre) ( Figure 1 C ) or control adenovirus (AxCAw1) (data not shown) was higher than that of the transgenic mice (CN2-8 and CN2-29), which excludes the possibility that the recombinant adenovirus affected the results. More than 75% of the WT mice injected with AxCANCre survived to day 500, whereas the HCV-expressing mice had lower survival rates. The irf-1 ?/? CN2-8 and irf-1 ?/? CN2-29 strains had even lower survival rates, indicating that persistent HCV protein expression in combination with irf-1 disruption significantly decreases survival ( Figure 1 C ). Lymphoproliferative Disorders Are Accelerated With Age and Level of Viral Protein Expression To determine the mechanism underlying the increased mortality caused by persistent HCV protein expression in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, we examined the kinetics of dysplasia ( Figure 1 D ). Strikingly, 67% of the female irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and 70% of the male irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed tumors 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre. Some of the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed hyperplasia of the lymph nodes, and these tumors developed much earlier than the tumors in their irf-1 +/+ or CN2 counterparts ( Figure 1 D ). Aberrant cell proliferation developed randomly among the male and female carrier animals between day 180 and day 600. On day 400 after Cre/ lox P switching, the average weights of the spleens of the WT, CN2, and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice were 90, 160, and 310 mg, respectively. The disruption of irf-1 aggravated the HCV-induced spontaneous proliferative disturbances in lymphatic tissues. The number of CN2 mice that died with at least one tumor and the number of tumors per mouse were significantly increased by the ablation of irf-1 ( Figure 1 F ). Although the type of hyperplasia did not differ significantly between the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and their irf-1 +/+ CN2 siblings, the time to onset of tumori-genesis differed dramatically ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ), indicating that age is a significant factor in the promotion of lymphomagenesis by HCV proteins. A significant percentage of the mice that expressed the HCV core protein ( irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice) developed polyclonal lymphoid growth disturbances, including splenomegaly, expanded lymph nodes, adenocarcinoma in the abdomen or leg, and lymphoma of the liver or Peyer's patches ( Figure 2 A ). In contrast, hepatocytes with abundant expression of HCV proteins rarely developed into hepatocellular carcinomas. H&E staining of splenomegalic tissue revealed extensive hyperplasia of the white pulp zones, in which the cortical zones contained lym phoid follicles and scattered germinal centers, although mitotic figures were rarely observed ( Figure 2 B and data not shown). These results indicate that persistent expression of HCV proteins frequently induces lymphoproliferative disorders in addition to liver hyperplasia, which is consistent with the phenotype of patients with hepato-cellular carcinoma. 3 , 4 , 9 Abnormal T-Cell and B-Cell Proliferation in HCV Transgenic Mice To characterize the disruption of lymphocyte proliferation due to HCV protein expression in the transgenic mice, we used flow cytometry to determine the ratio of T cells to B cells by staining with antibodies directed against CD3, CD45R, CD4, CD8, and the T-cell receptor. The average ratio of T cells to B cells in the lymph nodes and spleens of CN2 mice was significantly higher than that in the WT mice. The majority of the CD3+ lymphocytes and a few CD8+ lymphocytes expressed CD4 on their surfaces. The proliferating cells were mainly CD4+ T cells, although some were CD45R+B cells ( Figure 3 and data not shown). The irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice also developed B-cell lymphomas (data not shown). These results confirm that HCV protein expression induces lymphoproliferative disorders that involve excessive expansion of both T and B cells. In irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, the cell population that was negative for T-cell receptor ( ? , ? , ? , and ? isoforms) staining was smaller than that in the other mice. Inhibition of Fas-Induced Apoptosis Owing to Disruption of irf-1 Leads to Persistent Expression of HCV in Transgenic Mouse Livers The Fas ligand is essential for the development of hepatitis via cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–mediated cell killing. 22 Therefore, we determined the sensitivities of irf-1 ?/? hepatocytes to Fas-induced apoptosis. The irf-1 ?/? mice and WT littermates were injected intravenously with a monoclonal antibody against Fas. The disruption of irf-1 inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis, presumably by decreasing the levels of caspase-6 and -7 messenger RNA (mRNA; Supplementary Figure 2 ). These results suggest that the reduced expression of effector caspases delays Fas-mediated apoptosis in irf-1 ?/? mice and abrogates the elimination of HCV-expressing cells in vivo. Stable Expression of HCV Proteins Induces Lymphoproliferative Diseases To confirm that HCV proteins induce lymphoproliferation without the adenoviral vector system, switching of the expression of HCV proteins was conducted using the Mx promoter–driven cre recombinase with poly(I:C) induction ( Figure 4 A ). The Mx promoter is active in hepatocytes as well as in hematopoietic cells. We crossed CN2 mice with Mx1-Cre transgenic mice; CRE recombinase was expressed from the IFN-inducible Mx1 promoter. Injection of the Mx1-Cre/CN2-29 mice with poly (I:C) induced IFN production and efficiently induced the generation of CN2 gene products in hematopoietic cells (mainly in Kupffer cells and lymphocytes), liver, and spleen but not in most other tissues. At 7 days after induction of viral proteins, HCV core proteins were detected in both hepatocytes and hematopoietic cells (data not shown). After 180 days, almost 40% of the CN2(-29) mice developed lymphomas, whereas the WT mice did not ( Figure 4 B ). The neoplastic cells were larger than lymphocytes, and their nuclei were irregular, round, oval, elongated, and polygonal. HCV core protein expression was confirmed by immunoblotting ( Figure 4 C ), and increases in the levels of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-10, and IL-12 were observed (data not shown). The hematopoietic marker CD45R was detected in the lymphoproliferative regions and spleens ( Figure 4 B ). The efficiency of expression switching was confirmed by both the HCV transgene copy numbers and protein expression using quantitative PCR and immunoblotting, respectively ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). These results further validate that sustained expression of HCV proteins induces lymphoproliferation. Increased IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Levels in HCV Transgenic Mice To study the mechanisms of HCV-induced lymphoproliferative diseases, we measured the serum IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and IL-12 levels in the CN2 transgenic mice and their WT littermates ( Figure 5 A ). The serum IL-4 concentration did not differ significantly between the CN2 and WT mice following injection with AxCANCre. However, the CN2 mice had significantly increased levels of serum IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12. Notably, the CN2 mice with proliferative disturbances in the lymph nodes and spleen had dramatically elevated levels of these cytokines, suggesting that altered cytokine production is involved in aberrant lymphocyte proliferation or differentiation in CN2 mice. In contrast, the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice did not show elevated levels of serum IL-12 but had significantly higher levels of serum IL-2 and IL-10 compared with irf-1 ?/? mice ( Figure 5 B ). Thus, the disruption of irf-1 abrogates the increase in IL-12 level but augments the increases in the levels of IL-2 and IL-10 in CN2 mice. These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 play key roles in the induction of the lymphoproliferative phenotype in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. To verify the relationship between the weights of the lymph organs and the cytokine levels, the correlation coefficients were calculated according to Pearson ( Figure 5 C and 5 D ). Whereas spleen weight did not markedly influence the increase in IL-4 level (data not shown), a significant positive correlation was found between spleen weight and increased IL-2 and IL-10 levels in CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 ?/? background (R = 0.58, P < .05, and R = 0.68, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 D ). With respect to the serum levels of IL-2 and IL-10, a less intensive but significant positive correlation was found between the cytokine levels and spleen weights of CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 +/+ background (R = 0.43, P < .05, and R = 0.53, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 C ). These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 are involved in lymphoproliferation in viral protein-expressing mice. Aberrant Expression of Bcl-2 in Expanded Lymph Nodes of CN2 Mice Bcl-2 immunoglobulin transgenic mice develop follicular lymphoproliferation 23 due to the inability of various stimuli to induce apoptosis in these mice. 24 Therefore, to examine whether HCV causes dysregulation of Bcl-2 in lymphoid tissues, we examined the expression of Bcl-2 ( Figure 5 E ). Lymph nodes collected from irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre showed elevated levels of Bcl-2. Immunoblot analysis revealed that a doublet for Bcl-2 (26 and 28 kilodaltons) appeared in some samples 500 days after AxCANCre administration, suggesting the presence of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated Bcl-2. 25 Combination Cytokine Treatment Enhances Splenocyte Colony Formation in Synergy With Viral Protein Expression To determine whether aberrant cytokine profiles contribute to lymphocyte transformation, a colony formation assay was performed using the methylcellulose method. Mouse splenocytes were infected with adenoviruses that expressed the cre DNA recombinase or lacZ control. Expression of HCV core proteins was induced by cre-adenovirus infection of the splenocytes ( Figure 6 A ). Colony counting was performed at postinfection day 28 ( Figure 6 B ). Combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10 greatly enhanced colony formation, especially in the splenocytes of HCV transgenic mice (CN2-29, irf-1 ?/? CN2-29). The addition of IL-12 suppressed colony formation induced by combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10. In the irf-1 ?/? background, treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 or IL-2 plus IL-12 greatly enhanced colony formation. To determine whether enhanced colony formation correlated with cytokine-induced Bcl-2 expression, the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in the splenocytes were quantified ( Figure 6 C ). Because IL-2 enhances T-lymphocyte proliferation and transformation, 26 it is of particular interest that treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 resulted in marked increases in both lymphocyte transformation and the Bcl-2 mRNA levels upon HCV transgene expression. These results indicate that dysregulated cytokine expression, disruption of irf-1 , and HCV transgene expression synergistically enhance splenocyte transformation. Cytokine Treatment and HCV Transgene Expression Synergistically Inhibit Fas-Mediated Apoptosis To determine whether cytokines inhibit Fas-induced apoptosis, we treated the splenocytes from transgenic and WT mice with cytokines and then measured Fas-induced apoptosis by Annexin V staining and fluorescence-activated cell sorting, and we also assayed caspase enzymatic activity ( Figure 6 D and 6 E ). IL-10 treatment in the presence of IL-2 greatly inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, irf-1 disruption made the splenocytes resistant to Fas-induced apoptosis in the presence of IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12. In particular, IL-2 plus IL-10 treatment produced the strongest inhibition of Fas-induced apoptosis. These cytokines also up-regulated the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in splenocytes, which indicates that IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12 up-regulate bcl-2 expression, which subsequently inhibits Fas-induced apoptosis. This result is consistent with reports that IL-10 and/or IL-2 treatment induce bcl-2 in B or T lymphocytes. 10 , 27 Caspase-3/7 activity was correlated with the level of bcl-2 expression ( Figure 6 C and 6 F ). These results indicate that aberrant cytokine expression and disruption of IFN signaling affect bcl-2 expression, which is associated with the inhibition of caspase expression. HCV Core and E2 Proteins Mediate IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Expression To determine which viral protein is responsible for cytokine expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed in splenocytes using recombinant lenti-viruses that express the HCV core, E1, E2, NS2, and lacZ. Each gene expression profile was confirmed by reverse-transcription PCR ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). Only the HCV core protein induced IL-2 and IL-10 ( Figure 7 A ). To determine whether extracellular viral proteins trigger cytokine expression, recombinant viral proteins were added to the cells. Only the viral envelope protein E2 induced IL-12 ( Figure 7 B ). These results indicate that the HCV core and E2 proteins are responsible for IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 expression. HCV Core and IL-10 Induce Bcl-2 Expression To determine whether viral protein expression and cytokine stimulation synergistically induce Bcl-2 expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed using lentiviral vectors, and the cells were tested for Bcl-2 expression. Core protein expression and IL-10 stimulation induced Bcl-2, while the other proteins did not ( Figure 7 C ). Interestingly, the combination of IL-2 and IL-12 only induced Bcl-2 in the irf-1 ?/? background, while triple stimulation (IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12) did not induce Bcl-2 ( Figure 7 C ). These results indicate that complex signaling networks induce Bcl-2 in the presence of viral nucleocapsid proteins.  Results Viral Protein Expression and Disruption of irf-1 Synergistically Increase the Development of Lymphoproliferative Disorders To clarify the in vivo effects of HCV protein expression, we examined the survival of mice that carry the CN2 transgene (CN2-8, CN2-29). 15 The experimental design is shown in Figure 1 A (total number of mice, 900). Without Cre/ lox P switching, the animals that carry the HCV transgene (CN2-8 and CN2-29: core, E1, E2, and NS2 proteins) appeared healthy and developed normally. 15 All of the transgene carriers were observed for at least 600 days after Cre/ lox P switching ( Figure 1 A ). Administration of a recombinant adenovirus that expresses cre (AxCANCre) induced the efficient recombination of CN2 transgenes in the hepatocytes from CN2 and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice ( Figure 1 B ). Recombination produced the floxed CN2 transgene (3.3 kilobases) and was completed within 4–7 days; it diminished before day 21 in CN2 mice but persisted in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. The expression of core protein in the hepatocytes of CN2 mice peaked on day 7 and decreased to an undetectable level by day 21 ( Supplementary Figure 1 A ). The expression of core protein in hepatocytes coincided with a high level of inflammation, as determined by measurements of serum alanine aminotransferase activity ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and data not shown). The HCV core protein was detected in CN2-8 mice 4–14 days after the administration of Ax-CANCre, and disruption of irf-1 ensured core protein expression for more than 500 days ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and 1 B ). Therefore, irf-1 disruption allowed efficient and persistent expression of HCV proteins. HCV core protein gene expression was confirmed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of livers, splenocytes, and peripheral blood monocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). AxCANCre administration to the transgenic mouse induced the efficient expression of HCV transgenes in lymphocytes and splenocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). The survival rate of WT mice injected with the cre adenovirus (AxCANCre) ( Figure 1 C ) or control adenovirus (AxCAw1) (data not shown) was higher than that of the transgenic mice (CN2-8 and CN2-29), which excludes the possibility that the recombinant adenovirus affected the results. More than 75% of the WT mice injected with AxCANCre survived to day 500, whereas the HCV-expressing mice had lower survival rates. The irf-1 ?/? CN2-8 and irf-1 ?/? CN2-29 strains had even lower survival rates, indicating that persistent HCV protein expression in combination with irf-1 disruption significantly decreases survival ( Figure 1 C ). Lymphoproliferative Disorders Are Accelerated With Age and Level of Viral Protein Expression To determine the mechanism underlying the increased mortality caused by persistent HCV protein expression in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, we examined the kinetics of dysplasia ( Figure 1 D ). Strikingly, 67% of the female irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and 70% of the male irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed tumors 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre. Some of the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed hyperplasia of the lymph nodes, and these tumors developed much earlier than the tumors in their irf-1 +/+ or CN2 counterparts ( Figure 1 D ). Aberrant cell proliferation developed randomly among the male and female carrier animals between day 180 and day 600. On day 400 after Cre/ lox P switching, the average weights of the spleens of the WT, CN2, and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice were 90, 160, and 310 mg, respectively. The disruption of irf-1 aggravated the HCV-induced spontaneous proliferative disturbances in lymphatic tissues. The number of CN2 mice that died with at least one tumor and the number of tumors per mouse were significantly increased by the ablation of irf-1 ( Figure 1 F ). Although the type of hyperplasia did not differ significantly between the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and their irf-1 +/+ CN2 siblings, the time to onset of tumori-genesis differed dramatically ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ), indicating that age is a significant factor in the promotion of lymphomagenesis by HCV proteins. A significant percentage of the mice that expressed the HCV core protein ( irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice) developed polyclonal lymphoid growth disturbances, including splenomegaly, expanded lymph nodes, adenocarcinoma in the abdomen or leg, and lymphoma of the liver or Peyer's patches ( Figure 2 A ). In contrast, hepatocytes with abundant expression of HCV proteins rarely developed into hepatocellular carcinomas. H&E staining of splenomegalic tissue revealed extensive hyperplasia of the white pulp zones, in which the cortical zones contained lym phoid follicles and scattered germinal centers, although mitotic figures were rarely observed ( Figure 2 B and data not shown). These results indicate that persistent expression of HCV proteins frequently induces lymphoproliferative disorders in addition to liver hyperplasia, which is consistent with the phenotype of patients with hepato-cellular carcinoma. 3 , 4 , 9 Abnormal T-Cell and B-Cell Proliferation in HCV Transgenic Mice To characterize the disruption of lymphocyte proliferation due to HCV protein expression in the transgenic mice, we used flow cytometry to determine the ratio of T cells to B cells by staining with antibodies directed against CD3, CD45R, CD4, CD8, and the T-cell receptor. The average ratio of T cells to B cells in the lymph nodes and spleens of CN2 mice was significantly higher than that in the WT mice. The majority of the CD3+ lymphocytes and a few CD8+ lymphocytes expressed CD4 on their surfaces. The proliferating cells were mainly CD4+ T cells, although some were CD45R+B cells ( Figure 3 and data not shown). The irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice also developed B-cell lymphomas (data not shown). These results confirm that HCV protein expression induces lymphoproliferative disorders that involve excessive expansion of both T and B cells. In irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, the cell population that was negative for T-cell receptor ( ? , ? , ? , and ? isoforms) staining was smaller than that in the other mice. Inhibition of Fas-Induced Apoptosis Owing to Disruption of irf-1 Leads to Persistent Expression of HCV in Transgenic Mouse Livers The Fas ligand is essential for the development of hepatitis via cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–mediated cell killing. 22 Therefore, we determined the sensitivities of irf-1 ?/? hepatocytes to Fas-induced apoptosis. The irf-1 ?/? mice and WT littermates were injected intravenously with a monoclonal antibody against Fas. The disruption of irf-1 inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis, presumably by decreasing the levels of caspase-6 and -7 messenger RNA (mRNA; Supplementary Figure 2 ). These results suggest that the reduced expression of effector caspases delays Fas-mediated apoptosis in irf-1 ?/? mice and abrogates the elimination of HCV-expressing cells in vivo. Stable Expression of HCV Proteins Induces Lymphoproliferative Diseases To confirm that HCV proteins induce lymphoproliferation without the adenoviral vector system, switching of the expression of HCV proteins was conducted using the Mx promoter–driven cre recombinase with poly(I:C) induction ( Figure 4 A ). The Mx promoter is active in hepatocytes as well as in hematopoietic cells. We crossed CN2 mice with Mx1-Cre transgenic mice; CRE recombinase was expressed from the IFN-inducible Mx1 promoter. Injection of the Mx1-Cre/CN2-29 mice with poly (I:C) induced IFN production and efficiently induced the generation of CN2 gene products in hematopoietic cells (mainly in Kupffer cells and lymphocytes), liver, and spleen but not in most other tissues. At 7 days after induction of viral proteins, HCV core proteins were detected in both hepatocytes and hematopoietic cells (data not shown). After 180 days, almost 40% of the CN2(-29) mice developed lymphomas, whereas the WT mice did not ( Figure 4 B ). The neoplastic cells were larger than lymphocytes, and their nuclei were irregular, round, oval, elongated, and polygonal. HCV core protein expression was confirmed by immunoblotting ( Figure 4 C ), and increases in the levels of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-10, and IL-12 were observed (data not shown). The hematopoietic marker CD45R was detected in the lymphoproliferative regions and spleens ( Figure 4 B ). The efficiency of expression switching was confirmed by both the HCV transgene copy numbers and protein expression using quantitative PCR and immunoblotting, respectively ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). These results further validate that sustained expression of HCV proteins induces lymphoproliferation. Increased IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Levels in HCV Transgenic Mice To study the mechanisms of HCV-induced lymphoproliferative diseases, we measured the serum IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and IL-12 levels in the CN2 transgenic mice and their WT littermates ( Figure 5 A ). The serum IL-4 concentration did not differ significantly between the CN2 and WT mice following injection with AxCANCre. However, the CN2 mice had significantly increased levels of serum IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12. Notably, the CN2 mice with proliferative disturbances in the lymph nodes and spleen had dramatically elevated levels of these cytokines, suggesting that altered cytokine production is involved in aberrant lymphocyte proliferation or differentiation in CN2 mice. In contrast, the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice did not show elevated levels of serum IL-12 but had significantly higher levels of serum IL-2 and IL-10 compared with irf-1 ?/? mice ( Figure 5 B ). Thus, the disruption of irf-1 abrogates the increase in IL-12 level but augments the increases in the levels of IL-2 and IL-10 in CN2 mice. These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 play key roles in the induction of the lymphoproliferative phenotype in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. To verify the relationship between the weights of the lymph organs and the cytokine levels, the correlation coefficients were calculated according to Pearson ( Figure 5 C and 5 D ). Whereas spleen weight did not markedly influence the increase in IL-4 level (data not shown), a significant positive correlation was found between spleen weight and increased IL-2 and IL-10 levels in CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 ?/? background (R = 0.58, P < .05, and R = 0.68, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 D ). With respect to the serum levels of IL-2 and IL-10, a less intensive but significant positive correlation was found between the cytokine levels and spleen weights of CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 +/+ background (R = 0.43, P < .05, and R = 0.53, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 C ). These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 are involved in lymphoproliferation in viral protein-expressing mice. Aberrant Expression of Bcl-2 in Expanded Lymph Nodes of CN2 Mice Bcl-2 immunoglobulin transgenic mice develop follicular lymphoproliferation 23 due to the inability of various stimuli to induce apoptosis in these mice. 24 Therefore, to examine whether HCV causes dysregulation of Bcl-2 in lymphoid tissues, we examined the expression of Bcl-2 ( Figure 5 E ). Lymph nodes collected from irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre showed elevated levels of Bcl-2. Immunoblot analysis revealed that a doublet for Bcl-2 (26 and 28 kilodaltons) appeared in some samples 500 days after AxCANCre administration, suggesting the presence of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated Bcl-2. 25 Combination Cytokine Treatment Enhances Splenocyte Colony Formation in Synergy With Viral Protein Expression To determine whether aberrant cytokine profiles contribute to lymphocyte transformation, a colony formation assay was performed using the methylcellulose method. Mouse splenocytes were infected with adenoviruses that expressed the cre DNA recombinase or lacZ control. Expression of HCV core proteins was induced by cre-adenovirus infection of the splenocytes ( Figure 6 A ). Colony counting was performed at postinfection day 28 ( Figure 6 B ). Combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10 greatly enhanced colony formation, especially in the splenocytes of HCV transgenic mice (CN2-29, irf-1 ?/? CN2-29). The addition of IL-12 suppressed colony formation induced by combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10. In the irf-1 ?/? background, treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 or IL-2 plus IL-12 greatly enhanced colony formation. To determine whether enhanced colony formation correlated with cytokine-induced Bcl-2 expression, the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in the splenocytes were quantified ( Figure 6 C ). Because IL-2 enhances T-lymphocyte proliferation and transformation, 26 it is of particular interest that treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 resulted in marked increases in both lymphocyte transformation and the Bcl-2 mRNA levels upon HCV transgene expression. These results indicate that dysregulated cytokine expression, disruption of irf-1 , and HCV transgene expression synergistically enhance splenocyte transformation. Cytokine Treatment and HCV Transgene Expression Synergistically Inhibit Fas-Mediated Apoptosis To determine whether cytokines inhibit Fas-induced apoptosis, we treated the splenocytes from transgenic and WT mice with cytokines and then measured Fas-induced apoptosis by Annexin V staining and fluorescence-activated cell sorting, and we also assayed caspase enzymatic activity ( Figure 6 D and 6 E ). IL-10 treatment in the presence of IL-2 greatly inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, irf-1 disruption made the splenocytes resistant to Fas-induced apoptosis in the presence of IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12. In particular, IL-2 plus IL-10 treatment produced the strongest inhibition of Fas-induced apoptosis. These cytokines also up-regulated the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in splenocytes, which indicates that IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12 up-regulate bcl-2 expression, which subsequently inhibits Fas-induced apoptosis. This result is consistent with reports that IL-10 and/or IL-2 treatment induce bcl-2 in B or T lymphocytes. 10 , 27 Caspase-3/7 activity was correlated with the level of bcl-2 expression ( Figure 6 C and 6 F ). These results indicate that aberrant cytokine expression and disruption of IFN signaling affect bcl-2 expression, which is associated with the inhibition of caspase expression. HCV Core and E2 Proteins Mediate IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Expression To determine which viral protein is responsible for cytokine expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed in splenocytes using recombinant lenti-viruses that express the HCV core, E1, E2, NS2, and lacZ. Each gene expression profile was confirmed by reverse-transcription PCR ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). Only the HCV core protein induced IL-2 and IL-10 ( Figure 7 A ). To determine whether extracellular viral proteins trigger cytokine expression, recombinant viral proteins were added to the cells. Only the viral envelope protein E2 induced IL-12 ( Figure 7 B ). These results indicate that the HCV core and E2 proteins are responsible for IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 expression. HCV Core and IL-10 Induce Bcl-2 Expression To determine whether viral protein expression and cytokine stimulation synergistically induce Bcl-2 expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed using lentiviral vectors, and the cells were tested for Bcl-2 expression. Core protein expression and IL-10 stimulation induced Bcl-2, while the other proteins did not ( Figure 7 C ). Interestingly, the combination of IL-2 and IL-12 only induced Bcl-2 in the irf-1 ?/? background, while triple stimulation (IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12) did not induce Bcl-2 ( Figure 7 C ). These results indicate that complex signaling networks induce Bcl-2 in the presence of viral nucleocapsid proteins.  Viral Protein Expression and Disruption of irf-1 Synergistically Increase the Development of Lymphoproliferative Disorders To clarify the in vivo effects of HCV protein expression, we examined the survival of mice that carry the CN2 transgene (CN2-8, CN2-29). 15 The experimental design is shown in Figure 1 A (total number of mice, 900). Without Cre/ lox P switching, the animals that carry the HCV transgene (CN2-8 and CN2-29: core, E1, E2, and NS2 proteins) appeared healthy and developed normally. 15 All of the transgene carriers were observed for at least 600 days after Cre/ lox P switching ( Figure 1 A ). Administration of a recombinant adenovirus that expresses cre (AxCANCre) induced the efficient recombination of CN2 transgenes in the hepatocytes from CN2 and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice ( Figure 1 B ). Recombination produced the floxed CN2 transgene (3.3 kilobases) and was completed within 4–7 days; it diminished before day 21 in CN2 mice but persisted in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. The expression of core protein in the hepatocytes of CN2 mice peaked on day 7 and decreased to an undetectable level by day 21 ( Supplementary Figure 1 A ). The expression of core protein in hepatocytes coincided with a high level of inflammation, as determined by measurements of serum alanine aminotransferase activity ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and data not shown). The HCV core protein was detected in CN2-8 mice 4–14 days after the administration of Ax-CANCre, and disruption of irf-1 ensured core protein expression for more than 500 days ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and 1 B ). Therefore, irf-1 disruption allowed efficient and persistent expression of HCV proteins. HCV core protein gene expression was confirmed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of livers, splenocytes, and peripheral blood monocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). AxCANCre administration to the transgenic mouse induced the efficient expression of HCV transgenes in lymphocytes and splenocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). The survival rate of WT mice injected with the cre adenovirus (AxCANCre) ( Figure 1 C ) or control adenovirus (AxCAw1) (data not shown) was higher than that of the transgenic mice (CN2-8 and CN2-29), which excludes the possibility that the recombinant adenovirus affected the results. More than 75% of the WT mice injected with AxCANCre survived to day 500, whereas the HCV-expressing mice had lower survival rates. The irf-1 ?/? CN2-8 and irf-1 ?/? CN2-29 strains had even lower survival rates, indicating that persistent HCV protein expression in combination with irf-1 disruption significantly decreases survival ( Figure 1 C ).  Viral Protein Expression and Disruption of irf-1 Synergistically Increase the Development of Lymphoproliferative Disorders To clarify the in vivo effects of HCV protein expression, we examined the survival of mice that carry the CN2 transgene (CN2-8, CN2-29). 15 The experimental design is shown in Figure 1 A (total number of mice, 900). Without Cre/ lox P switching, the animals that carry the HCV transgene (CN2-8 and CN2-29: core, E1, E2, and NS2 proteins) appeared healthy and developed normally. 15 All of the transgene carriers were observed for at least 600 days after Cre/ lox P switching ( Figure 1 A ). Administration of a recombinant adenovirus that expresses cre (AxCANCre) induced the efficient recombination of CN2 transgenes in the hepatocytes from CN2 and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice ( Figure 1 B ). Recombination produced the floxed CN2 transgene (3.3 kilobases) and was completed within 4–7 days; it diminished before day 21 in CN2 mice but persisted in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. The expression of core protein in the hepatocytes of CN2 mice peaked on day 7 and decreased to an undetectable level by day 21 ( Supplementary Figure 1 A ). The expression of core protein in hepatocytes coincided with a high level of inflammation, as determined by measurements of serum alanine aminotransferase activity ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and data not shown). The HCV core protein was detected in CN2-8 mice 4–14 days after the administration of Ax-CANCre, and disruption of irf-1 ensured core protein expression for more than 500 days ( Supplementary Figure 1 A and 1 B ). Therefore, irf-1 disruption allowed efficient and persistent expression of HCV proteins. HCV core protein gene expression was confirmed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of livers, splenocytes, and peripheral blood monocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). AxCANCre administration to the transgenic mouse induced the efficient expression of HCV transgenes in lymphocytes and splenocytes ( Supplementary Figure 1 C ). The survival rate of WT mice injected with the cre adenovirus (AxCANCre) ( Figure 1 C ) or control adenovirus (AxCAw1) (data not shown) was higher than that of the transgenic mice (CN2-8 and CN2-29), which excludes the possibility that the recombinant adenovirus affected the results. More than 75% of the WT mice injected with AxCANCre survived to day 500, whereas the HCV-expressing mice had lower survival rates. The irf-1 ?/? CN2-8 and irf-1 ?/? CN2-29 strains had even lower survival rates, indicating that persistent HCV protein expression in combination with irf-1 disruption significantly decreases survival ( Figure 1 C ).  Lymphoproliferative Disorders Are Accelerated With Age and Level of Viral Protein Expression To determine the mechanism underlying the increased mortality caused by persistent HCV protein expression in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, we examined the kinetics of dysplasia ( Figure 1 D ). Strikingly, 67% of the female irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and 70% of the male irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed tumors 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre. Some of the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed hyperplasia of the lymph nodes, and these tumors developed much earlier than the tumors in their irf-1 +/+ or CN2 counterparts ( Figure 1 D ). Aberrant cell proliferation developed randomly among the male and female carrier animals between day 180 and day 600. On day 400 after Cre/ lox P switching, the average weights of the spleens of the WT, CN2, and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice were 90, 160, and 310 mg, respectively. The disruption of irf-1 aggravated the HCV-induced spontaneous proliferative disturbances in lymphatic tissues. The number of CN2 mice that died with at least one tumor and the number of tumors per mouse were significantly increased by the ablation of irf-1 ( Figure 1 F ). Although the type of hyperplasia did not differ significantly between the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and their irf-1 +/+ CN2 siblings, the time to onset of tumori-genesis differed dramatically ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ), indicating that age is a significant factor in the promotion of lymphomagenesis by HCV proteins. A significant percentage of the mice that expressed the HCV core protein ( irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice) developed polyclonal lymphoid growth disturbances, including splenomegaly, expanded lymph nodes, adenocarcinoma in the abdomen or leg, and lymphoma of the liver or Peyer's patches ( Figure 2 A ). In contrast, hepatocytes with abundant expression of HCV proteins rarely developed into hepatocellular carcinomas. H&E staining of splenomegalic tissue revealed extensive hyperplasia of the white pulp zones, in which the cortical zones contained lym phoid follicles and scattered germinal centers, although mitotic figures were rarely observed ( Figure 2 B and data not shown). These results indicate that persistent expression of HCV proteins frequently induces lymphoproliferative disorders in addition to liver hyperplasia, which is consistent with the phenotype of patients with hepato-cellular carcinoma. 3 , 4 , 9  Lymphoproliferative Disorders Are Accelerated With Age and Level of Viral Protein Expression To determine the mechanism underlying the increased mortality caused by persistent HCV protein expression in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, we examined the kinetics of dysplasia ( Figure 1 D ). Strikingly, 67% of the female irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and 70% of the male irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed tumors 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre. Some of the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice developed hyperplasia of the lymph nodes, and these tumors developed much earlier than the tumors in their irf-1 +/+ or CN2 counterparts ( Figure 1 D ). Aberrant cell proliferation developed randomly among the male and female carrier animals between day 180 and day 600. On day 400 after Cre/ lox P switching, the average weights of the spleens of the WT, CN2, and irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice were 90, 160, and 310 mg, respectively. The disruption of irf-1 aggravated the HCV-induced spontaneous proliferative disturbances in lymphatic tissues. The number of CN2 mice that died with at least one tumor and the number of tumors per mouse were significantly increased by the ablation of irf-1 ( Figure 1 F ). Although the type of hyperplasia did not differ significantly between the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice and their irf-1 +/+ CN2 siblings, the time to onset of tumori-genesis differed dramatically ( Figure 1 D and 1 F ), indicating that age is a significant factor in the promotion of lymphomagenesis by HCV proteins. A significant percentage of the mice that expressed the HCV core protein ( irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice) developed polyclonal lymphoid growth disturbances, including splenomegaly, expanded lymph nodes, adenocarcinoma in the abdomen or leg, and lymphoma of the liver or Peyer's patches ( Figure 2 A ). In contrast, hepatocytes with abundant expression of HCV proteins rarely developed into hepatocellular carcinomas. H&E staining of splenomegalic tissue revealed extensive hyperplasia of the white pulp zones, in which the cortical zones contained lym phoid follicles and scattered germinal centers, although mitotic figures were rarely observed ( Figure 2 B and data not shown). These results indicate that persistent expression of HCV proteins frequently induces lymphoproliferative disorders in addition to liver hyperplasia, which is consistent with the phenotype of patients with hepato-cellular carcinoma. 3 , 4 , 9  Abnormal T-Cell and B-Cell Proliferation in HCV Transgenic Mice To characterize the disruption of lymphocyte proliferation due to HCV protein expression in the transgenic mice, we used flow cytometry to determine the ratio of T cells to B cells by staining with antibodies directed against CD3, CD45R, CD4, CD8, and the T-cell receptor. The average ratio of T cells to B cells in the lymph nodes and spleens of CN2 mice was significantly higher than that in the WT mice. The majority of the CD3+ lymphocytes and a few CD8+ lymphocytes expressed CD4 on their surfaces. The proliferating cells were mainly CD4+ T cells, although some were CD45R+B cells ( Figure 3 and data not shown). The irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice also developed B-cell lymphomas (data not shown). These results confirm that HCV protein expression induces lymphoproliferative disorders that involve excessive expansion of both T and B cells. In irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, the cell population that was negative for T-cell receptor ( ? , ? , ? , and ? isoforms) staining was smaller than that in the other mice.  Abnormal T-Cell and B-Cell Proliferation in HCV Transgenic Mice To characterize the disruption of lymphocyte proliferation due to HCV protein expression in the transgenic mice, we used flow cytometry to determine the ratio of T cells to B cells by staining with antibodies directed against CD3, CD45R, CD4, CD8, and the T-cell receptor. The average ratio of T cells to B cells in the lymph nodes and spleens of CN2 mice was significantly higher than that in the WT mice. The majority of the CD3+ lymphocytes and a few CD8+ lymphocytes expressed CD4 on their surfaces. The proliferating cells were mainly CD4+ T cells, although some were CD45R+B cells ( Figure 3 and data not shown). The irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice also developed B-cell lymphomas (data not shown). These results confirm that HCV protein expression induces lymphoproliferative disorders that involve excessive expansion of both T and B cells. In irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice, the cell population that was negative for T-cell receptor ( ? , ? , ? , and ? isoforms) staining was smaller than that in the other mice.  Inhibition of Fas-Induced Apoptosis Owing to Disruption of irf-1 Leads to Persistent Expression of HCV in Transgenic Mouse Livers The Fas ligand is essential for the development of hepatitis via cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–mediated cell killing. 22 Therefore, we determined the sensitivities of irf-1 ?/? hepatocytes to Fas-induced apoptosis. The irf-1 ?/? mice and WT littermates were injected intravenously with a monoclonal antibody against Fas. The disruption of irf-1 inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis, presumably by decreasing the levels of caspase-6 and -7 messenger RNA (mRNA; Supplementary Figure 2 ). These results suggest that the reduced expression of effector caspases delays Fas-mediated apoptosis in irf-1 ?/? mice and abrogates the elimination of HCV-expressing cells in vivo.  Inhibition of Fas-Induced Apoptosis Owing to Disruption of irf-1 Leads to Persistent Expression of HCV in Transgenic Mouse Livers The Fas ligand is essential for the development of hepatitis via cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–mediated cell killing. 22 Therefore, we determined the sensitivities of irf-1 ?/? hepatocytes to Fas-induced apoptosis. The irf-1 ?/? mice and WT littermates were injected intravenously with a monoclonal antibody against Fas. The disruption of irf-1 inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis, presumably by decreasing the levels of caspase-6 and -7 messenger RNA (mRNA; Supplementary Figure 2 ). These results suggest that the reduced expression of effector caspases delays Fas-mediated apoptosis in irf-1 ?/? mice and abrogates the elimination of HCV-expressing cells in vivo.  Stable Expression of HCV Proteins Induces Lymphoproliferative Diseases To confirm that HCV proteins induce lymphoproliferation without the adenoviral vector system, switching of the expression of HCV proteins was conducted using the Mx promoter–driven cre recombinase with poly(I:C) induction ( Figure 4 A ). The Mx promoter is active in hepatocytes as well as in hematopoietic cells. We crossed CN2 mice with Mx1-Cre transgenic mice; CRE recombinase was expressed from the IFN-inducible Mx1 promoter. Injection of the Mx1-Cre/CN2-29 mice with poly (I:C) induced IFN production and efficiently induced the generation of CN2 gene products in hematopoietic cells (mainly in Kupffer cells and lymphocytes), liver, and spleen but not in most other tissues. At 7 days after induction of viral proteins, HCV core proteins were detected in both hepatocytes and hematopoietic cells (data not shown). After 180 days, almost 40% of the CN2(-29) mice developed lymphomas, whereas the WT mice did not ( Figure 4 B ). The neoplastic cells were larger than lymphocytes, and their nuclei were irregular, round, oval, elongated, and polygonal. HCV core protein expression was confirmed by immunoblotting ( Figure 4 C ), and increases in the levels of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-10, and IL-12 were observed (data not shown). The hematopoietic marker CD45R was detected in the lymphoproliferative regions and spleens ( Figure 4 B ). The efficiency of expression switching was confirmed by both the HCV transgene copy numbers and protein expression using quantitative PCR and immunoblotting, respectively ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). These results further validate that sustained expression of HCV proteins induces lymphoproliferation.  Stable Expression of HCV Proteins Induces Lymphoproliferative Diseases To confirm that HCV proteins induce lymphoproliferation without the adenoviral vector system, switching of the expression of HCV proteins was conducted using the Mx promoter–driven cre recombinase with poly(I:C) induction ( Figure 4 A ). The Mx promoter is active in hepatocytes as well as in hematopoietic cells. We crossed CN2 mice with Mx1-Cre transgenic mice; CRE recombinase was expressed from the IFN-inducible Mx1 promoter. Injection of the Mx1-Cre/CN2-29 mice with poly (I:C) induced IFN production and efficiently induced the generation of CN2 gene products in hematopoietic cells (mainly in Kupffer cells and lymphocytes), liver, and spleen but not in most other tissues. At 7 days after induction of viral proteins, HCV core proteins were detected in both hepatocytes and hematopoietic cells (data not shown). After 180 days, almost 40% of the CN2(-29) mice developed lymphomas, whereas the WT mice did not ( Figure 4 B ). The neoplastic cells were larger than lymphocytes, and their nuclei were irregular, round, oval, elongated, and polygonal. HCV core protein expression was confirmed by immunoblotting ( Figure 4 C ), and increases in the levels of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-10, and IL-12 were observed (data not shown). The hematopoietic marker CD45R was detected in the lymphoproliferative regions and spleens ( Figure 4 B ). The efficiency of expression switching was confirmed by both the HCV transgene copy numbers and protein expression using quantitative PCR and immunoblotting, respectively ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). These results further validate that sustained expression of HCV proteins induces lymphoproliferation.  Increased IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Levels in HCV Transgenic Mice To study the mechanisms of HCV-induced lymphoproliferative diseases, we measured the serum IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and IL-12 levels in the CN2 transgenic mice and their WT littermates ( Figure 5 A ). The serum IL-4 concentration did not differ significantly between the CN2 and WT mice following injection with AxCANCre. However, the CN2 mice had significantly increased levels of serum IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12. Notably, the CN2 mice with proliferative disturbances in the lymph nodes and spleen had dramatically elevated levels of these cytokines, suggesting that altered cytokine production is involved in aberrant lymphocyte proliferation or differentiation in CN2 mice. In contrast, the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice did not show elevated levels of serum IL-12 but had significantly higher levels of serum IL-2 and IL-10 compared with irf-1 ?/? mice ( Figure 5 B ). Thus, the disruption of irf-1 abrogates the increase in IL-12 level but augments the increases in the levels of IL-2 and IL-10 in CN2 mice. These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 play key roles in the induction of the lymphoproliferative phenotype in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. To verify the relationship between the weights of the lymph organs and the cytokine levels, the correlation coefficients were calculated according to Pearson ( Figure 5 C and 5 D ). Whereas spleen weight did not markedly influence the increase in IL-4 level (data not shown), a significant positive correlation was found between spleen weight and increased IL-2 and IL-10 levels in CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 ?/? background (R = 0.58, P < .05, and R = 0.68, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 D ). With respect to the serum levels of IL-2 and IL-10, a less intensive but significant positive correlation was found between the cytokine levels and spleen weights of CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 +/+ background (R = 0.43, P < .05, and R = 0.53, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 C ). These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 are involved in lymphoproliferation in viral protein-expressing mice.  Increased IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Levels in HCV Transgenic Mice To study the mechanisms of HCV-induced lymphoproliferative diseases, we measured the serum IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, and IL-12 levels in the CN2 transgenic mice and their WT littermates ( Figure 5 A ). The serum IL-4 concentration did not differ significantly between the CN2 and WT mice following injection with AxCANCre. However, the CN2 mice had significantly increased levels of serum IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12. Notably, the CN2 mice with proliferative disturbances in the lymph nodes and spleen had dramatically elevated levels of these cytokines, suggesting that altered cytokine production is involved in aberrant lymphocyte proliferation or differentiation in CN2 mice. In contrast, the irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice did not show elevated levels of serum IL-12 but had significantly higher levels of serum IL-2 and IL-10 compared with irf-1 ?/? mice ( Figure 5 B ). Thus, the disruption of irf-1 abrogates the increase in IL-12 level but augments the increases in the levels of IL-2 and IL-10 in CN2 mice. These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 play key roles in the induction of the lymphoproliferative phenotype in irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice. To verify the relationship between the weights of the lymph organs and the cytokine levels, the correlation coefficients were calculated according to Pearson ( Figure 5 C and 5 D ). Whereas spleen weight did not markedly influence the increase in IL-4 level (data not shown), a significant positive correlation was found between spleen weight and increased IL-2 and IL-10 levels in CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 ?/? background (R = 0.58, P < .05, and R = 0.68, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 D ). With respect to the serum levels of IL-2 and IL-10, a less intensive but significant positive correlation was found between the cytokine levels and spleen weights of CN2 gene-expressing mice on the irf-1 +/+ background (R = 0.43, P < .05, and R = 0.53, P < .05, respectively) ( Figure 5 C ). These results indicate that IL-2 and IL-10 are involved in lymphoproliferation in viral protein-expressing mice.  Aberrant Expression of Bcl-2 in Expanded Lymph Nodes of CN2 Mice Bcl-2 immunoglobulin transgenic mice develop follicular lymphoproliferation 23 due to the inability of various stimuli to induce apoptosis in these mice. 24 Therefore, to examine whether HCV causes dysregulation of Bcl-2 in lymphoid tissues, we examined the expression of Bcl-2 ( Figure 5 E ). Lymph nodes collected from irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre showed elevated levels of Bcl-2. Immunoblot analysis revealed that a doublet for Bcl-2 (26 and 28 kilodaltons) appeared in some samples 500 days after AxCANCre administration, suggesting the presence of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated Bcl-2. 25  Aberrant Expression of Bcl-2 in Expanded Lymph Nodes of CN2 Mice Bcl-2 immunoglobulin transgenic mice develop follicular lymphoproliferation 23 due to the inability of various stimuli to induce apoptosis in these mice. 24 Therefore, to examine whether HCV causes dysregulation of Bcl-2 in lymphoid tissues, we examined the expression of Bcl-2 ( Figure 5 E ). Lymph nodes collected from irf-1 ?/? CN2 mice 400 days after the administration of AxCANCre showed elevated levels of Bcl-2. Immunoblot analysis revealed that a doublet for Bcl-2 (26 and 28 kilodaltons) appeared in some samples 500 days after AxCANCre administration, suggesting the presence of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated Bcl-2. 25  Combination Cytokine Treatment Enhances Splenocyte Colony Formation in Synergy With Viral Protein Expression To determine whether aberrant cytokine profiles contribute to lymphocyte transformation, a colony formation assay was performed using the methylcellulose method. Mouse splenocytes were infected with adenoviruses that expressed the cre DNA recombinase or lacZ control. Expression of HCV core proteins was induced by cre-adenovirus infection of the splenocytes ( Figure 6 A ). Colony counting was performed at postinfection day 28 ( Figure 6 B ). Combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10 greatly enhanced colony formation, especially in the splenocytes of HCV transgenic mice (CN2-29, irf-1 ?/? CN2-29). The addition of IL-12 suppressed colony formation induced by combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10. In the irf-1 ?/? background, treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 or IL-2 plus IL-12 greatly enhanced colony formation. To determine whether enhanced colony formation correlated with cytokine-induced Bcl-2 expression, the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in the splenocytes were quantified ( Figure 6 C ). Because IL-2 enhances T-lymphocyte proliferation and transformation, 26 it is of particular interest that treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 resulted in marked increases in both lymphocyte transformation and the Bcl-2 mRNA levels upon HCV transgene expression. These results indicate that dysregulated cytokine expression, disruption of irf-1 , and HCV transgene expression synergistically enhance splenocyte transformation.  Combination Cytokine Treatment Enhances Splenocyte Colony Formation in Synergy With Viral Protein Expression To determine whether aberrant cytokine profiles contribute to lymphocyte transformation, a colony formation assay was performed using the methylcellulose method. Mouse splenocytes were infected with adenoviruses that expressed the cre DNA recombinase or lacZ control. Expression of HCV core proteins was induced by cre-adenovirus infection of the splenocytes ( Figure 6 A ). Colony counting was performed at postinfection day 28 ( Figure 6 B ). Combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10 greatly enhanced colony formation, especially in the splenocytes of HCV transgenic mice (CN2-29, irf-1 ?/? CN2-29). The addition of IL-12 suppressed colony formation induced by combined treatment with IL-2 and IL-10. In the irf-1 ?/? background, treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 or IL-2 plus IL-12 greatly enhanced colony formation. To determine whether enhanced colony formation correlated with cytokine-induced Bcl-2 expression, the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in the splenocytes were quantified ( Figure 6 C ). Because IL-2 enhances T-lymphocyte proliferation and transformation, 26 it is of particular interest that treatment with IL-2 plus IL-10 resulted in marked increases in both lymphocyte transformation and the Bcl-2 mRNA levels upon HCV transgene expression. These results indicate that dysregulated cytokine expression, disruption of irf-1 , and HCV transgene expression synergistically enhance splenocyte transformation.  Cytokine Treatment and HCV Transgene Expression Synergistically Inhibit Fas-Mediated Apoptosis To determine whether cytokines inhibit Fas-induced apoptosis, we treated the splenocytes from transgenic and WT mice with cytokines and then measured Fas-induced apoptosis by Annexin V staining and fluorescence-activated cell sorting, and we also assayed caspase enzymatic activity ( Figure 6 D and 6 E ). IL-10 treatment in the presence of IL-2 greatly inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, irf-1 disruption made the splenocytes resistant to Fas-induced apoptosis in the presence of IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12. In particular, IL-2 plus IL-10 treatment produced the strongest inhibition of Fas-induced apoptosis. These cytokines also up-regulated the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in splenocytes, which indicates that IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12 up-regulate bcl-2 expression, which subsequently inhibits Fas-induced apoptosis. This result is consistent with reports that IL-10 and/or IL-2 treatment induce bcl-2 in B or T lymphocytes. 10 , 27 Caspase-3/7 activity was correlated with the level of bcl-2 expression ( Figure 6 C and 6 F ). These results indicate that aberrant cytokine expression and disruption of IFN signaling affect bcl-2 expression, which is associated with the inhibition of caspase expression.  Cytokine Treatment and HCV Transgene Expression Synergistically Inhibit Fas-Mediated Apoptosis To determine whether cytokines inhibit Fas-induced apoptosis, we treated the splenocytes from transgenic and WT mice with cytokines and then measured Fas-induced apoptosis by Annexin V staining and fluorescence-activated cell sorting, and we also assayed caspase enzymatic activity ( Figure 6 D and 6 E ). IL-10 treatment in the presence of IL-2 greatly inhibited Fas-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, irf-1 disruption made the splenocytes resistant to Fas-induced apoptosis in the presence of IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12. In particular, IL-2 plus IL-10 treatment produced the strongest inhibition of Fas-induced apoptosis. These cytokines also up-regulated the Bcl-2 mRNA levels in splenocytes, which indicates that IL-2, IL-10, and/or IL-12 up-regulate bcl-2 expression, which subsequently inhibits Fas-induced apoptosis. This result is consistent with reports that IL-10 and/or IL-2 treatment induce bcl-2 in B or T lymphocytes. 10 , 27 Caspase-3/7 activity was correlated with the level of bcl-2 expression ( Figure 6 C and 6 F ). These results indicate that aberrant cytokine expression and disruption of IFN signaling affect bcl-2 expression, which is associated with the inhibition of caspase expression.  HCV Core and E2 Proteins Mediate IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Expression To determine which viral protein is responsible for cytokine expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed in splenocytes using recombinant lenti-viruses that express the HCV core, E1, E2, NS2, and lacZ. Each gene expression profile was confirmed by reverse-transcription PCR ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). Only the HCV core protein induced IL-2 and IL-10 ( Figure 7 A ). To determine whether extracellular viral proteins trigger cytokine expression, recombinant viral proteins were added to the cells. Only the viral envelope protein E2 induced IL-12 ( Figure 7 B ). These results indicate that the HCV core and E2 proteins are responsible for IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 expression.  HCV Core and E2 Proteins Mediate IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 Expression To determine which viral protein is responsible for cytokine expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed in splenocytes using recombinant lenti-viruses that express the HCV core, E1, E2, NS2, and lacZ. Each gene expression profile was confirmed by reverse-transcription PCR ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). Only the HCV core protein induced IL-2 and IL-10 ( Figure 7 A ). To determine whether extracellular viral proteins trigger cytokine expression, recombinant viral proteins were added to the cells. Only the viral envelope protein E2 induced IL-12 ( Figure 7 B ). These results indicate that the HCV core and E2 proteins are responsible for IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12 expression.  HCV Core and IL-10 Induce Bcl-2 Expression To determine whether viral protein expression and cytokine stimulation synergistically induce Bcl-2 expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed using lentiviral vectors, and the cells were tested for Bcl-2 expression. Core protein expression and IL-10 stimulation induced Bcl-2, while the other proteins did not ( Figure 7 C ). Interestingly, the combination of IL-2 and IL-12 only induced Bcl-2 in the irf-1 ?/? background, while triple stimulation (IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12) did not induce Bcl-2 ( Figure 7 C ). These results indicate that complex signaling networks induce Bcl-2 in the presence of viral nucleocapsid proteins.  HCV Core and IL-10 Induce Bcl-2 Expression To determine whether viral protein expression and cytokine stimulation synergistically induce Bcl-2 expression, individual viral proteins were stably expressed using lentiviral vectors, and the cells were tested for Bcl-2 expression. Core protein expression and IL-10 stimulation induced Bcl-2, while the other proteins did not ( Figure 7 C ). Interestingly, the combination of IL-2 and IL-12 only induced Bcl-2 in the irf-1 ?/? background, while triple stimulation (IL-2, IL-10, and IL-12) did not induce Bcl-2 ( Figure 7 C ). These results indicate that complex signaling networks induce Bcl-2 in the presence of viral nucleocapsid proteins.  Discussion The present study shows that Bcl-2 levels, cytokine levels, aging, and inflammation enhance the development of lymphoproliferative disorders caused by HCV proteins ( Supplementary Figure 5 ). Disruption of irf-1 enables the persistent expression of HCV protein, leading to lymphoproliferative diseases owing to reduced apoptosis (ie, lower levels of caspase-1, -6, and -7 expression). HCV CN2 transgenic (Tg+) mice are resistant to Fas-induced apoptosis due to the inhibition of cytochrome c release from mitochondria. 16 Mice with disruption of irf-1 have several defects of their innate and adaptive immunity, such as lineage-specific defects in thymocyte development; immature T cells can develop into mature CD4+ cells but not into CD8+ T cells. 18 , 28 IRF-1 controls the positive and negative selection of CD8+ thymocytes. 29 IRF-1 is required for the development of the Th1-type immune response, and its absence leads to the induction of the Th2-type immune response. 18 , 30 Because the number of natural killer cells is dramatically reduced in irf-1 ?/? mice, 18 this defect may cause the marked increase in viral protein expression and the inhibition of tumor surveil-lance mechanisms, leading to the development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Expression of the IL-12 p40 subunit is defective in irf-1 ?/? mice. 18 Lymphomagenesis may require the additional genetic instability provided by HCV-induced hypermutation (2-hit model). Important questions are raised regarding the lymphoproliferative mechanisms of lymphomas in HCV-infected patients (B-cell malignancies predominate). Hy-permutation of the immunoglobulin genes in B cells induced by HCV infection is the cause of the lymphomagenesis seen in HCV infection, 21 , 31 and this model may provide more direct insights into lymphoma production, because HCV-induced hypermutation causes genetic instability and causes chromosomal aberrations, possibly resulting in neoplastic transformation. 32 In addition, the antiapoptotic phenotype generated by sustained viral protein expression may enhance the survival of lymphocytes and inhibit activation-induced cell death to turn off the activated lymphocytes. The dysregulated cytokine profiles and sustained lymphocyte survival may alter the fates of regulatory T cells and dendritic cells. 33 In conclusion, the present study shows that the conditional expression of HCV proteins induces inflammation and lymphoproliferative disorders, which are enhanced by irf-1 disruption. Therefore, IRF-1–inducible genes probably play essential roles in suppressing HCV-induced lymphoma and in eliminating HCV protein-expressing cells. Our transgenic mice provide evidence that the overexpression of apoptosis-related proteins, including Bcl-2, and/or aberrant cytokine production are primary events in HCV-induced lymphoproliferation. It is interesting to note that lymphoproliferation was dominant over liver tumor development in the present study. Approximately 40% of the CN2-29Mx1Cre mice developed B-cell lymphomas, while 5% of the mice developed liver tumors. Further molecular analyses will enlighten the differential signaling pathways between hepatocytes and lymphocytes and increase our understanding of the differences between lymphomagenesis and liver tumor development caused by HCV.  Discussion The present study shows that Bcl-2 levels, cytokine levels, aging, and inflammation enhance the development of lymphoproliferative disorders caused by HCV proteins ( Supplementary Figure 5 ). Disruption of irf-1 enables the persistent expression of HCV protein, leading to lymphoproliferative diseases owing to reduced apoptosis (ie, lower levels of caspase-1, -6, and -7 expression). HCV CN2 transgenic (Tg+) mice are resistant to Fas-induced apoptosis due to the inhibition of cytochrome c release from mitochondria. 16 Mice with disruption of irf-1 have several defects of their innate and adaptive immunity, such as lineage-specific defects in thymocyte development; immature T cells can develop into mature CD4+ cells but not into CD8+ T cells. 18 , 28 IRF-1 controls the positive and negative selection of CD8+ thymocytes. 29 IRF-1 is required for the development of the Th1-type immune response, and its absence leads to the induction of the Th2-type immune response. 18 , 30 Because the number of natural killer cells is dramatically reduced in irf-1 ?/? mice, 18 this defect may cause the marked increase in viral protein expression and the inhibition of tumor surveil-lance mechanisms, leading to the development of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Expression of the IL-12 p40 subunit is defective in irf-1 ?/? mice. 18 Lymphomagenesis may require the additional genetic instability provided by HCV-induced hypermutation (2-hit model). Important questions are raised regarding the lymphoproliferative mechanisms of lymphomas in HCV-infected patients (B-cell malignancies predominate). Hy-permutation of the immunoglobulin genes in B cells induced by HCV infection is the cause of the lymphomagenesis seen in HCV infection, 21 , 31 and this model may provide more direct insights into lymphoma production, because HCV-induced hypermutation causes genetic instability and causes chromosomal aberrations, possibly resulting in neoplastic transformation. 32 In addition, the antiapoptotic phenotype generated by sustained viral protein expression may enhance the survival of lymphocytes and inhibit activation-induced cell death to turn off the activated lymphocytes. The dysregulated cytokine profiles and sustained lymphocyte survival may alter the fates of regulatory T cells and dendritic cells. 33 In conclusion, the present study shows that the conditional expression of HCV proteins induces inflammation and lymphoproliferative disorders, which are enhanced by irf-1 disruption. Therefore, IRF-1–inducible genes probably play essential roles in suppressing HCV-induced lymphoma and in eliminating HCV protein-expressing cells. Our transgenic mice provide evidence that the overexpression of apoptosis-related proteins, including Bcl-2, and/or aberrant cytokine production are primary events in HCV-induced lymphoproliferation. It is interesting to note that lymphoproliferation was dominant over liver tumor development in the present study. Approximately 40% of the CN2-29Mx1Cre mice developed B-cell lymphomas, while 5% of the mice developed liver tumors. Further molecular analyses will enlighten the differential signaling pathways between hepatocytes and lymphocytes and increase our understanding of the differences between lymphomagenesis and liver tumor development caused by HCV.  Supplementary Material 01  Supplementary Material 01 