Copy Number Analysis Indicates Monoclonal Origin of Lethal Metastatic Prostate Cancer  Methods Summary PELICAN Autopsy Study of Lethal Prostate Cancer Ninety-four cancer samples were studied from 30 men who died of prostate cancer and underwent autopsy as part of the Project to Eliminate Lethal prostate CANcer (PELICAN) rapid autopsy program at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (JHASPC). Initiated in 1994, all JHASPC study subjects gave informed consent to participate as part of a Johns Hopkins Medicine IRB-approved protocol. All subjects underwent androgen-deprivation during the course of their treatment for metastatic prostate cancer, and died between 1995 and 2004. Tissues were snap-frozen and cryostat-microdissected and DNA purified as described previously 20 . Subject and sample data including distribution of samples studied by cCGH and Affy6 array technology are contained in Supplementary Table 1 . Mean estimated cancer sample DNA purity based on hematoxylin and eosin histology is 88% (range 60–99%). Chromosomal Comparative Genomic Hybridization (cCGH) was performed at resolution of 389 cytogenetic bands (excluding the chromosome Y) in 85 cancer DNA samples from 29 subjects. cCGH data ( Supplementary Table 3 ) are of lower resolution but are highly concordant with array-based CGH (aCGH) results 32 . CGH was done as described previously 33 and as detailed in Supplementary Methods . Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 analysis Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 chips (Affy6) were purchased from Affymetrix, Inc. All of the reagents used for the assay were obtained from manufacturers recommended by Affymetrix. We amplified, purified, fragmented and labeled the genomic DNA, hybridized, washed and stained the Affy6 arrays according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Supplementary Methods ). We used Partek Genomic Suite (PGS) version 6.4 for allele specific and non-allele specific analyses using default settings ( http://www.partek.com/Tutorials ) unless otherwise specified. Sixteen subject-paired noncancerous samples from 14 subjects were used to create a copy number baseline ( Supplementary Table 2 ). For each of 58 cancer DNA samples studied by Affy6, we then generated a DNA copy number estimate for all ~1.8 million probes on the Affy6 chip, and then segmented these data into 52221 channels using the PGS Segmentation algorithm. Autosomal and sex-chromosomal segmentation data for the 58 samples was then analyzed in PGS using unsupervised hierarchical clustering (Pearson’s Dissimilarity algorithm) to produce data shown ( Fig. 1e ). Allele-specific genomic analysis depicted (Figs. 2 , 3 and Supplementary Table 8 ) was performed using the PGS allele-specific analysis algorithm that includes genotype information and allele-specific intensities from paired samples to estimate DNA copy number for each heterozygous SNP, and is further described in Supplementary Methods . Statistical Analysis Permutation- Based Classification Analysis. For the cCGH data, considering each metastatic DNA sample with 218 SAM-defined ( Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Tables 4 and 5 ) CGH measures as a vector of 218-elements and the distance between two samples defined as the Euclidean distance of two vectors. For the Affy6 data, we considered each metastatic DNA sample with 52221 measures as a vector of 52221-elements and the distance between two samples defined as the Euclidean distance of two vectors. All the samples were divided into a training set and a testing set. The predicted label for a sample in the testing set is the same as the label of the sample mean of all samples belonging to the same subject in the training set with the smallest distance to the testing sample (nearest mean classifier) 13 . Leave-One-Out Cross Validation (LOOCV) is then performed utilizing one sample as the test sample and the remaining samples as the training set 13 . This is repeated such that every sample is used once as testing sample. If the predicted label coincides with the original label, it is correctly classified; otherwise, it is in error. We apply the nearest mean classification method to classify the samples and utilize the LOOCV to estimate the classification error. The error rate is calculated as the percentile of wrongly classified samples over all samples. Statistical tests on cCGH and Affy6 data are one-tailed. We also tested cCGH and Affy6 data for evidence of clonality by testing the hypothesis that there is no difference between the “between-subject” distance and “within-subject” distance by considering each cCGH sample with 218 CGH measures as a vector of 218-elements and each Affy6 sample with 52221 measures as a vector of 52221 elements. Let D bm be the average “between-subject” distance over all sample pairs belonging to different subjects and D bw be the average “within-subject” distance over all sample pairs belonging to the same subject, using the summary statistic S s = D bm ? D bw , we compared experimentally observed S s to the distribution of S s calculated from 100,000 random permutations of the subject labels 34 , 35 . The experimentally observed cCGH data S s value is 3.8159, and the maximum value of S s in the permuted data is 0.8467 ( Supplementary Fig. 3 ), rejecting the null hypothesis with P <0.00001. The experimentally observed Affy6 data S s value is 110.24, and the maximum value of S s in the permuted data is 19.62 ( Supplementary Fig. 7 ), rejecting the null hypothesis with P <0.00001. Additional statistical methods details are contained in Supplementary Methods .  PELICAN Autopsy Study of Lethal Prostate Cancer Ninety-four cancer samples were studied from 30 men who died of prostate cancer and underwent autopsy as part of the Project to Eliminate Lethal prostate CANcer (PELICAN) rapid autopsy program at the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (JHASPC). Initiated in 1994, all JHASPC study subjects gave informed consent to participate as part of a Johns Hopkins Medicine IRB-approved protocol. All subjects underwent androgen-deprivation during the course of their treatment for metastatic prostate cancer, and died between 1995 and 2004. Tissues were snap-frozen and cryostat-microdissected and DNA purified as described previously 20 . Subject and sample data including distribution of samples studied by cCGH and Affy6 array technology are contained in Supplementary Table 1 . Mean estimated cancer sample DNA purity based on hematoxylin and eosin histology is 88% (range 60–99%). Chromosomal Comparative Genomic Hybridization (cCGH) was performed at resolution of 389 cytogenetic bands (excluding the chromosome Y) in 85 cancer DNA samples from 29 subjects. cCGH data ( Supplementary Table 3 ) are of lower resolution but are highly concordant with array-based CGH (aCGH) results 32 . CGH was done as described previously 33 and as detailed in Supplementary Methods .  Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 analysis Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 chips (Affy6) were purchased from Affymetrix, Inc. All of the reagents used for the assay were obtained from manufacturers recommended by Affymetrix. We amplified, purified, fragmented and labeled the genomic DNA, hybridized, washed and stained the Affy6 arrays according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( Supplementary Methods ). We used Partek Genomic Suite (PGS) version 6.4 for allele specific and non-allele specific analyses using default settings ( http://www.partek.com/Tutorials ) unless otherwise specified. Sixteen subject-paired noncancerous samples from 14 subjects were used to create a copy number baseline ( Supplementary Table 2 ). For each of 58 cancer DNA samples studied by Affy6, we then generated a DNA copy number estimate for all ~1.8 million probes on the Affy6 chip, and then segmented these data into 52221 channels using the PGS Segmentation algorithm. Autosomal and sex-chromosomal segmentation data for the 58 samples was then analyzed in PGS using unsupervised hierarchical clustering (Pearson’s Dissimilarity algorithm) to produce data shown ( Fig. 1e ). Allele-specific genomic analysis depicted (Figs. 2 , 3 and Supplementary Table 8 ) was performed using the PGS allele-specific analysis algorithm that includes genotype information and allele-specific intensities from paired samples to estimate DNA copy number for each heterozygous SNP, and is further described in Supplementary Methods .  Statistical Analysis Permutation- Based Classification Analysis. For the cCGH data, considering each metastatic DNA sample with 218 SAM-defined ( Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Tables 4 and 5 ) CGH measures as a vector of 218-elements and the distance between two samples defined as the Euclidean distance of two vectors. For the Affy6 data, we considered each metastatic DNA sample with 52221 measures as a vector of 52221-elements and the distance between two samples defined as the Euclidean distance of two vectors. All the samples were divided into a training set and a testing set. The predicted label for a sample in the testing set is the same as the label of the sample mean of all samples belonging to the same subject in the training set with the smallest distance to the testing sample (nearest mean classifier) 13 . Leave-One-Out Cross Validation (LOOCV) is then performed utilizing one sample as the test sample and the remaining samples as the training set 13 . This is repeated such that every sample is used once as testing sample. If the predicted label coincides with the original label, it is correctly classified; otherwise, it is in error. We apply the nearest mean classification method to classify the samples and utilize the LOOCV to estimate the classification error. The error rate is calculated as the percentile of wrongly classified samples over all samples. Statistical tests on cCGH and Affy6 data are one-tailed. We also tested cCGH and Affy6 data for evidence of clonality by testing the hypothesis that there is no difference between the “between-subject” distance and “within-subject” distance by considering each cCGH sample with 218 CGH measures as a vector of 218-elements and each Affy6 sample with 52221 measures as a vector of 52221 elements. Let D bm be the average “between-subject” distance over all sample pairs belonging to different subjects and D bw be the average “within-subject” distance over all sample pairs belonging to the same subject, using the summary statistic S s = D bm ? D bw , we compared experimentally observed S s to the distribution of S s calculated from 100,000 random permutations of the subject labels 34 , 35 . The experimentally observed cCGH data S s value is 3.8159, and the maximum value of S s in the permuted data is 0.8467 ( Supplementary Fig. 3 ), rejecting the null hypothesis with P <0.00001. The experimentally observed Affy6 data S s value is 110.24, and the maximum value of S s in the permuted data is 19.62 ( Supplementary Fig. 7 ), rejecting the null hypothesis with P <0.00001. Additional statistical methods details are contained in Supplementary Methods .  Supplementary Material 1 2 