TIMING AND DURATION OF DEVELOPMENTAL NICOTINE EXPOSURE CONTRIBUTE TO ATTENUATION OF THE TADPOLE HYPERCAPNIC NEUROVENTILATORY RESPONSE The ability for air-breathing vertebrates to adjust ventilation in response to increased CO2 (hypercapnia) is fundamental to maintaining pH homeostasis. Developmental nicotine exposure has been shown to impair tadpole neuroventilatory responses to hypercapnia following 8-12 wk of exposure. It is not clear, however, to what extent the timing of exposure during development and/or the duration over which the exposure takes place contribute to this impairment. Here tadpoles were exposed to 30 ?g/L of nicotine for 3- or 10-wk durations, either early or late in tadpole development. Correlates of tadpole lung neuroventilation were monitored during normocapnic (1.5 % CO2) and hypercapnic (5 % CO2) conditions of isolated brainstems. Preparations derived from early metamorphic tadpoles failed to increase lung neuroventilation in response to hypercapnia whether they had been exposed to nicotine for 3 or 10 wk. Preparations derived from late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond to hypercapnia after being exposed to nicotine for 10 wk. These results suggest that both the developmental timing and duration of exposure are important when considering nicotine's effect on the hypercapnic neuroventilatory response.  INTRODUCTION Hypercapnic acidosis stimulates respiratory output, a modulation chiefly mediated by central CO2/pH sensitive neurons ( O'Regan and Majcherczyk, 1982 ; Milsom, 1995 ; Nattie, 1999 ; Putnam et al., 2004 ), which have been demonstrated in all tetrapod vertebrates ( Milsom, 2002 ). CO2/pH-sensitive neurons provide feedback to brainstem respiratory control regions on the adequacy of ventilation relative to metabolism ( Nattie, 1999 ).Ventilatory responses to hypercapnia in mammals are low in newborns and subsequently increase to adult levels with development ( Putnam et al., 2005 ). This hypercapnic response pattern is mirrored in anuran amphibians where the proportional increase in lung frequency in response to hypercapnia becomes greater as metamorphosis progresses from early tadpole stages to post metamorphic stages ( Smatresk and Smits, 1991 ; Torgerson et al., 1997 ; Taylor et al., 2003b; Gheshmy et al., 2006 ). These hypercapnic neuroventilatory responses (HCnVRs) are characterized by an increase in lung burst frequency in response to high concentrations of CO2.The specific mechanism responsible for the development of HCnVRs may be shared among all vertebrates, and consist of an orchestrated transition in the relative role of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission ( Putnam et al., 2005 ). Nicotine is a developmental neurotoxin, altering the replication, formation and differentiation of brain tissue ( Slotkin, 2004 ). The neuroteratogenic nature of prenatal nicotine exposure has been well established and chronic exposure may impair ventilatory responses to exogenous stressors such as hypoxia or hypercapnia ( Hafstrom et al., 2005 ). An attenuated response to hypoxic ventilatory stress following prenatal nicotine exposure has been demonstrated in rat pups ( St-John and Leiter, 1999 ; Simakajornboon et al., 2004 ). Early metamorphic tadpoles exposed to 8-12 weeks of 30 ?g/L nicotine demonstrated a diminished ventilatory response to hypercapnia in vivo and in in vitro brainstem preparations ( Taylor et al., 2008 ). Despite evidence that nicotine impairs tadpole HCnVRs ( Taylor et al., 2008 ), it is not clear whether a minimum 8-wk duration of nicotine exposure or exposure at the time of early tadpole development is necessary to create an impairment. Both early and late times in tadpole development may be particularly sensitive to the effects of nicotine exposure. Early in development tadpoles undergo considerable neurogenesis and synaptogenesis ( Horn, 1991 ; Stofer and Horn, 1993 ). Late in development tadpoles are at the peak of metamorphosis and are undergoing major transitions in anatomy and physiology. These include an increased dependence on lungs for gas exchange, which is coupled with an increase in lung-related neural activity ( Burggren and West, 1982 ; Taylor et al., 2003a). Nicotine exposure during either of these developmental time points may underlie impairments in the HCnVR. In the present study we differentiate how developmental timing and duration of chronic nicotine exposure affect tadpole HCnVR. Our experiments specifically targeted early and late time points of tadpole metamorphosis and nicotine exposure durations of 3 and 10 weeks. We hypothesized that early metamorphic tadpoles would be more susceptible to nicotine exposure than late metamorphic tadpoles; we anticipated impairments of the HCnVR in early but not late metamorphic tadpoles after both 3 and 10 weeks of nicotine exposure. This hypothesis was based on the observation that tadpoles have a robust, fully developed HCnVR by late metamorphosis (Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b), suggesting that the neural mechanisms underlying the hypercapnic response exist by late metamorphosis and may be less vulnerable than early metamorphic tadpoles to the neuroteratogenic effects of nicotine.  METHODS Animals Studies were performed on Lithobates (formerly Rana ) catesbeiana tadpoles (n = 80) purchased from a commercial supplier (Sullivan Co. Inc., www.researchamphibians.com ). Tadpoles were maintained at 23 °C and fed goldfish food daily. Tadpoles were maintained in aquaria for 10 wk with either dechlorinated water only or dechlorinated water containing nicotine (30 ?g/L). This concentration of nicotine is consistent with that of a previous study using bullfrogs ( Taylor et al., 2008 ) and is within the concentration range of nicotine found in the body fluids of an average smoker ( Moyer et al., 2002 ). 3-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles were maintained in dechlorinated water for 7 wk before being transferred to nicotine-containing water for 3 wk. Therefore all animals were maintained in the laboratory for 10 wk regardless of the duration of nicotine exposure. We chose 3- and 10-wk exposure durations because the Taylor et al. (2008) reported impairment of hypercapnic response after 8 to 12 wk of nicotine exposure. We wanted reproduce those findings and determine if that impaired HCnVR was stage dependant.10-wk exposure, the mid-range of that previous study, was selected. 3-wk nicotine exposure represents one third to one quarter the previous exposure duration and was chosen to determine whether a significantly shorter exposure could lead to a similar impairment. Tadpoles’ developmental stages were determined at the start of treatment and at the time of dissection to insure developmental homogeneity. At the time of dissection each tadpole was either “early metamorphic” (forelimbs absent, hind limbs paddle-like without joints or separated toes) or “late metamorphic” (forelimbs and hind limbs present, tail being resorbed), corresponding to developmental stages 7-12 or 20-25, respectively, in the classification scheme of Taylor and Köllros (1946) . Tadpoles included in early metamorphic groups were stages 7-9 at the start of their 10 wk laboratory maintenance, while those included in late metamorphic groups were stages 18-20. This was true for animals that received either 3 or 10 wk of chronic nicotine exposure, as they were all maintained for 10 wk. Animals that did not remain within these stage ranges for 3 or 10 wk were excluded from the data sets. We established 6 experimental groups of early and late metamorphic non-nicotine exposed treatment-control tadpoles (n = 14 and n = 14 respectively), early and late metamorphic 3-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles (n = 16 and n = 16 respectively), and early and late metamorphic 10-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles (n = 10 and n = 10 respectively). A subset of each experimental group was used as time-controls to determine the robustness of neuroventilation. These preparations remained normocapnic throughout the experiment (early and late metamorphic treatment controls, n = 6 of each, early and late metamorphic 3-wk nicotine-exposed, n = 6 of each, and early and late metamorphic 10-wk nicotine-exposed, n = 4 of each). All care and experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, and complied with all state and federal ethical guidelines. Surgical preparation Each tadpole was anesthetized by immersion for 1-2 min in cold (4° C) 0.2 mM tricaine methanesulfate (MS222; Sigma, www.sigmaaldrich.com ) in dechlorinated water buffered to pH 7.8 with NaHCO3. Using a razor blade, the front of the head rostral to the nares and the back of the body (hind limbs and tail, if present) were removed. Under a dissecting microscope, the dorsal cranium and forebrain rostral to the diencephalon were resected and the fourth ventricle opened by removing the choroid plexus. The remaining brainstem and spinal cord were removed en bloc and further trimmed rostral to the optic tectum and at the brachial nerve. During dissection, exposed tissues were superfused with cold artificial cerebral spinal fluid (aCSF) composed of (in mM) 104 NaCl, 4 KCl, 1.4 MgCl2, 10 d -glucose, 25 NaHCO3 and 2.4 CaCl2 equilibrated with 100 % O2. The aCSF HCO3? concentration is similar to that of plasma from late metamorphic tadpoles and frogs, but higher that the HCO3? concentration in plasma from early metamorphic tadpoles ( Just et al., 1973 ). These methods have been used in previous tadpole studies (Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b; 2008 ); Concentration of aCSF was selected to insure comparability between experiments on animals of different metamorphic stages. The isolated brainstem-spinal cord was transferred en bloc to a 2.5-ml, Plexiglas, flow-through recording chamber and was supported, ventral side up, between coarse nylon mesh such that all surfaces were bathed with aCSF flowing from rostral to caudal at a rate of 5 ml/min. A supply of aCSF, equilibrated with O2-CO2 mixtures that produced the desired pH, flowed through plastic tubing to the recording chamber and bathed the isolated brainstem. The pH of the aCSF was maintained at either pH 7.8 (1.5 % CO2: 98.5 % O2; normocapnia) or pH 7.4 (5.0 % CO2: 95.0 % O2; hypercapnia) by adjusting the fractional concentrations of O2 and CO2 in the equilibration gas. CO2 was monitored with a CO2 analyzer (Capstar 100; CWE, www.cwe-inc.com ). After isolation the brainstem was allowed to stabilize for ~1 h while superfused at 23 °C, with aCSF of pH 7.8 and ~9 torr P co 2. Nerve Recording Roots of the facial and hypoglossal nerves were drawn into glass suction electrodes pulled from 1-mm-diameter capillary glass to tip diameters of 30-60 ?m. Whole-nerve discharge was amplified (X100 by DAM 50 amplifiers, World Precision Instruments, www.wpiinc.com ; X1000 by a four-channel model 1700 amplifier, A-M Systems, www.a-msystems.com ) and filtered (100 Hz high pass to 1 kHz low pass). The amplified and filtered output was sent to a data acquisition system (Powerlab, AD Instruments, www.adinstruments.com ), which sampled at 1 kHz, data were archived as whole-nerve discharge, and duplicate integrated (full-wave rectified and averaged over 200 ms) neurograms were acquired simultaneously. Such recordings were made from brainstems that were either 3- and 10-week chronically exposed to nicotine as well as brainstems derived from tadpoles in the treatment-control and each time-control group. Neurograms were recorded during 30 min of normocapnia, followed by 30 min of hypercapnia, followed by 30 min of normocapnia for all hypercapnia-treated brainstems. In this way putative ventilatory rhythm at baseline, the HCnVR and the return to baseline activity were recorded. The treatment-control group received the same sequence of normocapnia followed by hypercapnia followed by normocapnia. For time-control groups, neurograms were recorded during 90 min of normocapnia (the total duration of the hypercapnic treatments) to quantify changes in neuroventilation would occur over the time course of the experiment. Data analyses and statistics Burst activity patterns in the neurograms recorded from the isolated brainstems were designated as either putative gill or putative lung breaths on the basis of the amplitude of the integrated nerve activity and the presence or absence of coincident firing in both the facial and hypoglossal nerves ( Fig. 1 ), as previously described ( Torgerson et al., 1998 ; Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b). Putative gill breaths had lower integrated burst amplitude on the facial nerve than putative lung breaths, and little or no coincident burst activity in the hypoglossal nerve. Putative lung breaths had higher integrated burst amplitude in the facial nerve and coincident burst activity in the hypoglossal nerve. Taylor et al. (Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b) demonstrated that changes in the frequency of putative lung breaths are the primary manifestation of the HCnVR; the duration and amplitude of putative lung breaths and the frequency, duration and amplitude of putative gill breaths are unresponsive to hypercapnia. Thus, we quantified only the frequency of putative lung bursts, which was done by comparing the number of lung bursts per minute in 3 consecutive minutes (at the end of the 30-minute neurogram) of each CO2/pH condition (normocapnia, hypercapnia and return to normocapnia). Frequencies of lung neuroventilation were compared using repeated-measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA; SigmaStat, www.systat.com ). When an RM-ANOVA indicated that significant differences existed between the treatment groups, multiple comparisons were made using the Holm-Sidak multiple comparison test. Hypercapnia-induced relative changes in lung burst frequency were analyzed with T-test comparisons of the average percent change from normocapnic ventilatory frequency between each nicotine-exposed treatment group and treatment-controls. Values reported in the text are always mean ± SE.  Animals Studies were performed on Lithobates (formerly Rana ) catesbeiana tadpoles (n = 80) purchased from a commercial supplier (Sullivan Co. Inc., www.researchamphibians.com ). Tadpoles were maintained at 23 °C and fed goldfish food daily. Tadpoles were maintained in aquaria for 10 wk with either dechlorinated water only or dechlorinated water containing nicotine (30 ?g/L). This concentration of nicotine is consistent with that of a previous study using bullfrogs ( Taylor et al., 2008 ) and is within the concentration range of nicotine found in the body fluids of an average smoker ( Moyer et al., 2002 ). 3-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles were maintained in dechlorinated water for 7 wk before being transferred to nicotine-containing water for 3 wk. Therefore all animals were maintained in the laboratory for 10 wk regardless of the duration of nicotine exposure. We chose 3- and 10-wk exposure durations because the Taylor et al. (2008) reported impairment of hypercapnic response after 8 to 12 wk of nicotine exposure. We wanted reproduce those findings and determine if that impaired HCnVR was stage dependant.10-wk exposure, the mid-range of that previous study, was selected. 3-wk nicotine exposure represents one third to one quarter the previous exposure duration and was chosen to determine whether a significantly shorter exposure could lead to a similar impairment. Tadpoles’ developmental stages were determined at the start of treatment and at the time of dissection to insure developmental homogeneity. At the time of dissection each tadpole was either “early metamorphic” (forelimbs absent, hind limbs paddle-like without joints or separated toes) or “late metamorphic” (forelimbs and hind limbs present, tail being resorbed), corresponding to developmental stages 7-12 or 20-25, respectively, in the classification scheme of Taylor and Köllros (1946) . Tadpoles included in early metamorphic groups were stages 7-9 at the start of their 10 wk laboratory maintenance, while those included in late metamorphic groups were stages 18-20. This was true for animals that received either 3 or 10 wk of chronic nicotine exposure, as they were all maintained for 10 wk. Animals that did not remain within these stage ranges for 3 or 10 wk were excluded from the data sets. We established 6 experimental groups of early and late metamorphic non-nicotine exposed treatment-control tadpoles (n = 14 and n = 14 respectively), early and late metamorphic 3-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles (n = 16 and n = 16 respectively), and early and late metamorphic 10-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles (n = 10 and n = 10 respectively). A subset of each experimental group was used as time-controls to determine the robustness of neuroventilation. These preparations remained normocapnic throughout the experiment (early and late metamorphic treatment controls, n = 6 of each, early and late metamorphic 3-wk nicotine-exposed, n = 6 of each, and early and late metamorphic 10-wk nicotine-exposed, n = 4 of each). All care and experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, and complied with all state and federal ethical guidelines.  Surgical preparation Each tadpole was anesthetized by immersion for 1-2 min in cold (4° C) 0.2 mM tricaine methanesulfate (MS222; Sigma, www.sigmaaldrich.com ) in dechlorinated water buffered to pH 7.8 with NaHCO3. Using a razor blade, the front of the head rostral to the nares and the back of the body (hind limbs and tail, if present) were removed. Under a dissecting microscope, the dorsal cranium and forebrain rostral to the diencephalon were resected and the fourth ventricle opened by removing the choroid plexus. The remaining brainstem and spinal cord were removed en bloc and further trimmed rostral to the optic tectum and at the brachial nerve. During dissection, exposed tissues were superfused with cold artificial cerebral spinal fluid (aCSF) composed of (in mM) 104 NaCl, 4 KCl, 1.4 MgCl2, 10 d -glucose, 25 NaHCO3 and 2.4 CaCl2 equilibrated with 100 % O2. The aCSF HCO3? concentration is similar to that of plasma from late metamorphic tadpoles and frogs, but higher that the HCO3? concentration in plasma from early metamorphic tadpoles ( Just et al., 1973 ). These methods have been used in previous tadpole studies (Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b; 2008 ); Concentration of aCSF was selected to insure comparability between experiments on animals of different metamorphic stages. The isolated brainstem-spinal cord was transferred en bloc to a 2.5-ml, Plexiglas, flow-through recording chamber and was supported, ventral side up, between coarse nylon mesh such that all surfaces were bathed with aCSF flowing from rostral to caudal at a rate of 5 ml/min. A supply of aCSF, equilibrated with O2-CO2 mixtures that produced the desired pH, flowed through plastic tubing to the recording chamber and bathed the isolated brainstem. The pH of the aCSF was maintained at either pH 7.8 (1.5 % CO2: 98.5 % O2; normocapnia) or pH 7.4 (5.0 % CO2: 95.0 % O2; hypercapnia) by adjusting the fractional concentrations of O2 and CO2 in the equilibration gas. CO2 was monitored with a CO2 analyzer (Capstar 100; CWE, www.cwe-inc.com ). After isolation the brainstem was allowed to stabilize for ~1 h while superfused at 23 °C, with aCSF of pH 7.8 and ~9 torr P co 2.  Nerve Recording Roots of the facial and hypoglossal nerves were drawn into glass suction electrodes pulled from 1-mm-diameter capillary glass to tip diameters of 30-60 ?m. Whole-nerve discharge was amplified (X100 by DAM 50 amplifiers, World Precision Instruments, www.wpiinc.com ; X1000 by a four-channel model 1700 amplifier, A-M Systems, www.a-msystems.com ) and filtered (100 Hz high pass to 1 kHz low pass). The amplified and filtered output was sent to a data acquisition system (Powerlab, AD Instruments, www.adinstruments.com ), which sampled at 1 kHz, data were archived as whole-nerve discharge, and duplicate integrated (full-wave rectified and averaged over 200 ms) neurograms were acquired simultaneously. Such recordings were made from brainstems that were either 3- and 10-week chronically exposed to nicotine as well as brainstems derived from tadpoles in the treatment-control and each time-control group. Neurograms were recorded during 30 min of normocapnia, followed by 30 min of hypercapnia, followed by 30 min of normocapnia for all hypercapnia-treated brainstems. In this way putative ventilatory rhythm at baseline, the HCnVR and the return to baseline activity were recorded. The treatment-control group received the same sequence of normocapnia followed by hypercapnia followed by normocapnia. For time-control groups, neurograms were recorded during 90 min of normocapnia (the total duration of the hypercapnic treatments) to quantify changes in neuroventilation would occur over the time course of the experiment.  Data analyses and statistics Burst activity patterns in the neurograms recorded from the isolated brainstems were designated as either putative gill or putative lung breaths on the basis of the amplitude of the integrated nerve activity and the presence or absence of coincident firing in both the facial and hypoglossal nerves ( Fig. 1 ), as previously described ( Torgerson et al., 1998 ; Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b). Putative gill breaths had lower integrated burst amplitude on the facial nerve than putative lung breaths, and little or no coincident burst activity in the hypoglossal nerve. Putative lung breaths had higher integrated burst amplitude in the facial nerve and coincident burst activity in the hypoglossal nerve. Taylor et al. (Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b) demonstrated that changes in the frequency of putative lung breaths are the primary manifestation of the HCnVR; the duration and amplitude of putative lung breaths and the frequency, duration and amplitude of putative gill breaths are unresponsive to hypercapnia. Thus, we quantified only the frequency of putative lung bursts, which was done by comparing the number of lung bursts per minute in 3 consecutive minutes (at the end of the 30-minute neurogram) of each CO2/pH condition (normocapnia, hypercapnia and return to normocapnia). Frequencies of lung neuroventilation were compared using repeated-measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA; SigmaStat, www.systat.com ). When an RM-ANOVA indicated that significant differences existed between the treatment groups, multiple comparisons were made using the Holm-Sidak multiple comparison test. Hypercapnia-induced relative changes in lung burst frequency were analyzed with T-test comparisons of the average percent change from normocapnic ventilatory frequency between each nicotine-exposed treatment group and treatment-controls. Values reported in the text are always mean ± SE.  RESULTS Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of early metamorphic tadpoles The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts over 90 min normocapnia in early metamorphic tadpoles are illustrated in Fig. 2 . There was no significant difference between the frequency of putative lung breaths exhibited during normocapnia by the isolated brainstems of all control (0.6 ± 0.2) and 3- or 10-week early metamorphic nicotine-exposed tadpoles (1.0 ± 0.2 P = 0.24 and 2.0 ± 0.4 P = 0.30, respectively). Normocapnia was maintained in time-controls for 90 min. Early metamorphic control, 3- and 10-week chronic nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in lung burst frequency over the 90-min protocol (P = 0.41, P = 0.43 and P = 0.42). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of either early metamorphic tadpole brainstems. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in early metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 3 . Early metamorphic tadpoles failed to increase lung burst frequency in response to hypercapnia following 3-wk chronic nicotine exposure (from 1.2 ± 0.5 to 0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.75). Returning CO2 levels to normocapnia also had no effect on putative lung ventilation (0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.71) of these animals. Consistent with the findings of Taylor et al. (2008) 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure also inhibited a hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency in early metamorphic tadpoles (from 0.7 ± 0.3 to 0.7 ± 0.3; P = 0.96). There was no significant change in lung burst frequency following the return of CO2 levels to baseline (0.7 ± 0.4; P = 1.00). Thus, both 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposures eliminated the hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation in early metamorphic tadpoles. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by early metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that exhibited by the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals ( Fig. 4 ). Control tadpoles increased lung burst frequency by 317 ± 210 % from normocapnia in response to superfusion with 5 % CO2. Following 3-wk nicotine exposure, tadpole brainstems exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was significantly lower than treatment-controls (?29 ± 64 %; P = 0.04) and was not significantly different from normocapnia (P = 0.30). In the 10-wk nicotine-exposed early metamorphic tadpoles, relative change in lung burst frequency compared with their normocapnic lung burst frequency was also significantly lower than treatment-control animals (?38 ± 27 %; P = 0.03) and was not a significant change from normocapnic ventilation (P = 0.07). Therefore, 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposure inhibited the neuroventilatory response of early metamorphic tadpoles to hypercapnia and both 3- and 10-wk exposed tadpoles exhibited a hypercapnia-induced relative change in lung neuroventilation that was lower than controls ( Fig. 5A ). Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of late metamorphic tadpoles Figure 5 depicts representative neurograms for both early and late metamorphic tadpoles. The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of normocapnic and hypercapnic lung bursts are illustrated in Fig. 5B . Late metamorphic tadpoles have been shown to exhibit significantly more lung breaths per minute in vivo ( Burggren and West, 1982 ; 1986) and in vitro ( Torgerson et al., 1997 ) than early metamorphic tadpoles, our results are consistent with those observations (6.8 ± 1.9 compared to 0.6 ± 0.2; P = 0.003, data not shown). Lung burst frequency over 90 minutes of normocapnia was assessed in time-controls following 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposure ( Fig. 6 .) There was no significant difference in lung burst frequency in the brainstems of 3- or 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals compared to those of late metamorphic control tadpoles (P = 0.89, and P = 0.41). Additionally, control, 3- and 10-wk chronically nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in normocapnic lung burst frequency over the 90-min time-control protocol (P = 0.53, P = 0.74 and P = 0.58). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of late metamorphic tadpole brainstems. There was also no significant change in lung burst frequency over a 90-min protocol in any of the experimental treatment groups. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in late metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 7 . 3-wk nicotine exposure did not impact the ability of late metamorphic tadpoles to respond to hypercapnia with the typical significant increase in lung bust frequency above normocapnic levels (from 6.2 ± 1.7 to 12.9 ± 3.0; P = 0.002). 3-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles also responded to the decrease in CO2 when returned to normocapnia from hypercapnia; there was a significant decline in their lung burst frequency (5.6 ± 1.4; P = 0.03). This was considerably different from the 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpole brainstems that did not significantly increase neuroventilation in response to hypercapnia (from 11.3 ± 4.2 to 16.3 ± 4.2; P = 0.19). However, it is important to point out that this may be reflective in part by the somewhat elevated normocapnic ventilation in this 10-wk nicotine exposed treatment group as the average frequency evoked by CO2 was similar for all late metamorphic treatment groups (15.1 ± 4.4, 12.86 ± 3.0, 16.3 ± 4.2 for control 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposed tadpoles respectively). Consequently, late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond to hypercapnia following 10- but not 3-wk nicotine exposure. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that of the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles ( Fig. 8 ). Late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles exhibited a considerable hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation (162 ± 29 %). Following 3-wk nicotine exposure late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a more modest, but statistically significant hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency when exposed to hypercapnia (87 ± 38 %; P = 0.05), this increase was not significantly different than treatment-controls (P = 0.15). The 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a markedly smaller, hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was not significantly different than their modestly elevated normocapnic ventilation (62 ± 27 %; P = 0.07) Also, while the peak frequency evoked by hypercapnia was similar in each age group, the average hypercapnia-induced change demonstrated by 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles was significantly lower than that of controls (P = 0.03). Thus 10-wk, but not 3-wk, nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond significantly to hypercapnia and exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in neuroventilation that was significantly lower in magnitude than that of treatment-control animals.  RESULTS Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of early metamorphic tadpoles The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts over 90 min normocapnia in early metamorphic tadpoles are illustrated in Fig. 2 . There was no significant difference between the frequency of putative lung breaths exhibited during normocapnia by the isolated brainstems of all control (0.6 ± 0.2) and 3- or 10-week early metamorphic nicotine-exposed tadpoles (1.0 ± 0.2 P = 0.24 and 2.0 ± 0.4 P = 0.30, respectively). Normocapnia was maintained in time-controls for 90 min. Early metamorphic control, 3- and 10-week chronic nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in lung burst frequency over the 90-min protocol (P = 0.41, P = 0.43 and P = 0.42). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of either early metamorphic tadpole brainstems. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in early metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 3 . Early metamorphic tadpoles failed to increase lung burst frequency in response to hypercapnia following 3-wk chronic nicotine exposure (from 1.2 ± 0.5 to 0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.75). Returning CO2 levels to normocapnia also had no effect on putative lung ventilation (0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.71) of these animals. Consistent with the findings of Taylor et al. (2008) 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure also inhibited a hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency in early metamorphic tadpoles (from 0.7 ± 0.3 to 0.7 ± 0.3; P = 0.96). There was no significant change in lung burst frequency following the return of CO2 levels to baseline (0.7 ± 0.4; P = 1.00). Thus, both 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposures eliminated the hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation in early metamorphic tadpoles. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by early metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that exhibited by the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals ( Fig. 4 ). Control tadpoles increased lung burst frequency by 317 ± 210 % from normocapnia in response to superfusion with 5 % CO2. Following 3-wk nicotine exposure, tadpole brainstems exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was significantly lower than treatment-controls (?29 ± 64 %; P = 0.04) and was not significantly different from normocapnia (P = 0.30). In the 10-wk nicotine-exposed early metamorphic tadpoles, relative change in lung burst frequency compared with their normocapnic lung burst frequency was also significantly lower than treatment-control animals (?38 ± 27 %; P = 0.03) and was not a significant change from normocapnic ventilation (P = 0.07). Therefore, 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposure inhibited the neuroventilatory response of early metamorphic tadpoles to hypercapnia and both 3- and 10-wk exposed tadpoles exhibited a hypercapnia-induced relative change in lung neuroventilation that was lower than controls ( Fig. 5A ). Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of late metamorphic tadpoles Figure 5 depicts representative neurograms for both early and late metamorphic tadpoles. The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of normocapnic and hypercapnic lung bursts are illustrated in Fig. 5B . Late metamorphic tadpoles have been shown to exhibit significantly more lung breaths per minute in vivo ( Burggren and West, 1982 ; 1986) and in vitro ( Torgerson et al., 1997 ) than early metamorphic tadpoles, our results are consistent with those observations (6.8 ± 1.9 compared to 0.6 ± 0.2; P = 0.003, data not shown). Lung burst frequency over 90 minutes of normocapnia was assessed in time-controls following 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposure ( Fig. 6 .) There was no significant difference in lung burst frequency in the brainstems of 3- or 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals compared to those of late metamorphic control tadpoles (P = 0.89, and P = 0.41). Additionally, control, 3- and 10-wk chronically nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in normocapnic lung burst frequency over the 90-min time-control protocol (P = 0.53, P = 0.74 and P = 0.58). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of late metamorphic tadpole brainstems. There was also no significant change in lung burst frequency over a 90-min protocol in any of the experimental treatment groups. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in late metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 7 . 3-wk nicotine exposure did not impact the ability of late metamorphic tadpoles to respond to hypercapnia with the typical significant increase in lung bust frequency above normocapnic levels (from 6.2 ± 1.7 to 12.9 ± 3.0; P = 0.002). 3-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles also responded to the decrease in CO2 when returned to normocapnia from hypercapnia; there was a significant decline in their lung burst frequency (5.6 ± 1.4; P = 0.03). This was considerably different from the 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpole brainstems that did not significantly increase neuroventilation in response to hypercapnia (from 11.3 ± 4.2 to 16.3 ± 4.2; P = 0.19). However, it is important to point out that this may be reflective in part by the somewhat elevated normocapnic ventilation in this 10-wk nicotine exposed treatment group as the average frequency evoked by CO2 was similar for all late metamorphic treatment groups (15.1 ± 4.4, 12.86 ± 3.0, 16.3 ± 4.2 for control 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposed tadpoles respectively). Consequently, late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond to hypercapnia following 10- but not 3-wk nicotine exposure. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that of the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles ( Fig. 8 ). Late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles exhibited a considerable hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation (162 ± 29 %). Following 3-wk nicotine exposure late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a more modest, but statistically significant hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency when exposed to hypercapnia (87 ± 38 %; P = 0.05), this increase was not significantly different than treatment-controls (P = 0.15). The 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a markedly smaller, hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was not significantly different than their modestly elevated normocapnic ventilation (62 ± 27 %; P = 0.07) Also, while the peak frequency evoked by hypercapnia was similar in each age group, the average hypercapnia-induced change demonstrated by 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles was significantly lower than that of controls (P = 0.03). Thus 10-wk, but not 3-wk, nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond significantly to hypercapnia and exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in neuroventilation that was significantly lower in magnitude than that of treatment-control animals.  Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of early metamorphic tadpoles The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts over 90 min normocapnia in early metamorphic tadpoles are illustrated in Fig. 2 . There was no significant difference between the frequency of putative lung breaths exhibited during normocapnia by the isolated brainstems of all control (0.6 ± 0.2) and 3- or 10-week early metamorphic nicotine-exposed tadpoles (1.0 ± 0.2 P = 0.24 and 2.0 ± 0.4 P = 0.30, respectively). Normocapnia was maintained in time-controls for 90 min. Early metamorphic control, 3- and 10-week chronic nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in lung burst frequency over the 90-min protocol (P = 0.41, P = 0.43 and P = 0.42). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of either early metamorphic tadpole brainstems. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in early metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 3 . Early metamorphic tadpoles failed to increase lung burst frequency in response to hypercapnia following 3-wk chronic nicotine exposure (from 1.2 ± 0.5 to 0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.75). Returning CO2 levels to normocapnia also had no effect on putative lung ventilation (0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.71) of these animals. Consistent with the findings of Taylor et al. (2008) 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure also inhibited a hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency in early metamorphic tadpoles (from 0.7 ± 0.3 to 0.7 ± 0.3; P = 0.96). There was no significant change in lung burst frequency following the return of CO2 levels to baseline (0.7 ± 0.4; P = 1.00). Thus, both 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposures eliminated the hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation in early metamorphic tadpoles. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by early metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that exhibited by the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals ( Fig. 4 ). Control tadpoles increased lung burst frequency by 317 ± 210 % from normocapnia in response to superfusion with 5 % CO2. Following 3-wk nicotine exposure, tadpole brainstems exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was significantly lower than treatment-controls (?29 ± 64 %; P = 0.04) and was not significantly different from normocapnia (P = 0.30). In the 10-wk nicotine-exposed early metamorphic tadpoles, relative change in lung burst frequency compared with their normocapnic lung burst frequency was also significantly lower than treatment-control animals (?38 ± 27 %; P = 0.03) and was not a significant change from normocapnic ventilation (P = 0.07). Therefore, 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposure inhibited the neuroventilatory response of early metamorphic tadpoles to hypercapnia and both 3- and 10-wk exposed tadpoles exhibited a hypercapnia-induced relative change in lung neuroventilation that was lower than controls ( Fig. 5A ).  Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of early metamorphic tadpoles The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts over 90 min normocapnia in early metamorphic tadpoles are illustrated in Fig. 2 . There was no significant difference between the frequency of putative lung breaths exhibited during normocapnia by the isolated brainstems of all control (0.6 ± 0.2) and 3- or 10-week early metamorphic nicotine-exposed tadpoles (1.0 ± 0.2 P = 0.24 and 2.0 ± 0.4 P = 0.30, respectively). Normocapnia was maintained in time-controls for 90 min. Early metamorphic control, 3- and 10-week chronic nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in lung burst frequency over the 90-min protocol (P = 0.41, P = 0.43 and P = 0.42). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of either early metamorphic tadpole brainstems. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in early metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 3 . Early metamorphic tadpoles failed to increase lung burst frequency in response to hypercapnia following 3-wk chronic nicotine exposure (from 1.2 ± 0.5 to 0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.75). Returning CO2 levels to normocapnia also had no effect on putative lung ventilation (0.8 ± 0.2; P = 0.71) of these animals. Consistent with the findings of Taylor et al. (2008) 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure also inhibited a hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency in early metamorphic tadpoles (from 0.7 ± 0.3 to 0.7 ± 0.3; P = 0.96). There was no significant change in lung burst frequency following the return of CO2 levels to baseline (0.7 ± 0.4; P = 1.00). Thus, both 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposures eliminated the hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation in early metamorphic tadpoles. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by early metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that exhibited by the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals ( Fig. 4 ). Control tadpoles increased lung burst frequency by 317 ± 210 % from normocapnia in response to superfusion with 5 % CO2. Following 3-wk nicotine exposure, tadpole brainstems exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was significantly lower than treatment-controls (?29 ± 64 %; P = 0.04) and was not significantly different from normocapnia (P = 0.30). In the 10-wk nicotine-exposed early metamorphic tadpoles, relative change in lung burst frequency compared with their normocapnic lung burst frequency was also significantly lower than treatment-control animals (?38 ± 27 %; P = 0.03) and was not a significant change from normocapnic ventilation (P = 0.07). Therefore, 3- and 10-wk chronic nicotine exposure inhibited the neuroventilatory response of early metamorphic tadpoles to hypercapnia and both 3- and 10-wk exposed tadpoles exhibited a hypercapnia-induced relative change in lung neuroventilation that was lower than controls ( Fig. 5A ).  Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of late metamorphic tadpoles Figure 5 depicts representative neurograms for both early and late metamorphic tadpoles. The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of normocapnic and hypercapnic lung bursts are illustrated in Fig. 5B . Late metamorphic tadpoles have been shown to exhibit significantly more lung breaths per minute in vivo ( Burggren and West, 1982 ; 1986) and in vitro ( Torgerson et al., 1997 ) than early metamorphic tadpoles, our results are consistent with those observations (6.8 ± 1.9 compared to 0.6 ± 0.2; P = 0.003, data not shown). Lung burst frequency over 90 minutes of normocapnia was assessed in time-controls following 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposure ( Fig. 6 .) There was no significant difference in lung burst frequency in the brainstems of 3- or 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals compared to those of late metamorphic control tadpoles (P = 0.89, and P = 0.41). Additionally, control, 3- and 10-wk chronically nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in normocapnic lung burst frequency over the 90-min time-control protocol (P = 0.53, P = 0.74 and P = 0.58). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of late metamorphic tadpole brainstems. There was also no significant change in lung burst frequency over a 90-min protocol in any of the experimental treatment groups. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in late metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 7 . 3-wk nicotine exposure did not impact the ability of late metamorphic tadpoles to respond to hypercapnia with the typical significant increase in lung bust frequency above normocapnic levels (from 6.2 ± 1.7 to 12.9 ± 3.0; P = 0.002). 3-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles also responded to the decrease in CO2 when returned to normocapnia from hypercapnia; there was a significant decline in their lung burst frequency (5.6 ± 1.4; P = 0.03). This was considerably different from the 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpole brainstems that did not significantly increase neuroventilation in response to hypercapnia (from 11.3 ± 4.2 to 16.3 ± 4.2; P = 0.19). However, it is important to point out that this may be reflective in part by the somewhat elevated normocapnic ventilation in this 10-wk nicotine exposed treatment group as the average frequency evoked by CO2 was similar for all late metamorphic treatment groups (15.1 ± 4.4, 12.86 ± 3.0, 16.3 ± 4.2 for control 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposed tadpoles respectively). Consequently, late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond to hypercapnia following 10- but not 3-wk nicotine exposure. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that of the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles ( Fig. 8 ). Late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles exhibited a considerable hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation (162 ± 29 %). Following 3-wk nicotine exposure late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a more modest, but statistically significant hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency when exposed to hypercapnia (87 ± 38 %; P = 0.05), this increase was not significantly different than treatment-controls (P = 0.15). The 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a markedly smaller, hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was not significantly different than their modestly elevated normocapnic ventilation (62 ± 27 %; P = 0.07) Also, while the peak frequency evoked by hypercapnia was similar in each age group, the average hypercapnia-induced change demonstrated by 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles was significantly lower than that of controls (P = 0.03). Thus 10-wk, but not 3-wk, nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond significantly to hypercapnia and exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in neuroventilation that was significantly lower in magnitude than that of treatment-control animals.  Effect of developmental nicotine exposure on the neuroventilation of late metamorphic tadpoles Figure 5 depicts representative neurograms for both early and late metamorphic tadpoles. The effects of developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of normocapnic and hypercapnic lung bursts are illustrated in Fig. 5B . Late metamorphic tadpoles have been shown to exhibit significantly more lung breaths per minute in vivo ( Burggren and West, 1982 ; 1986) and in vitro ( Torgerson et al., 1997 ) than early metamorphic tadpoles, our results are consistent with those observations (6.8 ± 1.9 compared to 0.6 ± 0.2; P = 0.003, data not shown). Lung burst frequency over 90 minutes of normocapnia was assessed in time-controls following 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposure ( Fig. 6 .) There was no significant difference in lung burst frequency in the brainstems of 3- or 10-wk nicotine-exposed animals compared to those of late metamorphic control tadpoles (P = 0.89, and P = 0.41). Additionally, control, 3- and 10-wk chronically nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited no significant change in normocapnic lung burst frequency over the 90-min time-control protocol (P = 0.53, P = 0.74 and P = 0.58). Thus, neither 3- nor 10-wk of chronic nicotine exposure had an effect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of late metamorphic tadpole brainstems. There was also no significant change in lung burst frequency over a 90-min protocol in any of the experimental treatment groups. The effects of chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine on the frequency of lung bursts during hypercapnia in late metamorphic tadpole brainstems are illustrated in Fig. 7 . 3-wk nicotine exposure did not impact the ability of late metamorphic tadpoles to respond to hypercapnia with the typical significant increase in lung bust frequency above normocapnic levels (from 6.2 ± 1.7 to 12.9 ± 3.0; P = 0.002). 3-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles also responded to the decrease in CO2 when returned to normocapnia from hypercapnia; there was a significant decline in their lung burst frequency (5.6 ± 1.4; P = 0.03). This was considerably different from the 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpole brainstems that did not significantly increase neuroventilation in response to hypercapnia (from 11.3 ± 4.2 to 16.3 ± 4.2; P = 0.19). However, it is important to point out that this may be reflective in part by the somewhat elevated normocapnic ventilation in this 10-wk nicotine exposed treatment group as the average frequency evoked by CO2 was similar for all late metamorphic treatment groups (15.1 ± 4.4, 12.86 ± 3.0, 16.3 ± 4.2 for control 3- and 10-wk nicotine exposed tadpoles respectively). Consequently, late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond to hypercapnia following 10- but not 3-wk nicotine exposure. The hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency exhibited by late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles was compared to that of the 3- and 10-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles ( Fig. 8 ). Late metamorphic treatment-control tadpoles exhibited a considerable hypercapnia-induced increase in putative lung ventilation (162 ± 29 %). Following 3-wk nicotine exposure late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a more modest, but statistically significant hypercapnia-induced increase in lung burst frequency when exposed to hypercapnia (87 ± 38 %; P = 0.05), this increase was not significantly different than treatment-controls (P = 0.15). The 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles demonstrated a markedly smaller, hypercapnia-induced change in lung burst frequency that was not significantly different than their modestly elevated normocapnic ventilation (62 ± 27 %; P = 0.07) Also, while the peak frequency evoked by hypercapnia was similar in each age group, the average hypercapnia-induced change demonstrated by 10-wk nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles was significantly lower than that of controls (P = 0.03). Thus 10-wk, but not 3-wk, nicotine-exposed late metamorphic tadpoles failed to respond significantly to hypercapnia and exhibited a hypercapnia-induced change in neuroventilation that was significantly lower in magnitude than that of treatment-control animals.  DISCUSSION Tadpole lung burst frequency increases in response to hypercapnia (Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b). The present study demonstrates that chronic developmental exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine for 10-wk attenuates that increase in both early and late metamorphic tadpoles. All preparations from 10-wk nicotine-exposed tadpoles exhibited significantly lower hypercapnic lung burst frequency changes than treatment-control animals. Early metamorphic tadpoles also failed to respond to hypercapnia following 3-wk of nicotine exposure. This would imply that the 10-wk duration of exposure is not necessary to impair the HCnVR. However, late metamorphic tadpoles responded to hypercapnia following a 3-wk nicotine exposure. This differential response to hypercapnia following 3-wk nicotine exposure in early and late metamorphic tadpoles suggests that the developmental timing of exposure to nicotine plays a role in its impairment of HCnVR. Time-controls were used to discern whether the frequency of lung bursts varied throughout the time-span of our protocol. There was no significant change in putative lung ventilation over the 90-min experimental protocol for any treatment group. Thus, impairments in hypercapnic neuroventilation are not the result of nicotine impacting the in vitro preparation's integrity over time. The neuroventilatory lung frequency of treatment-control tadpoles returns to normocapnic levels when CO2 levels are switched to normocapnia from hypercapnia. This demonstrates that the frequency changes observed during hypercapnia are the result of the hypercapnic treatment alone. Chronic nicotine had no affect on the normocapnic lung burst frequency of either early or late metamorphic tadpole brainstems. This suggests that nicotine affects either central CO2/pH chemosensitivity or the ability of central compensatory mechanisms to change ventilatory motor output in response to increases in CO2/pH. Nicotine binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, which have been shown to affect CO2 chemosensitivity ( Monteau et al., 1990 ). Prenatal nicotine exposure has adverse impact on development of the cholinergic system ( Navarro et al., 1989 ). It remains to be determined where in the brainstem and at what step in the CO2 chemoreflex pathway nicotine is affecting the HCnVR, This determination could not be made with the current data; thus, further study of the effects of nicotine on the generation of respiratory rhythm, and pattern in warranted. Nicotine exposure may affect non-cholinergic pathways implicated in respiratory modulation, including but not limited to, the serotonergic, purinergic and gabaergic systems ( Xu et al., 2001 ; Mihailescu et al., 2002 ; Huang et al., 2007 ; Luo et al., 2007 ; Slotkin et al., 2007 ). The present study was designed to characterize a functional impairment of the hypercapnic response, identifying the mechanism by which nicotine impairs this response is a topic for future research. Central chemosensitive neurons are thought to provide tonic drive for respiratory rhythm generation in part through cholinergic mechanisms ( Loeschcke, 1982 ; Eugenin and Nicholls, 1997 ; Eugenin et al., 2001 ; Okada et al., 2001 ). Chemosensitive neurons are excited by acetylcholine (Ach) and depressed by cholinergic inhibition ( Fukuda and Loeschcke, 1979 ; Kennedy et al., 2001 ). Application of nicotine to brainstem chemosensitive sites induces hyperventilation, and intravenous injection of hexamethonium, a nicotinic Ach receptor antagonist, diminishes nicotine-induced hyperventilation in anesthetized rats ( Dev and Loeschcke, 1979 ). Thus, a clear relationship between endogenous cholinergic mechanisms and central chemoreception exists. It remains to be demonstrated whether the attenuation of the HCnVR is due to chronic nicotine exposure is a result of a developmental neural deficit or a pharmacological effect of nicotine. The ventilatory response to acetylcholine in amphibians has not been extensively investigated. Kennedy et al. ( Kennedy et al., 2001 ) found that adult cane toad brainstems increased their lung burst frequency following acute nicotine exposure. We saw no such increase; suggesting that the effect of chronic exposure to nicotine is fundamentally different from that of acute exposure. This is further supported by the fact that late metamorphic tadpoles respond normally to hypercapnia following 3-wk but- not 10-wk nicotine exposure, therefore at least in the case of late metamorphic tadpoles more than 3-wk nicotine exposure is needed to impair HCnVRs. Future studies that investigate the HCnVR of early tadpoles during even shorter nicotine exposure and after a nicotine-free recovery interval may offer additional insight. The impaired HCnVR in early metamorphic tadpoles occurs at a point in development when tadpoles are undergoing significant synaptogenesis ( Horn, 1991 ; Moody et al., 1996 ). Concomitantly, that time is one of increased dependence on lung ventilation and increased chemosenistivity ( Torgerson et al., 1997 ; Taylor et al., 2003a; 2003b). The immature configuration of the early metamorphic tadpole brainstems, may account for their susceptibility to nicotine following the 3-wk exposure. It remains to be determined whether nicotine has any impact on other aspects of tadpole development. The ventilatory response to chronic nicotine in mammals is highly variable. This has been attributed to inconsistencies in nicotine exposure duration and animal age ( Hafstrom et al., 2005 ). Here we offer evidence to support the conclusion that both developmental timing and duration are factors that affect nicotine's impact on hypercapnic neuroventilation in anurans and perhaps all vertebrates. Conclusions 3 wk of chronic exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine is sufficient to impair the hypercapnic lung burst response of early metamorphic tadpole brainstems. 10- but not 3-wk nicotine exposure attenuates the hypercapnic neuroventilatory response of late metamorphic tadpoles. Neither 3 nor 10 wk of chronic nicotine exposure causes a change in the normocapnic lung neuroventilatory frequency of either early or late metamorphic tadpole brainstems. This substantiates a deleterious impact of developmental nicotine exposure on the ability of tadpoles to increase lung neuroventilation during hypercapnia and illustrates the important role of developmental timing and duration of exposure in determining the neuropathology of nicotine exposure.  Conclusions 3 wk of chronic exposure to 30 ?g/L nicotine is sufficient to impair the hypercapnic lung burst response of early metamorphic tadpole brainstems. 10- but not 3-wk nicotine exposure attenuates the hypercapnic neuroventilatory response of late metamorphic tadpoles. Neither 3 nor 10 wk of chronic nicotine exposure causes a change in the normocapnic lung neuroventilatory frequency of either early or late metamorphic tadpole brainstems. This substantiates a deleterious impact of developmental nicotine exposure on the ability of tadpoles to increase lung neuroventilation during hypercapnia and illustrates the important role of developmental timing and duration of exposure in determining the neuropathology of nicotine exposure. 