An Agenda for Advancing the Science of Implementation of Evidence-Based HIV Prevention Interventions In the past 25 years, a tremendous amount of time and resources have been committed to developing evidence-based HIV prevention interventions. More recently, there have been noteworthy efforts to develop an infrastructure and related policies to promote the dissemination (i.e., “the targeted distribution of information and intervention materials to a specific public health or clinical practice audience”) of evidence-based interventions. Despite these advances, however, we have had comparatively little success in the effective implementation (i.e., “the use of strategies to adopt and integrate evidence-based health interventions and change practice patterns within specific settings”) of such interventions in everyday practice or community settings. The objective of the current paper is to highlight select and initial areas of research that are critically needed to advance the state-of-the-science of implementation of HIV prevention interventions in our broader efforts to curb the epidemic worldwide.  Conclusion Efforts to implement evidence-based HIV prevention interventions in real-world settings have met substantial and formidable barriers. Targeting research efforts to address these challenges is critical to curbing the HIV epidemic via risk-reduction interventions. In this brief, agenda-setting report, we have sought to identify and articulate the pressing needs for systematic scientific inquiry into three broad research areas that are well positioned to maximally benefit implementation practice with respect to HIV prevention interventions. Specifically, we suggest that focused research efforts are needed to better understand (1) the role of the organizational context in which interventions are implemented, (2) the role of intervention characteristics in facilitating or impeding the implementation process, and (3) the need for conceptualizing and testing dynamic, multi-level, theory-based implementation process models. In order for our effective interventions to truly have an impact on curbing the epidemic worldwide, we must approach ‘delivery science’ with the same scientific rigor, dedication, and urgency that has characterized our investment in ‘discovery science’ to date. In doing so, we can begin to identify empirically guided strategies that are essential for supporting the widespread and effective implementation of HIV prevention interventions into everyday settings. 