Role of Rac1 GTPase in JNK Signaling and Delayed Neuronal Cell Death Following Global Cerebral Ischemia The overall goal of this study was to determine the role of Rac1 in POSH/MLK/JNK signaling and delayed neuronal cell death following cerebral ischemia. Temporal studies revealed that Rac1 GTPase activation was significantly elevated in hippocampus CA1 at 10 min to 72h after cerebral ischemia reperfusion, with peak levels 30 min to 6h after reperfusion. Total Rac1 protein levels were not significantly changed following cerebral ischemia. Rac1 has been shown to interact with POSH (plenty of SH3s), a scaffold protein that binds to and regulates MLK3 and JNK activation. Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) studies revealed that POSH-Rac1-MLK3 complex formation displayed a significant and prolonged elevation after reperfusion, with a correlative increase in phosphorylation/activation of MLK3 as compared to sham controls. Intracerebroventricular administration of Rac1 antisense oligonucleotides (AS-ODNs) significantly attenuated Rac1 levels and Rac1 activation at 30min after reperfusion, with a correlated significant attenuation of POSH-MLK3-Rac1 complex formation and MLK3 activation in hippocampus CA1. Infusion of Rac1 AS-ODNs also significantly attenuated post-ischemic activation of JNK, downstream of MLK3, and strongly protected the hippocampus CA1 from ischemic damage. Missense oligos had no effect on any of the parameters measured. The Rac1 AS-ODNs results were further confirmed by administration of a Rac1 inhibitor (NSC23766), which markedly attenuated activation of Rac1 and JNK, and significantly attenuated delayed neuronal cell death following cerebral ischemia. As a whole, these studies demonstrate an important role for Rac1 in activation of the prodeath MLK3-JNK kinase signaling pathway and delayed neuronal cell death following cerebral ischemia.  4. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE Materials Anti-Rac1, anti-phospho-MLK3 (Thr277/Ser281) antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). Antibodies to POSH, MLK3, JNK and active JNK (recognizes active JNK1, JNK2 and JNK3) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Nitrocellulose filter was from Amersham Pharmacia (Little Chalfont, UK). BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate) and NBT (nitro blue tetrazolium) were from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). Rac1 inhibitor NSC 23766 was from Tocris Cookson Inc. (Ballwin, MO, USA). All the other chemicals were from Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA) unless indicated otherwise. Intracerebroventricular administration To investigate the possible role of Rac1 in response to ischemic injury, 10 nmol of end-phosphorothioated Rac1 AS-ODNs in 10 ?L TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (PH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA) were administrated to the left cerebral ventricles of rats every 24 h for 3 days before cerebral ischemia by means of intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) infusion. The same dose of missenses (MS) or vehicle (TE) was used as controls. The sequences for Rac1 AS-ODNs used in this study were 5?-ACTTGATGGCCTGCAT-3? from the Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. and missenses were 5?-GTATGGGACTCTACCT-3?. In other experimental conditions, 25 ?g NSC23766 was administered to both of the cerebral ventricles of rats 15 min before cerebral ischemia. For i.c.v. injection, the rats were placed on ear bars of a stereotaxic instrument under anesthesia. Drug infusion was performed using a steppermotorized microsyringe (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA) at a rate of 1 ?L/min through a pre-implanted cannula in the cerebral ventricle (from the bregma: anteroposterior, ±0.8 mm; lateral, 1.5 mm; depth, 3.5 mm). Induction of forebrain ischemia Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 250–300 g were used (all procedures were approved by the institutional animal care committee). Brain ischemia was induced by four-vessel occlusion, as described previously ( Gu et al., 2001 ; Pulsinelli and Brierley, 1979 ). Briefly, under anesthesia with chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg, i.p.), vertebral arteries were electrocauterized and common carotid arteries were exposed. Rats were allowed to recover for 24 h and fasted overnight. Ischemia was induced by occluding the common arteries with aneurysm clips for 15 min. Rats which lost their righting reflex within 30 s and whose pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light during ischemia were selected for the experiments. An EEG was monitored to ensure isoelectricity within 30 s after carotid artery occlusion. Carotid artery blood flow was restored by releasing the clips. Rectal temperature was maintained at about 37°C during and 2 h after ischemia. Sham controls were performed using the same surgical exposure procedures, except that the arteries were not occluded. Tissue preparation For brain tissue preparation, rats were sacrificed under isoflurane anesthesia at 10 min, 30 min, 3 h, 6 h, 1 and 3 days after 15 min of global cerebral ischemia. The hippocampal CA1 region microdissected from both sides of the hippocampal fissure and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Tissues were homogenized with a Teflon-glass homogenizer in ice cold homogenization medium consisting of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 12 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 3 mM dithiotheitol (DTT), 2 mM sodium orthovanadate (Na3VO4), 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1% Triton X-100, and 10 ?g/ml each of aprotinin, leupeptin, and pepstatin A. The homogenates were centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 30 min at 4°C, supernatants were collected and stored at ?80°C for use. The protein concentrations were determined by a Lowry protein assay kit with bovine serum albumin as standard. Immunoprecipitation and western blotting For immunoprecipitation, tissue homogenates (each containing 400 ?g of proteins) were diluted 4-fold with HEPES buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, and 1 mM each of EGTA, EDTA, PMSF and Na3VO4. Samples were pre-incubated for 1 h with 20 ?L protein A/G then centrifuged to remove any protein adhered nonspecifically to the protein A/G. The supernatant was incubated with 2–5 ?g proper antibody or species-relevant non-specific IgG (n.s. IgG) for 4 h at 4°C. After the addition of protein A/G-sepharose, the mixture was incubated at 4°C for an additional 2 h. Sample were triple washed with HEPES buffer and eluted by sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) loading buffer then boiled for 5 min. Western blot analysis was carried out on 4–20% SDS–PAGE and 50–100?g proteins were electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose filter (pore size, 0.45 ?m). After blocking for 2 h in phsophate-buffered saline (PBS) with 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST) and 3% BSA, the membranes were incubated overnight with primary antibody (1:500) in PBST containing 3% BSA. Detection was carried out by the use of proper alkaline phosphatase conjugated IgG (1:20,000) and developed with NBT/BCIP assay kit (Promega). After immunoblotting, the density of the bands was scanned using an image analyzer (LabWorks Software, UVP Upland, CA, USA). Rac1 assay Rac activation assays were performed using color PAK1 PBD Agarose Beads (Rac/CDC42 assay kit; Upstate Biotechnology). Precipitated complexes were washed three times with magnesium-containing lysis buffer and boiled in sample buffer. Proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to western blot analysis using anti-Rac1-specific antibody. Cresyl violet and TUNEL staining Rats were anesthetized with chloral hydrate and underwent transcardial perfusion with 0.9% saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer. Brains were removed, postfixed overnight in paraformaldehyde, processed and embedded in paraffin. Coronal sections (6 ?m) were cut on a microtome (Leica RM2155, Nussloch, Germany) and collected through the entire dorsal hippocampus (2.5–4.5 mm posterior from bregma) from animals at 5 d after ischemia or sham operation, and every fifth section was collected. Sections were de-paraffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a gradient of ethanol and distilled water and stained with cresyl violet then examined with a light microscope. The neuronal density of CA1 neurons per 1mm length of the medial CA1 pyramidal cell layer was counted bilaterally in four sections per animal. Cell counts from the right and left hippocampus on each of the four sections were averaged to provide mean value. TUNEL staining was performed using an ApopTag Peroxidase In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, sections were treated with protease K at 20 mg/ml for 15 min at room temperature. After incubation with reaction buffer containing TdT enzyme and at 37°C for 1 h, sections were washed with stop/wash buffer and treated with anti-digoxigenin conjugate for 30 min at room temperature and subsequently developed color in peroxidase substrate. The nuclei were lightly counterstained with haematoxylin and examined under a light microscope. Statistical evaluation Four or five independent animals were sampled at each time point for western blotting study and histology examination. Semi-quantitative analysis of the bands was performed with the Image J analysis software (Version 1.30v; Wayne Rasband, NIH, USA). All values are expressed as the means ± SD. Statistical analysis of the results was carried out by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the Dunnett’s test or Newman–Keuls test. Differences of p < 0.05 were considered significant.  Materials Anti-Rac1, anti-phospho-MLK3 (Thr277/Ser281) antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). Antibodies to POSH, MLK3, JNK and active JNK (recognizes active JNK1, JNK2 and JNK3) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Nitrocellulose filter was from Amersham Pharmacia (Little Chalfont, UK). BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-phosphate) and NBT (nitro blue tetrazolium) were from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). Rac1 inhibitor NSC 23766 was from Tocris Cookson Inc. (Ballwin, MO, USA). All the other chemicals were from Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA) unless indicated otherwise.  Intracerebroventricular administration To investigate the possible role of Rac1 in response to ischemic injury, 10 nmol of end-phosphorothioated Rac1 AS-ODNs in 10 ?L TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (PH 8.0), 1 mM EDTA) were administrated to the left cerebral ventricles of rats every 24 h for 3 days before cerebral ischemia by means of intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) infusion. The same dose of missenses (MS) or vehicle (TE) was used as controls. The sequences for Rac1 AS-ODNs used in this study were 5?-ACTTGATGGCCTGCAT-3? from the Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. and missenses were 5?-GTATGGGACTCTACCT-3?. In other experimental conditions, 25 ?g NSC23766 was administered to both of the cerebral ventricles of rats 15 min before cerebral ischemia. For i.c.v. injection, the rats were placed on ear bars of a stereotaxic instrument under anesthesia. Drug infusion was performed using a steppermotorized microsyringe (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA) at a rate of 1 ?L/min through a pre-implanted cannula in the cerebral ventricle (from the bregma: anteroposterior, ±0.8 mm; lateral, 1.5 mm; depth, 3.5 mm).  Induction of forebrain ischemia Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 250–300 g were used (all procedures were approved by the institutional animal care committee). Brain ischemia was induced by four-vessel occlusion, as described previously ( Gu et al., 2001 ; Pulsinelli and Brierley, 1979 ). Briefly, under anesthesia with chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg, i.p.), vertebral arteries were electrocauterized and common carotid arteries were exposed. Rats were allowed to recover for 24 h and fasted overnight. Ischemia was induced by occluding the common arteries with aneurysm clips for 15 min. Rats which lost their righting reflex within 30 s and whose pupils were dilated and unresponsive to light during ischemia were selected for the experiments. An EEG was monitored to ensure isoelectricity within 30 s after carotid artery occlusion. Carotid artery blood flow was restored by releasing the clips. Rectal temperature was maintained at about 37°C during and 2 h after ischemia. Sham controls were performed using the same surgical exposure procedures, except that the arteries were not occluded.  Tissue preparation For brain tissue preparation, rats were sacrificed under isoflurane anesthesia at 10 min, 30 min, 3 h, 6 h, 1 and 3 days after 15 min of global cerebral ischemia. The hippocampal CA1 region microdissected from both sides of the hippocampal fissure and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Tissues were homogenized with a Teflon-glass homogenizer in ice cold homogenization medium consisting of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 12 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 3 mM dithiotheitol (DTT), 2 mM sodium orthovanadate (Na3VO4), 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1% Triton X-100, and 10 ?g/ml each of aprotinin, leupeptin, and pepstatin A. The homogenates were centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 30 min at 4°C, supernatants were collected and stored at ?80°C for use. The protein concentrations were determined by a Lowry protein assay kit with bovine serum albumin as standard.  Immunoprecipitation and western blotting For immunoprecipitation, tissue homogenates (each containing 400 ?g of proteins) were diluted 4-fold with HEPES buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, and 1 mM each of EGTA, EDTA, PMSF and Na3VO4. Samples were pre-incubated for 1 h with 20 ?L protein A/G then centrifuged to remove any protein adhered nonspecifically to the protein A/G. The supernatant was incubated with 2–5 ?g proper antibody or species-relevant non-specific IgG (n.s. IgG) for 4 h at 4°C. After the addition of protein A/G-sepharose, the mixture was incubated at 4°C for an additional 2 h. Sample were triple washed with HEPES buffer and eluted by sodium dodecyl sulfate – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) loading buffer then boiled for 5 min. Western blot analysis was carried out on 4–20% SDS–PAGE and 50–100?g proteins were electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose filter (pore size, 0.45 ?m). After blocking for 2 h in phsophate-buffered saline (PBS) with 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST) and 3% BSA, the membranes were incubated overnight with primary antibody (1:500) in PBST containing 3% BSA. Detection was carried out by the use of proper alkaline phosphatase conjugated IgG (1:20,000) and developed with NBT/BCIP assay kit (Promega). After immunoblotting, the density of the bands was scanned using an image analyzer (LabWorks Software, UVP Upland, CA, USA).  Rac1 assay Rac activation assays were performed using color PAK1 PBD Agarose Beads (Rac/CDC42 assay kit; Upstate Biotechnology). Precipitated complexes were washed three times with magnesium-containing lysis buffer and boiled in sample buffer. Proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to western blot analysis using anti-Rac1-specific antibody.  Cresyl violet and TUNEL staining Rats were anesthetized with chloral hydrate and underwent transcardial perfusion with 0.9% saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer. Brains were removed, postfixed overnight in paraformaldehyde, processed and embedded in paraffin. Coronal sections (6 ?m) were cut on a microtome (Leica RM2155, Nussloch, Germany) and collected through the entire dorsal hippocampus (2.5–4.5 mm posterior from bregma) from animals at 5 d after ischemia or sham operation, and every fifth section was collected. Sections were de-paraffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a gradient of ethanol and distilled water and stained with cresyl violet then examined with a light microscope. The neuronal density of CA1 neurons per 1mm length of the medial CA1 pyramidal cell layer was counted bilaterally in four sections per animal. Cell counts from the right and left hippocampus on each of the four sections were averaged to provide mean value. TUNEL staining was performed using an ApopTag Peroxidase In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, sections were treated with protease K at 20 mg/ml for 15 min at room temperature. After incubation with reaction buffer containing TdT enzyme and at 37°C for 1 h, sections were washed with stop/wash buffer and treated with anti-digoxigenin conjugate for 30 min at room temperature and subsequently developed color in peroxidase substrate. The nuclei were lightly counterstained with haematoxylin and examined under a light microscope.  Statistical evaluation Four or five independent animals were sampled at each time point for western blotting study and histology examination. Semi-quantitative analysis of the bands was performed with the Image J analysis software (Version 1.30v; Wayne Rasband, NIH, USA). All values are expressed as the means ± SD. Statistical analysis of the results was carried out by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the Dunnett’s test or Newman–Keuls test. Differences of p < 0.05 were considered significant. 