Emerging Data with Antiangiogenic Therapies in Early and Advanced Non–Small-Cell Lung Cancer Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States. Patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy have a 5-year survival rate of 25% to 70% depending on stage, whereas those with advanced disease have a median survival of approximately 8 months when treated with standard platinum-based therapy. Improvements in our understanding of cancer biology have led to the development of novel agents that more precisely affect the target of interest, allowing for a more rational approach to clinical trial design. Angiogenesis, the growth of new vessels from preexisting vessels, is a fundamental step in tumor growth and progression. Inhibition of tumor-related angiogenesis has become an attractive target for anticancer therapy. Bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), is the most studied antiangiogenic agent in patients with non–small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). There was an improvement in overall survival when bevacizumab was combined with paclitaxel and carboplatin in patients with advanced NSCLC that was not seen when bevacizumab was combined with cisplatin and gemcitabine. Studies with bevacizumab in the adjuvant and advanced setting are ongoing in patients with NSCLC. Small-molecule inhibitors targeting the VEGF receptor and the tyrosine kinase receptor have also shown promise when combined with standard chemotherapy, but their role in the treatment of patients with NSCLC remains to be determined. This article reviews clinical trials that have incorporated antiangiogenic agents in the treatment of patients with NSCLC.  Conclusion As our knowledge of cell biology improves, we are able to identify therapies that more precisely affect the target of interest, allowing for a more rational approach to clinical trial design. Inhibition of angiogenesis continues to be an attractive target in the treatment of patients with NSCLC. Based on randomized phase II and III trials, bevacizumab is the only antiangiogenic therapy approved to date for the treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC. 14 , 15 The multitude of ongoing clinical trials that have added bevacizumab to standard chemotherapy illustrates the continued interest in VEGF as a therapeutic target. The small-molecule receptor TKIs have several targets, including VEGF receptors. Although several of these agents have shown activity in phase II trials, the studies are small, and larger phase III trials that are currently under way will determine their role in the treatment of patients with NSCLC. An important aspect of several of these studies continues to be the inclusion of biologic correlates in order to determine indicators that are prognostic and predictive of a benefit from therapy. However, no definitive markers have been identified to date. The increased sophistication of preclinical models and the enrollment of patients in clinical trials that include measurements of potential biologic correlates will help identify patients who might benefit from therapy with angiogenesis inhibitors as well as determine potential mechanisms of resistance to therapy. 