Epigenetic Modulation of the Retinoid X Receptor ? by Green Tea in the Azoxymethane-Apc Min/+ Mouse Model of Intestinal Cancer We investigated the possible mechanisms of inhibition of colorectal carcinogenesis by green tea (GT) in azoxymethane-treated (AOM) Apc Min/ + mice. Mice received water or a 0.6% (w/v) solution of GT as the only source of beverage. GT treatment commenced at the 8th week of age and lasted for 8 wk. The treatment caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of newly formed tumors (28%, P <0.05). Immunohistochemical analysis showed that GT decreased the levels of ?-catenin and its downstream target cyclin D1. To probe a mechanism, we further investigated the expression of retinoic X receptor alpha (RXR?) in AOM/ Apc Min/ + tumors. Our results show that RXR? is selectively downregulated in AOM/ Apc Min/ + mouse intestinal tumors. In contrast, other retinoic receptors including retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR?), RAR?, RXR?, and RXR? were all expressed in Apc Min/ + adenomas. Furthermore, our results show that RXR? downregulation is an early event in colorectal carcinogenesis and is independent of ?-catenin expression. GT significantly increased the protein levels of RXR?. In addition, RT-PCR analysis showed that GT induced a similar increase in the levels of RXR? mRNA. Genomic bisulfite treatment of colonic DNA followed by pyrosequencing of 24 CpG sites in the promoter region of RXR? gene showed a significant decrease in CpG methylation with GT treatment. The results suggest that a low concentration of GT is sufficient to desilence RXR? and inhibit intestinal tumorigenesis in the Apc Min/ + mouse.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals and Treatments One hundred sixty-two mice were used in the study; 120 male and female C57BL/6J- Apc Min/ + ( Apc Min/ +) mice and 42 wild-type C57BL/6J (B6) evenly divided by gender. The mice were housed in an animal research facility accredited by the AAA-LAC at the University of South Carolina. Treatment protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of South Carolina. The mice were kept on a light/dark (12/12 h) cycle, 20–24°C and 50% humidity. Mice were weaned at 3 wk of age and fed AIN76A diet ad libitum thereafter. The mice were split into four groups based on the type of analysis conducted on each group ( Figure 1A ). The B6 mice injected with azoxymethane (AOM) served as a control group for AOM-induced tumorigenesis. The groups were further divided into five equal subgroups based on the GT or AOM treatments ( Figure 1A ). AOM (purchased from Ash Stevens, Detroit, MI) was diluted to a final concentration of 8 mg/kg body weight with 0.9% saline solution on the day of injection and administered to the mice intraperitoneally (i.p.) once a week for 3 wk ( Figure 1B ). GT was a generous gift from Dr. C.S. Yang (Rutgers University, NJ). The GT stock was received as a GT powder and was HPLC analyzed ( Table 1 ) to determine its composition. The same stock was used throughout the experiment to avoid any variations in the GT content. A fresh solution of 0.6% (w/v) was prepared every other day [ 5 ]. All the mice were sacrificed at 16 wk of age by cervical dislocation except for the group dedicated to the immunohistochemical analysis (IHC). The mice in the latter group were sacrificed after 12 wk (4 wk of GT treatment) in order to study the effects of GT on earlier neoplastic tumors. The mice were closely monitored and weighed weekly. Any mouse that lost more than 10% of its original body weight was excluded from the experiment. Tumor Count and Size Comparison Colons and small intestines were removed, flushed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), slit open along the longitudinal median and fixed flat in 10% buffered formalin for 24 h. The fixed tissues were stained with 0.2% methylene blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) dissolved in PBS. Tumors were scored at 30× magnification using a Nikon dissecting microscope with a fiber optic light source to illuminate the tissues and a calibration scale to determine the tumor size. Tumors with diameters ?1 mm (1–5 crypts) were classified as small tumors, whereas tumors that exceeded 1 mm (>6 crypts) in diameter were classified as large tumors. All the tumors were scored by the same investigator who was blind to the treatment groups. No tumors were found in any of the B6 mice. Immunohistochemical Analysis The colons and small intestines were fixed as described above, but Swiss-rolled before fixation. Fixed tissues were paraffin embedded, cut into 5 ?m sections, mounted on slides, and processed for immunoblotting as described previously [ 29 ]. Sections were incubated for 45 min with one of the following primary antibodies. Mouse monoclonal anti-?-catenin antibody (BD Transduction Laboratories, Lexington, KY) diluted 1:300. Rabbit monoclonal anti-TCF-4 and anti-cyclin D1 (SP4) antibodies (Lab Vision/Neomarkers, Fremont, CA) diluted 1:100. Rabbit polyclonal anti- RXR?, RXR?, or RAR? antibodies and rabbit polyclonal anti- APC antibody specific to the C-terminus (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) each diluted 1:200. Rabbit polyclonal anti-RXR? or RAR? antibodies (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA) each diluted 1:200. Mouse polyclonal anti-COX-2 antibody (Caymen Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI) diluted 1:400. Mouse monoclonal anti-DNMT1 antibody (Abcam, Inc., Cambridge, MA) diluted 1:200. Blocking of the sections and detection of the anti-?-catenin, cyclin D1, RXR?, RAR?, and DNMT1 antibodies was by ACUITY polymer detection kit, which consisted of a special polymer for pre- and post-primary antibody incubation (Signet Laboratories, Dedham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Detection of the other antibodies was by CSA II Biotin-Free Catalyzed Signal Amplification System (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Nonspecific binding was blocked by incubating the sections with normal goat serum (BioGenex, San Ramon, CA) for 20 min at room temperature. Evaluation of the staining was carried out by dividing the tumors with abnormal staining into three types based on their size. Small lesions consisted of 1–5 crypts. Medium lesions consisted of 6–10 crypts. Large lesions consisted of more than 10 crypts. The evaluation of the COX-2 staining was carried out by counting number of lesions expressing COX-2 without further classification. All the tumors were scored at 100× magnification by the same investigator who was blind to the treatment groups. The entire small intestine and colon were scored for tumors in each mouse and the average number of each type of tumors per animal was determined. Human samples of normal colon and colon carcinoma were collected from patients after surgery at Palmetto Richland Hospital (Columbia, SC). They were immediately fixed in buffered formalin for 24 h then processed and paraffin embedded. A total of four normal colon samples and eight colon adenocarcinomas were collected from different patients. The human samples served as controls to confirm the relevance of the immunohistochemical findings in Apc Min/ +polyps to human tumors. RNA Isolation and Real-Time PCR Mucosal layers were scraped and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen then kept at ?80°C until the day of isolation. Total RNA was isolated using the TRI Reagent® total RNA isolation method (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The quality and quantity of the isolated RNA were determined by the Agilent-2100 Bioanalyzer system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RT-PCR reactions were carried out in an iCycler Thermal cycler with MyiQ Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). One hundred nanograms of the isolated total RNA per reaction was reverse transcribed followed by amplification of specific mRNAs using the iScript One-Step RT-PCR kit with SYBR Green (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s protocol at an annealing temperature of 60°C. Primers for mouse RXR? and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as an intrinsic control have been described previously [ 30 ]. The following primer sequences were used. RXR? forward: 5?-CTTTGACA-GGGTGCTAACAGAGC-3?, reverse: 5?-ACGCTTCTAGTGACGCATACACC-3?. GAPDH, forward: 5?-GGGTGGAGCCAAACGGGTC-3?, reverse: 5?-GGAGTTGCTGTTGAAGTCGCA-3?. Total RNAs from at least three mice per treatment group were evaluated. Quantitation of the RT-PCR data was performed using MyiQ software (Bio-Rad). The data are the average of at least three experiments adjusted to the intrinsic control and represents the levels of RXR? mRNA in the treatment groups relative to the B6 mice. Error bars represent SEM. DNA Isolation, Bisulfite Treatment, and Pyrosequencing Genomic DNA was isolated from mucosal scrapings using the TRI Reagent® total RNA isolation method (Molecular Research Center), which allows the isolation of both RNA and DNA from the same samples, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA was then diluted with tris-buffered saline (TBS), which consisted of 50 mM Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 7.6. Concentrations of the isolated genomic DNA were determined using a SmartSpec Plus Spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Five hundred nanograms of the isolated DNA per sample was bisulfite treated using the EZ DNA Methylation Kit™ (Zymo Research, Orange, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The sequence of the mouse RXR? gene(Rxra) [Entrez Gene ID 20181; Ensemble Gene ENSMUSG00000015846] and its 5? upstream region was analyzed for the presence of CpG islands using MethPrimer software (Urology Research Center, University of California, CA) as described previously [ 31 ]. Analysis of the DNA sequence of the first exon and a 1000 bp 5?-upstream of RXR? (a total of 1197 bp) revealed that two CpG islands existed (a size of 114 bp, 5?–3? 148–261 and a size of 698 bp, 5?–3? 445–1142, respectively). Ten nanograms of the bisulfite-treated DNA per sample was PCR amplified (covering a sequence of 320 bp in the larger CpG island) then pyrosequenced to determine the percent methylation of selected CpG sites as described previously [ 32 , 33 ]. Primer sequences were as follows: Forward primer: 5?-TTGGGAATTTTTGGTAGATGTAA-3? (position 689–711), reverse biotinylated primer (position 1008–984): 5?-biotin-CCCAACAATATAAACTACTTATACC-3?, sequencing primer 1 (position 711–729): 5?-AATTTGTAAGTTTGTAGGG-3?, sequencing primer 2 (position 815–833): 5?-GGTTGYGGGYGGGGYGAGT-3?, and sequencing primer 3 (position 907–925): 5?-GTTGTAGGTYGGGTYGGAG-3?. Pyrosequencing and methylation analysis were performed by an independent lab (Biotage, Foxboro, MA) that was blind to the treatment groups. Samples from at least two mice per group were analyzed. A total of 24 CpG sites per sample were analyzed and the average percent methylation per site was calculated. The presented data are relative to percent methylation in the B6 subgroup. Error bars represent SEM. Statistical Analysis All data were analyzed using Sigmastat V3.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL) and SAS V8.2e (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) softwares. Descriptive statistics were used to identify the distribution of the data. A two-way ANOVA test was used to compare the treatment groups in the presence or absence of AOM or GT. For data that failed the normality test, generalized linear models were used to compare the groups. In this case, the data were modeled after a Poisson distribution when appropriate. Alternatively, a negative binomial distribution model was followed when the data exhibited an overdispersion. The analyses included testing for the main effects of AOM or GT in the treatment groups and for interactions between the treatments. The data were considered very significant if P <0.005, significant if P <0.05, marginally significant if 0.05 ? P <0.1, and insignificant if P ?0.1  Animals and Treatments One hundred sixty-two mice were used in the study; 120 male and female C57BL/6J- Apc Min/ + ( Apc Min/ +) mice and 42 wild-type C57BL/6J (B6) evenly divided by gender. The mice were housed in an animal research facility accredited by the AAA-LAC at the University of South Carolina. Treatment protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of South Carolina. The mice were kept on a light/dark (12/12 h) cycle, 20–24°C and 50% humidity. Mice were weaned at 3 wk of age and fed AIN76A diet ad libitum thereafter. The mice were split into four groups based on the type of analysis conducted on each group ( Figure 1A ). The B6 mice injected with azoxymethane (AOM) served as a control group for AOM-induced tumorigenesis. The groups were further divided into five equal subgroups based on the GT or AOM treatments ( Figure 1A ). AOM (purchased from Ash Stevens, Detroit, MI) was diluted to a final concentration of 8 mg/kg body weight with 0.9% saline solution on the day of injection and administered to the mice intraperitoneally (i.p.) once a week for 3 wk ( Figure 1B ). GT was a generous gift from Dr. C.S. Yang (Rutgers University, NJ). The GT stock was received as a GT powder and was HPLC analyzed ( Table 1 ) to determine its composition. The same stock was used throughout the experiment to avoid any variations in the GT content. A fresh solution of 0.6% (w/v) was prepared every other day [ 5 ]. All the mice were sacrificed at 16 wk of age by cervical dislocation except for the group dedicated to the immunohistochemical analysis (IHC). The mice in the latter group were sacrificed after 12 wk (4 wk of GT treatment) in order to study the effects of GT on earlier neoplastic tumors. The mice were closely monitored and weighed weekly. Any mouse that lost more than 10% of its original body weight was excluded from the experiment.  Tumor Count and Size Comparison Colons and small intestines were removed, flushed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), slit open along the longitudinal median and fixed flat in 10% buffered formalin for 24 h. The fixed tissues were stained with 0.2% methylene blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) dissolved in PBS. Tumors were scored at 30× magnification using a Nikon dissecting microscope with a fiber optic light source to illuminate the tissues and a calibration scale to determine the tumor size. Tumors with diameters ?1 mm (1–5 crypts) were classified as small tumors, whereas tumors that exceeded 1 mm (>6 crypts) in diameter were classified as large tumors. All the tumors were scored by the same investigator who was blind to the treatment groups. No tumors were found in any of the B6 mice.  Immunohistochemical Analysis The colons and small intestines were fixed as described above, but Swiss-rolled before fixation. Fixed tissues were paraffin embedded, cut into 5 ?m sections, mounted on slides, and processed for immunoblotting as described previously [ 29 ]. Sections were incubated for 45 min with one of the following primary antibodies. Mouse monoclonal anti-?-catenin antibody (BD Transduction Laboratories, Lexington, KY) diluted 1:300. Rabbit monoclonal anti-TCF-4 and anti-cyclin D1 (SP4) antibodies (Lab Vision/Neomarkers, Fremont, CA) diluted 1:100. Rabbit polyclonal anti- RXR?, RXR?, or RAR? antibodies and rabbit polyclonal anti- APC antibody specific to the C-terminus (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) each diluted 1:200. Rabbit polyclonal anti-RXR? or RAR? antibodies (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA) each diluted 1:200. Mouse polyclonal anti-COX-2 antibody (Caymen Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI) diluted 1:400. Mouse monoclonal anti-DNMT1 antibody (Abcam, Inc., Cambridge, MA) diluted 1:200. Blocking of the sections and detection of the anti-?-catenin, cyclin D1, RXR?, RAR?, and DNMT1 antibodies was by ACUITY polymer detection kit, which consisted of a special polymer for pre- and post-primary antibody incubation (Signet Laboratories, Dedham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Detection of the other antibodies was by CSA II Biotin-Free Catalyzed Signal Amplification System (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Nonspecific binding was blocked by incubating the sections with normal goat serum (BioGenex, San Ramon, CA) for 20 min at room temperature. Evaluation of the staining was carried out by dividing the tumors with abnormal staining into three types based on their size. Small lesions consisted of 1–5 crypts. Medium lesions consisted of 6–10 crypts. Large lesions consisted of more than 10 crypts. The evaluation of the COX-2 staining was carried out by counting number of lesions expressing COX-2 without further classification. All the tumors were scored at 100× magnification by the same investigator who was blind to the treatment groups. The entire small intestine and colon were scored for tumors in each mouse and the average number of each type of tumors per animal was determined. Human samples of normal colon and colon carcinoma were collected from patients after surgery at Palmetto Richland Hospital (Columbia, SC). They were immediately fixed in buffered formalin for 24 h then processed and paraffin embedded. A total of four normal colon samples and eight colon adenocarcinomas were collected from different patients. The human samples served as controls to confirm the relevance of the immunohistochemical findings in Apc Min/ +polyps to human tumors.  RNA Isolation and Real-Time PCR Mucosal layers were scraped and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen then kept at ?80°C until the day of isolation. Total RNA was isolated using the TRI Reagent® total RNA isolation method (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The quality and quantity of the isolated RNA were determined by the Agilent-2100 Bioanalyzer system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RT-PCR reactions were carried out in an iCycler Thermal cycler with MyiQ Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). One hundred nanograms of the isolated total RNA per reaction was reverse transcribed followed by amplification of specific mRNAs using the iScript One-Step RT-PCR kit with SYBR Green (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s protocol at an annealing temperature of 60°C. Primers for mouse RXR? and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as an intrinsic control have been described previously [ 30 ]. The following primer sequences were used. RXR? forward: 5?-CTTTGACA-GGGTGCTAACAGAGC-3?, reverse: 5?-ACGCTTCTAGTGACGCATACACC-3?. GAPDH, forward: 5?-GGGTGGAGCCAAACGGGTC-3?, reverse: 5?-GGAGTTGCTGTTGAAGTCGCA-3?. Total RNAs from at least three mice per treatment group were evaluated. Quantitation of the RT-PCR data was performed using MyiQ software (Bio-Rad). The data are the average of at least three experiments adjusted to the intrinsic control and represents the levels of RXR? mRNA in the treatment groups relative to the B6 mice. Error bars represent SEM.  DNA Isolation, Bisulfite Treatment, and Pyrosequencing Genomic DNA was isolated from mucosal scrapings using the TRI Reagent® total RNA isolation method (Molecular Research Center), which allows the isolation of both RNA and DNA from the same samples, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The DNA was then diluted with tris-buffered saline (TBS), which consisted of 50 mM Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 7.6. Concentrations of the isolated genomic DNA were determined using a SmartSpec Plus Spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Five hundred nanograms of the isolated DNA per sample was bisulfite treated using the EZ DNA Methylation Kit™ (Zymo Research, Orange, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The sequence of the mouse RXR? gene(Rxra) [Entrez Gene ID 20181; Ensemble Gene ENSMUSG00000015846] and its 5? upstream region was analyzed for the presence of CpG islands using MethPrimer software (Urology Research Center, University of California, CA) as described previously [ 31 ]. Analysis of the DNA sequence of the first exon and a 1000 bp 5?-upstream of RXR? (a total of 1197 bp) revealed that two CpG islands existed (a size of 114 bp, 5?–3? 148–261 and a size of 698 bp, 5?–3? 445–1142, respectively). Ten nanograms of the bisulfite-treated DNA per sample was PCR amplified (covering a sequence of 320 bp in the larger CpG island) then pyrosequenced to determine the percent methylation of selected CpG sites as described previously [ 32 , 33 ]. Primer sequences were as follows: Forward primer: 5?-TTGGGAATTTTTGGTAGATGTAA-3? (position 689–711), reverse biotinylated primer (position 1008–984): 5?-biotin-CCCAACAATATAAACTACTTATACC-3?, sequencing primer 1 (position 711–729): 5?-AATTTGTAAGTTTGTAGGG-3?, sequencing primer 2 (position 815–833): 5?-GGTTGYGGGYGGGGYGAGT-3?, and sequencing primer 3 (position 907–925): 5?-GTTGTAGGTYGGGTYGGAG-3?. Pyrosequencing and methylation analysis were performed by an independent lab (Biotage, Foxboro, MA) that was blind to the treatment groups. Samples from at least two mice per group were analyzed. A total of 24 CpG sites per sample were analyzed and the average percent methylation per site was calculated. The presented data are relative to percent methylation in the B6 subgroup. Error bars represent SEM.  Statistical Analysis All data were analyzed using Sigmastat V3.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL) and SAS V8.2e (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) softwares. Descriptive statistics were used to identify the distribution of the data. A two-way ANOVA test was used to compare the treatment groups in the presence or absence of AOM or GT. For data that failed the normality test, generalized linear models were used to compare the groups. In this case, the data were modeled after a Poisson distribution when appropriate. Alternatively, a negative binomial distribution model was followed when the data exhibited an overdispersion. The analyses included testing for the main effects of AOM or GT in the treatment groups and for interactions between the treatments. The data were considered very significant if P <0.005, significant if P <0.05, marginally significant if 0.05 ? P <0.1, and insignificant if P ?0.1  RESULTS Green Tea Inhibits the Formation of <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors Mice treated with GT (10 per treatment group) had a 50% reduction in the colonic tumors (1.8–0.9 tumors per mouse, P <0.05) compared to water-treated mice and about 18% reduction in the number of Apc Min/ + tumors developed in the small intestine (40–33 tumors per mouse, P <0.1) ( Figure 2A ). The reduction in colon and small intestinal tumors with GT treatment was mainly due to a reduction in the number of newly developed “small” tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm) with no significant effects on large tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm; 1–5 crypts). (28% reduction in small tumors; 17.3–12.5 tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 11% reduction in large tumors; 23.4–20.8, P >0.1) ( Figure 2B ). Green Tea Selectively Affects Early Changes in Intestinal Carcinogenesis Quantitative analysis of immunohistochemical staining of ?-catenin, cyclin D1, RXR?, and COX-2 showed a selective inhibition of expression in small tumors by GT. The aim of the IHC was to confirm whether or not the inhibitory effects of GT on Apc Min/ + tumors could be explained by any modulation of biomarkers involved in intestinal carcinogenesis. Tumors were scored as described in the Materials and Methods Section ( Figure 3 ). The GT intervention caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors overexpressing ?-catenin, but no inhibition of large or medium tumors (32% reduction in average small tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 10% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. All the tumors were scored at a 100× magnification. In correlation with ?-catenin overexpression, only the number of small tumors overexpressing cyclin D1 was significantly reduced by the GT treatment compared to water (38% reduction in small tumors, P <0.05 and 12% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) ( Figure 4 ). GT also caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors in which RXR? was downregulated with slight inhibition of large tumors (48% reduction in small adenomas per mouse, P <0.05 and 13% reduction in large adenomas, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. The downregulation of RXR? seems to be a very early event in Apc Min/ + carcinogenesis and was observed even in single crypts ( Figure 3B ). GT at a 0.6% (w/v) concentration was not significantly effective in reducing the number of tumors expressing COX-2 (11% reduction in the average number of tumors per mouse) ( Figure 4D ). Full-length APC was not detected in any of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and we did not observe any difference with the GT treatment ( Figure 5A ). On the other hand, TCF-4 was expressed in all Apc Min/ + adenomas ( Figure 5B ). DNMT1 was overexpressed in all of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and the observed expression was directly proportional to the size of the adenoma ( Figure 5C ). RXR? Is Selectively Downregulated in <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors In order to ask whether or not other retinoic receptors were also downregulated in the Apc Min/ + tumors, we stained for the following retinoic receptors: RAR?, RXR?, RAR?, and RXR? ( Figure 6A ). None of these retinoic receptors were downregulated even in the large tumors. The downregulation of RXR? was also seen in B6 mice injected with AOM ( Figure 6B ). These mice were much more resistant to AOM-induced tumorigenesis compared to the Apc Min/ + mice. We did notice, however, few areas of hyperplasia in the small intestine, but not the colon, of some of these Apc Min/ + mice. The hyperplastic epithelia appeared to exhibit normal APC expression and slightly increased ?-catenin expression, but without nuclear localization ( Figure 6C ). In order to confirm the relevance of RXR? downregulation in the Apc Min/ + tumors to the human colon carcinogenesis, several samples of normal human colon and adenocarcinomas were stained for RXR? and RAR? ( Figure 7 ). Similar to the Apc Min/ + adenomas, human adenocarcinomas showed a reduction in the expression of RXR?, but not RAR?; further emphasizing the role that RXR? might play in modulating colon carcinogenesis. While staining for RXR? was evident in all four normal colons, RXR? was persistently lost or weakly expressed in the eight specimens of human adenocarcinomas. The Downregulation of RXR? Correlates With Loss of Its mRNA Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was conducted to determine the levels of RXR? mRNA in Apc Min/ + mice in the treatment groups. As expected, the greatest loss was in the AOM plus water group ( Figure 8 ). The presented data are relative to the B6 mice (wt control) that lacked tumors, therefore exhibited the highest levels of RXR? mRNA. Overall, the RT-PCR analysis showed a 2.1-fold greater loss of RXR? mRNA in the absence of tea treatment (21% and 10% loss relative to B6 mRNA, in water vs. GT-treated mice, respectively). Green Tea Inhibits the Methylation of RXR? Gene Analysis of the DNA sequence of the first exon and a 1000 bp 5?-upstream of the RXR? gene showed that two CpG islands existed ( Figure 9A ). Primers were designed to amplify a region of 320 bp in the larger CpG island, after bisulfite treatment of the genomic DNA. The region spans the 5?-upstream area immediately adjacent to the first exon and part of the exon. We selected a total of 24 CpG sites to be analyzed by pyrosequencing, out of a total of 55 CpG sites present in the amplified PCR product. Three sequencing primers were designed to analyze the selected CpG sites. The CpG sites displayed variations in their percent of methylation and some seemed to be more prone to methylation than others. CpG site number 3 (third underlined site from the 5? end in Figure 9A ) exhibited the highest percent of methylation among the 24 selected CpG sites. The average percent of methylation per CpG site was calculated as an indication of the overall methylation of the promoter region of the RXR? gene. In correlation with the protein and RNA data, a statistically significant increase in the average methylation of the CpG sites was observed in Apc Min/ + mice injected with AOM and received water compared to the mice that received GT. Overall, there was more than a twofold relative increase in CpG methylation in the Apc Min/ + mice that received water compared to the mice that received GT (56% and 27% greater average methylation than the wt control, respectively, P = 0.09).  RESULTS Green Tea Inhibits the Formation of <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors Mice treated with GT (10 per treatment group) had a 50% reduction in the colonic tumors (1.8–0.9 tumors per mouse, P <0.05) compared to water-treated mice and about 18% reduction in the number of Apc Min/ + tumors developed in the small intestine (40–33 tumors per mouse, P <0.1) ( Figure 2A ). The reduction in colon and small intestinal tumors with GT treatment was mainly due to a reduction in the number of newly developed “small” tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm) with no significant effects on large tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm; 1–5 crypts). (28% reduction in small tumors; 17.3–12.5 tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 11% reduction in large tumors; 23.4–20.8, P >0.1) ( Figure 2B ). Green Tea Selectively Affects Early Changes in Intestinal Carcinogenesis Quantitative analysis of immunohistochemical staining of ?-catenin, cyclin D1, RXR?, and COX-2 showed a selective inhibition of expression in small tumors by GT. The aim of the IHC was to confirm whether or not the inhibitory effects of GT on Apc Min/ + tumors could be explained by any modulation of biomarkers involved in intestinal carcinogenesis. Tumors were scored as described in the Materials and Methods Section ( Figure 3 ). The GT intervention caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors overexpressing ?-catenin, but no inhibition of large or medium tumors (32% reduction in average small tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 10% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. All the tumors were scored at a 100× magnification. In correlation with ?-catenin overexpression, only the number of small tumors overexpressing cyclin D1 was significantly reduced by the GT treatment compared to water (38% reduction in small tumors, P <0.05 and 12% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) ( Figure 4 ). GT also caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors in which RXR? was downregulated with slight inhibition of large tumors (48% reduction in small adenomas per mouse, P <0.05 and 13% reduction in large adenomas, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. The downregulation of RXR? seems to be a very early event in Apc Min/ + carcinogenesis and was observed even in single crypts ( Figure 3B ). GT at a 0.6% (w/v) concentration was not significantly effective in reducing the number of tumors expressing COX-2 (11% reduction in the average number of tumors per mouse) ( Figure 4D ). Full-length APC was not detected in any of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and we did not observe any difference with the GT treatment ( Figure 5A ). On the other hand, TCF-4 was expressed in all Apc Min/ + adenomas ( Figure 5B ). DNMT1 was overexpressed in all of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and the observed expression was directly proportional to the size of the adenoma ( Figure 5C ). RXR? Is Selectively Downregulated in <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors In order to ask whether or not other retinoic receptors were also downregulated in the Apc Min/ + tumors, we stained for the following retinoic receptors: RAR?, RXR?, RAR?, and RXR? ( Figure 6A ). None of these retinoic receptors were downregulated even in the large tumors. The downregulation of RXR? was also seen in B6 mice injected with AOM ( Figure 6B ). These mice were much more resistant to AOM-induced tumorigenesis compared to the Apc Min/ + mice. We did notice, however, few areas of hyperplasia in the small intestine, but not the colon, of some of these Apc Min/ + mice. The hyperplastic epithelia appeared to exhibit normal APC expression and slightly increased ?-catenin expression, but without nuclear localization ( Figure 6C ). In order to confirm the relevance of RXR? downregulation in the Apc Min/ + tumors to the human colon carcinogenesis, several samples of normal human colon and adenocarcinomas were stained for RXR? and RAR? ( Figure 7 ). Similar to the Apc Min/ + adenomas, human adenocarcinomas showed a reduction in the expression of RXR?, but not RAR?; further emphasizing the role that RXR? might play in modulating colon carcinogenesis. While staining for RXR? was evident in all four normal colons, RXR? was persistently lost or weakly expressed in the eight specimens of human adenocarcinomas. The Downregulation of RXR? Correlates With Loss of Its mRNA Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was conducted to determine the levels of RXR? mRNA in Apc Min/ + mice in the treatment groups. As expected, the greatest loss was in the AOM plus water group ( Figure 8 ). The presented data are relative to the B6 mice (wt control) that lacked tumors, therefore exhibited the highest levels of RXR? mRNA. Overall, the RT-PCR analysis showed a 2.1-fold greater loss of RXR? mRNA in the absence of tea treatment (21% and 10% loss relative to B6 mRNA, in water vs. GT-treated mice, respectively). Green Tea Inhibits the Methylation of RXR? Gene Analysis of the DNA sequence of the first exon and a 1000 bp 5?-upstream of the RXR? gene showed that two CpG islands existed ( Figure 9A ). Primers were designed to amplify a region of 320 bp in the larger CpG island, after bisulfite treatment of the genomic DNA. The region spans the 5?-upstream area immediately adjacent to the first exon and part of the exon. We selected a total of 24 CpG sites to be analyzed by pyrosequencing, out of a total of 55 CpG sites present in the amplified PCR product. Three sequencing primers were designed to analyze the selected CpG sites. The CpG sites displayed variations in their percent of methylation and some seemed to be more prone to methylation than others. CpG site number 3 (third underlined site from the 5? end in Figure 9A ) exhibited the highest percent of methylation among the 24 selected CpG sites. The average percent of methylation per CpG site was calculated as an indication of the overall methylation of the promoter region of the RXR? gene. In correlation with the protein and RNA data, a statistically significant increase in the average methylation of the CpG sites was observed in Apc Min/ + mice injected with AOM and received water compared to the mice that received GT. Overall, there was more than a twofold relative increase in CpG methylation in the Apc Min/ + mice that received water compared to the mice that received GT (56% and 27% greater average methylation than the wt control, respectively, P = 0.09).  Green Tea Inhibits the Formation of <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors Mice treated with GT (10 per treatment group) had a 50% reduction in the colonic tumors (1.8–0.9 tumors per mouse, P <0.05) compared to water-treated mice and about 18% reduction in the number of Apc Min/ + tumors developed in the small intestine (40–33 tumors per mouse, P <0.1) ( Figure 2A ). The reduction in colon and small intestinal tumors with GT treatment was mainly due to a reduction in the number of newly developed “small” tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm) with no significant effects on large tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm; 1–5 crypts). (28% reduction in small tumors; 17.3–12.5 tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 11% reduction in large tumors; 23.4–20.8, P >0.1) ( Figure 2B ).  Green Tea Inhibits the Formation of <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors Mice treated with GT (10 per treatment group) had a 50% reduction in the colonic tumors (1.8–0.9 tumors per mouse, P <0.05) compared to water-treated mice and about 18% reduction in the number of Apc Min/ + tumors developed in the small intestine (40–33 tumors per mouse, P <0.1) ( Figure 2A ). The reduction in colon and small intestinal tumors with GT treatment was mainly due to a reduction in the number of newly developed “small” tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm) with no significant effects on large tumors (diameter ?1.0 mm; 1–5 crypts). (28% reduction in small tumors; 17.3–12.5 tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 11% reduction in large tumors; 23.4–20.8, P >0.1) ( Figure 2B ).  Green Tea Selectively Affects Early Changes in Intestinal Carcinogenesis Quantitative analysis of immunohistochemical staining of ?-catenin, cyclin D1, RXR?, and COX-2 showed a selective inhibition of expression in small tumors by GT. The aim of the IHC was to confirm whether or not the inhibitory effects of GT on Apc Min/ + tumors could be explained by any modulation of biomarkers involved in intestinal carcinogenesis. Tumors were scored as described in the Materials and Methods Section ( Figure 3 ). The GT intervention caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors overexpressing ?-catenin, but no inhibition of large or medium tumors (32% reduction in average small tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 10% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. All the tumors were scored at a 100× magnification. In correlation with ?-catenin overexpression, only the number of small tumors overexpressing cyclin D1 was significantly reduced by the GT treatment compared to water (38% reduction in small tumors, P <0.05 and 12% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) ( Figure 4 ). GT also caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors in which RXR? was downregulated with slight inhibition of large tumors (48% reduction in small adenomas per mouse, P <0.05 and 13% reduction in large adenomas, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. The downregulation of RXR? seems to be a very early event in Apc Min/ + carcinogenesis and was observed even in single crypts ( Figure 3B ). GT at a 0.6% (w/v) concentration was not significantly effective in reducing the number of tumors expressing COX-2 (11% reduction in the average number of tumors per mouse) ( Figure 4D ). Full-length APC was not detected in any of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and we did not observe any difference with the GT treatment ( Figure 5A ). On the other hand, TCF-4 was expressed in all Apc Min/ + adenomas ( Figure 5B ). DNMT1 was overexpressed in all of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and the observed expression was directly proportional to the size of the adenoma ( Figure 5C ).  Green Tea Selectively Affects Early Changes in Intestinal Carcinogenesis Quantitative analysis of immunohistochemical staining of ?-catenin, cyclin D1, RXR?, and COX-2 showed a selective inhibition of expression in small tumors by GT. The aim of the IHC was to confirm whether or not the inhibitory effects of GT on Apc Min/ + tumors could be explained by any modulation of biomarkers involved in intestinal carcinogenesis. Tumors were scored as described in the Materials and Methods Section ( Figure 3 ). The GT intervention caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors overexpressing ?-catenin, but no inhibition of large or medium tumors (32% reduction in average small tumors per mouse, P <0.05 and 10% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. All the tumors were scored at a 100× magnification. In correlation with ?-catenin overexpression, only the number of small tumors overexpressing cyclin D1 was significantly reduced by the GT treatment compared to water (38% reduction in small tumors, P <0.05 and 12% reduction in large tumors, P >1.0) ( Figure 4 ). GT also caused a statistically significant reduction in the number of small tumors in which RXR? was downregulated with slight inhibition of large tumors (48% reduction in small adenomas per mouse, P <0.05 and 13% reduction in large adenomas, P >1.0) compared to water-treated mice. The downregulation of RXR? seems to be a very early event in Apc Min/ + carcinogenesis and was observed even in single crypts ( Figure 3B ). GT at a 0.6% (w/v) concentration was not significantly effective in reducing the number of tumors expressing COX-2 (11% reduction in the average number of tumors per mouse) ( Figure 4D ). Full-length APC was not detected in any of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and we did not observe any difference with the GT treatment ( Figure 5A ). On the other hand, TCF-4 was expressed in all Apc Min/ + adenomas ( Figure 5B ). DNMT1 was overexpressed in all of the Apc Min/ + adenomas and the observed expression was directly proportional to the size of the adenoma ( Figure 5C ).  RXR? Is Selectively Downregulated in <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors In order to ask whether or not other retinoic receptors were also downregulated in the Apc Min/ + tumors, we stained for the following retinoic receptors: RAR?, RXR?, RAR?, and RXR? ( Figure 6A ). None of these retinoic receptors were downregulated even in the large tumors. The downregulation of RXR? was also seen in B6 mice injected with AOM ( Figure 6B ). These mice were much more resistant to AOM-induced tumorigenesis compared to the Apc Min/ + mice. We did notice, however, few areas of hyperplasia in the small intestine, but not the colon, of some of these Apc Min/ + mice. The hyperplastic epithelia appeared to exhibit normal APC expression and slightly increased ?-catenin expression, but without nuclear localization ( Figure 6C ). In order to confirm the relevance of RXR? downregulation in the Apc Min/ + tumors to the human colon carcinogenesis, several samples of normal human colon and adenocarcinomas were stained for RXR? and RAR? ( Figure 7 ). Similar to the Apc Min/ + adenomas, human adenocarcinomas showed a reduction in the expression of RXR?, but not RAR?; further emphasizing the role that RXR? might play in modulating colon carcinogenesis. While staining for RXR? was evident in all four normal colons, RXR? was persistently lost or weakly expressed in the eight specimens of human adenocarcinomas.  RXR? Is Selectively Downregulated in <italic>Apc<sup>Min/</sup></italic><sup>+</sup> Tumors In order to ask whether or not other retinoic receptors were also downregulated in the Apc Min/ + tumors, we stained for the following retinoic receptors: RAR?, RXR?, RAR?, and RXR? ( Figure 6A ). None of these retinoic receptors were downregulated even in the large tumors. The downregulation of RXR? was also seen in B6 mice injected with AOM ( Figure 6B ). These mice were much more resistant to AOM-induced tumorigenesis compared to the Apc Min/ + mice. We did notice, however, few areas of hyperplasia in the small intestine, but not the colon, of some of these Apc Min/ + mice. The hyperplastic epithelia appeared to exhibit normal APC expression and slightly increased ?-catenin expression, but without nuclear localization ( Figure 6C ). In order to confirm the relevance of RXR? downregulation in the Apc Min/ + tumors to the human colon carcinogenesis, several samples of normal human colon and adenocarcinomas were stained for RXR? and RAR? ( Figure 7 ). Similar to the Apc Min/ + adenomas, human adenocarcinomas showed a reduction in the expression of RXR?, but not RAR?; further emphasizing the role that RXR? might play in modulating colon carcinogenesis. While staining for RXR? was evident in all four normal colons, RXR? was persistently lost or weakly expressed in the eight specimens of human adenocarcinomas.  The Downregulation of RXR? Correlates With Loss of Its mRNA Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was conducted to determine the levels of RXR? mRNA in Apc Min/ + mice in the treatment groups. As expected, the greatest loss was in the AOM plus water group ( Figure 8 ). The presented data are relative to the B6 mice (wt control) that lacked tumors, therefore exhibited the highest levels of RXR? mRNA. Overall, the RT-PCR analysis showed a 2.1-fold greater loss of RXR? mRNA in the absence of tea treatment (21% and 10% loss relative to B6 mRNA, in water vs. GT-treated mice, respectively).  The Downregulation of RXR? Correlates With Loss of Its mRNA Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was conducted to determine the levels of RXR? mRNA in Apc Min/ + mice in the treatment groups. As expected, the greatest loss was in the AOM plus water group ( Figure 8 ). The presented data are relative to the B6 mice (wt control) that lacked tumors, therefore exhibited the highest levels of RXR? mRNA. Overall, the RT-PCR analysis showed a 2.1-fold greater loss of RXR? mRNA in the absence of tea treatment (21% and 10% loss relative to B6 mRNA, in water vs. GT-treated mice, respectively).  Green Tea Inhibits the Methylation of RXR? Gene Analysis of the DNA sequence of the first exon and a 1000 bp 5?-upstream of the RXR? gene showed that two CpG islands existed ( Figure 9A ). Primers were designed to amplify a region of 320 bp in the larger CpG island, after bisulfite treatment of the genomic DNA. The region spans the 5?-upstream area immediately adjacent to the first exon and part of the exon. We selected a total of 24 CpG sites to be analyzed by pyrosequencing, out of a total of 55 CpG sites present in the amplified PCR product. Three sequencing primers were designed to analyze the selected CpG sites. The CpG sites displayed variations in their percent of methylation and some seemed to be more prone to methylation than others. CpG site number 3 (third underlined site from the 5? end in Figure 9A ) exhibited the highest percent of methylation among the 24 selected CpG sites. The average percent of methylation per CpG site was calculated as an indication of the overall methylation of the promoter region of the RXR? gene. In correlation with the protein and RNA data, a statistically significant increase in the average methylation of the CpG sites was observed in Apc Min/ + mice injected with AOM and received water compared to the mice that received GT. Overall, there was more than a twofold relative increase in CpG methylation in the Apc Min/ + mice that received water compared to the mice that received GT (56% and 27% greater average methylation than the wt control, respectively, P = 0.09).  Green Tea Inhibits the Methylation of RXR? Gene Analysis of the DNA sequence of the first exon and a 1000 bp 5?-upstream of the RXR? gene showed that two CpG islands existed ( Figure 9A ). Primers were designed to amplify a region of 320 bp in the larger CpG island, after bisulfite treatment of the genomic DNA. The region spans the 5?-upstream area immediately adjacent to the first exon and part of the exon. We selected a total of 24 CpG sites to be analyzed by pyrosequencing, out of a total of 55 CpG sites present in the amplified PCR product. Three sequencing primers were designed to analyze the selected CpG sites. The CpG sites displayed variations in their percent of methylation and some seemed to be more prone to methylation than others. CpG site number 3 (third underlined site from the 5? end in Figure 9A ) exhibited the highest percent of methylation among the 24 selected CpG sites. The average percent of methylation per CpG site was calculated as an indication of the overall methylation of the promoter region of the RXR? gene. In correlation with the protein and RNA data, a statistically significant increase in the average methylation of the CpG sites was observed in Apc Min/ + mice injected with AOM and received water compared to the mice that received GT. Overall, there was more than a twofold relative increase in CpG methylation in the Apc Min/ + mice that received water compared to the mice that received GT (56% and 27% greater average methylation than the wt control, respectively, P = 0.09).  DISCUSSION We investigated the possible cancer protective mechanisms of GT in the Apc Min/ + mouse model. We have optimized a protocol to increase the number of colon tumors by injecting the Apc Min/ + mice with the colon selective carcinogen, AOM. Our protocol provides a reliable and convenient approach to increase the yield of colon tumors and circumvents a general liability of the standard Apc Min/ + mouse model. We used this improved protocol to study if and how physiological concentrations of GT might inhibit colon carcinogenesis. We chose a concentration of 0.6% of GT, since it provides similar concentrations of tea catechins in a typical GT beverage [ 5 ]. The number of “small” tumors was significantly reduced in colon and small intestines of GT-treated Apc Min/ + mice with only slight reduction in the number of larger tumors. The data suggest that GT, at a 0.6% (w/v) concentration, selectively targets the development of early tumors in the AOM- Apc Min/ + mouse model without affecting the established, larger tumors. Early adenomas are most likely the consequence of AOM treatment on Apc Min/ + compromised mucosa. Our results indicate that the time of administration of GT is pivotal to its maximizing its ability to inhibit colon carcinogenesis; physiological levels of GT are not likely to inhibit the progress of any large adenomas or adenocarcinomas existing prior to the tea administration. This is consonant with epidemiology of GT drinking and results from phase 1 trials [ 6 , 34 ]. To explain the ability of GT to inhibit the formation of new adenomas, we examined the possible modulation of several biomarkers known to be involved in colon carcinogenesis. These included ?-catenin, cyclin D1, and COX-2. In accordance with the tumor data, GT inhibited the formation of small (1–5 crypts) tumors overexpressing ?-catenin and its downstream target cyclin D1. Surprisingly, we did not observe any significant inhibitory effects of GT on COX-2 expression indicating that the inhibition of COX-2 expression by tea catechins is only likely to be achieved at concentrations far exceeding their concentrations provided by a typical tea beverage. Interactions between retinoic receptors and the Wnt pathway have been reported previously [ 22 , 35 , 36 ]. The current study is the first to report that RXR? is downregulated in Apc Min/ + tumors. The decrease seems to be an early event in Apc Min/ + intestinal tumorigenesis and was observed even in single crypts and in the mucosa of AOM-treated B6 mice. These crypts had normal localization of ?-catenin, but loss of RXR? ( Figure 6 ). In addition, unlike ?-catenin and cyclin D1 the increased expression of RXR? with GT treatment was observed even in the absence of AOM treatment (Western blotting, data not shown). Therefore, the loss of RXR? seems to be a separate event that does not necessarily correlate with ?-catenin overexpression and nuclear localization. RXR? has been shown to induce the degradation of ?-catenin in vitro [ 22 ]. Our results support a novel role for RXR? in an in vivo animal model for colon carcinogenesis. We observed the downregulation of RXR? in all of the AOM/ Apc Min/ + neoplastic lesions regardless of their size. In addition, the downregulation was specific to RXR? of all the other retinoic receptors ( Figure 6 ) and PPAR? (data not shown); it was also observed in human colon carcinomas. In fact, RXR? has been reported in some types of cancer to be a predictive of prognosis [ 37 ] and it may play a similar role in colon carcinogenesis. We have shown in this study that GT reduced the loss of RXR? mRNA and inhibited the methylation of its gene. Silencing of retinoic receptors by hypermethylation has been reported in several types of cancer with particular emphasis on the role RAR? as a tumor suppressor [ 38 ]. Three methyltransferases have been linked to genomic methylation. DNA methyltransferases 3a and 3b (DNMT3a and DNMT3b) are involved in de novo methylation patterns. The predominant nuclear DNA methyl-transferase, however, is DNMT1, which is involved in both genomic methylation and the maintenance of the methylation patterns. The inhibition of DNA methyltransferases, particularly DNMT1, has been shown to reverse the hypermethylation and restore the expression of silenced genes [ 39 , 40 ]. Interestingly, EGCG has been documented to dose-dependently inhibit DNMT1 activity, showing competitive inhibition with a K i of 6.89 ?M. Consequently, the same study showed that EGCG caused a time- and concentration-dependent reversal of hypermethylation of a variety of genes involved in growth control and cellular differentiation. In another study, EGCG was found to be the most potent of the tea catechins and was able to significantly inhibit DNMT1 at a concentration of less than 1 ?M [ 40 ]. The loss of RXR? could be the result of either mutation or silencing of the gene encoding for it. The ability of GT to increase the levels of RXR? in Apc Min/ + mucosa, however, suggests a reversible downregulation, that is, desilencing a promiscuous nuclear receptor that affects multiple signaling pathways. The current study shows that the reduction in the RXR? protein levels correlated with a reduction in the mRNA levels and an increase in the methylation status of the promoter region of the RXR? gene. GT treatment resulted in inhibition of the methylation of the RXR? gene, increase in its mRNA levels, and consequent increase in the protein levels in Apc Min/ + intestinal mucosa. Further research is required to fully investigate the role of RXR? in colon carcinogenesis. RXR? could potentially become a key target for the prevention and therapy of colon cancer and possibly other types of cancer, since its levels can be restored, as shown in this study, by bioactive phytochemicals in GT.  DISCUSSION We investigated the possible cancer protective mechanisms of GT in the Apc Min/ + mouse model. We have optimized a protocol to increase the number of colon tumors by injecting the Apc Min/ + mice with the colon selective carcinogen, AOM. Our protocol provides a reliable and convenient approach to increase the yield of colon tumors and circumvents a general liability of the standard Apc Min/ + mouse model. We used this improved protocol to study if and how physiological concentrations of GT might inhibit colon carcinogenesis. We chose a concentration of 0.6% of GT, since it provides similar concentrations of tea catechins in a typical GT beverage [ 5 ]. The number of “small” tumors was significantly reduced in colon and small intestines of GT-treated Apc Min/ + mice with only slight reduction in the number of larger tumors. The data suggest that GT, at a 0.6% (w/v) concentration, selectively targets the development of early tumors in the AOM- Apc Min/ + mouse model without affecting the established, larger tumors. Early adenomas are most likely the consequence of AOM treatment on Apc Min/ + compromised mucosa. Our results indicate that the time of administration of GT is pivotal to its maximizing its ability to inhibit colon carcinogenesis; physiological levels of GT are not likely to inhibit the progress of any large adenomas or adenocarcinomas existing prior to the tea administration. This is consonant with epidemiology of GT drinking and results from phase 1 trials [ 6 , 34 ]. To explain the ability of GT to inhibit the formation of new adenomas, we examined the possible modulation of several biomarkers known to be involved in colon carcinogenesis. These included ?-catenin, cyclin D1, and COX-2. In accordance with the tumor data, GT inhibited the formation of small (1–5 crypts) tumors overexpressing ?-catenin and its downstream target cyclin D1. Surprisingly, we did not observe any significant inhibitory effects of GT on COX-2 expression indicating that the inhibition of COX-2 expression by tea catechins is only likely to be achieved at concentrations far exceeding their concentrations provided by a typical tea beverage. Interactions between retinoic receptors and the Wnt pathway have been reported previously [ 22 , 35 , 36 ]. The current study is the first to report that RXR? is downregulated in Apc Min/ + tumors. The decrease seems to be an early event in Apc Min/ + intestinal tumorigenesis and was observed even in single crypts and in the mucosa of AOM-treated B6 mice. These crypts had normal localization of ?-catenin, but loss of RXR? ( Figure 6 ). In addition, unlike ?-catenin and cyclin D1 the increased expression of RXR? with GT treatment was observed even in the absence of AOM treatment (Western blotting, data not shown). Therefore, the loss of RXR? seems to be a separate event that does not necessarily correlate with ?-catenin overexpression and nuclear localization. RXR? has been shown to induce the degradation of ?-catenin in vitro [ 22 ]. Our results support a novel role for RXR? in an in vivo animal model for colon carcinogenesis. We observed the downregulation of RXR? in all of the AOM/ Apc Min/ + neoplastic lesions regardless of their size. In addition, the downregulation was specific to RXR? of all the other retinoic receptors ( Figure 6 ) and PPAR? (data not shown); it was also observed in human colon carcinomas. In fact, RXR? has been reported in some types of cancer to be a predictive of prognosis [ 37 ] and it may play a similar role in colon carcinogenesis. We have shown in this study that GT reduced the loss of RXR? mRNA and inhibited the methylation of its gene. Silencing of retinoic receptors by hypermethylation has been reported in several types of cancer with particular emphasis on the role RAR? as a tumor suppressor [ 38 ]. Three methyltransferases have been linked to genomic methylation. DNA methyltransferases 3a and 3b (DNMT3a and DNMT3b) are involved in de novo methylation patterns. The predominant nuclear DNA methyl-transferase, however, is DNMT1, which is involved in both genomic methylation and the maintenance of the methylation patterns. The inhibition of DNA methyltransferases, particularly DNMT1, has been shown to reverse the hypermethylation and restore the expression of silenced genes [ 39 , 40 ]. Interestingly, EGCG has been documented to dose-dependently inhibit DNMT1 activity, showing competitive inhibition with a K i of 6.89 ?M. Consequently, the same study showed that EGCG caused a time- and concentration-dependent reversal of hypermethylation of a variety of genes involved in growth control and cellular differentiation. In another study, EGCG was found to be the most potent of the tea catechins and was able to significantly inhibit DNMT1 at a concentration of less than 1 ?M [ 40 ]. The loss of RXR? could be the result of either mutation or silencing of the gene encoding for it. The ability of GT to increase the levels of RXR? in Apc Min/ + mucosa, however, suggests a reversible downregulation, that is, desilencing a promiscuous nuclear receptor that affects multiple signaling pathways. The current study shows that the reduction in the RXR? protein levels correlated with a reduction in the mRNA levels and an increase in the methylation status of the promoter region of the RXR? gene. GT treatment resulted in inhibition of the methylation of the RXR? gene, increase in its mRNA levels, and consequent increase in the protein levels in Apc Min/ + intestinal mucosa. Further research is required to fully investigate the role of RXR? in colon carcinogenesis. RXR? could potentially become a key target for the prevention and therapy of colon cancer and possibly other types of cancer, since its levels can be restored, as shown in this study, by bioactive phytochemicals in GT. 