Sensitive and Specific Detection of Early Gastric Cancer Using DNA Methylation Analysis of Gastric Washes Background & Aims Aberrant DNA methylation is an early and frequent process in gastric carcinogenesis and could be useful for detection of gastric neoplasia. We hypothesized that methylation analysis of DNA recovered from gastric washes could be used to detect gastric cancer. Methods We studied 51 candidate genes in 7 gastric cancer cell lines and 24 samples (training set) and identified 6 for further studies. We examined the methylation status of these genes in a test set consisting of 131 gastric neoplasias at various stages. Finally, we validated the 6 candidate genes in a different population of 40 primary gastric cancer samples and 113 non-neoplastic gastric mucosa samples. Results 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5, MLF1) showed frequent differential methylation between gastric cancer and normal mucosa in the training, test and validation sets. GDNF and MINT25 were most sensitive molecular markers of early stage gastric cancer while PRDM5 and MLF1 were markers of a field defect. There was a close correlation ( r =0.5 to 0.9, p =0.03 to 0.001) between methylation levels in tumor biopsy and gastric washes. MINT25 methylation had the best sensitivity (90%), specificity (96%), and area under the ROC curve (0.961) in terms of tumor detection in gastric washes. Conclusions These findings suggest MINT25 is a sensitive and specific marker for screening in gastric cancer. Additionally we have developed a new methodology for gastric cancer detection by DNA methylation in gastric washes.  Introduction Gastric cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer death in the world. Its prognosis is determined by clinical stage at diagnosis and treatment 1 – 3 . Diagnostic tools such as gastrointestinal endoscopy followed by pathological analysis and/or fluoroscopy have proven useful; however, the mortality rate has remained high throughout the world. The sensitivity and specificity of GI endoscopy is high, but its diagnostic power depends on the technical skill of the endoscopist. Endoscopic biopsy is a topical procedure whereby only a small portion of abnormal tissue is removed. It can be difficult to determine which tissue layer to remove which occasionally leads to a misdiagnosis. Moreover, GI endoscopy is neither comfortable nor risk free for patients, and it is associated with frequent morbidity. Furthermore, gastric cancer is more prevalent among elderly patients, who are likely to be taking medications such as antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs, which further complicates the procedure. The need for less-invasive and more efficient diagnostic tools has led to a search for gastric cancer antigens 4 , 5 . However, we now know that common biomarkers such as CEA and CA19-9 are not found frequently enough to yield high specificity or sensitivity assays. Molecular markers that distinguish benign from clinically silent malignant disease are needed to reduce the number of unnecessary endoscopic biopsies, and increase power for early-stage detection of gastric dysplasia and early gastric cancer. Cytosine DNA methylation is an important epigenetic change which leads to the recruitment of transcription repressors and chromatin changes. During the development and progression of gastric cancer, many genes are silenced by aberrant methylation of CpG islands, which are CpG dinucleotide-rich areas located within the promoters of approximately 60% of human genes 6 . Aberrant DNA methylation occurs more frequently than mutations in gastric cancer 7 – 13 . Studies have detected cancer-specific DNA methylation in stool, blood plasma, urine, and pancreatic juice in several different cancers 14 , 15 . Furthermore, concordant promoter hypermethylation of multiple genes, which is described as the “CpG island methylator phenotype”, has been found in both gastric and colorectal carcinomas 16 – 21 . Therefore, these epigenetic methylation markers could be useful for detecting gastric cancer. It has also been proposed that DNA methylation analysis could be useful to detect field cancerization in this disease 22 – 24 . Because many mucosal cells can be found in stomach juice, the detection of molecular markers in stomach juice is a possible noninvasive approach to screening for gastric cancer. However, owing to the secretion of hydrochloric acid from parietal cells in gastric mucosa, stomach juice is strongly acidic, with a pH of less than 3. It is difficult to use cells from gastric juice for molecular studies because of the DNA damage caused by this acidity 25 . One alternative to stomach juice is the use of gastric washes for molecular analysis. Endoscopists obtain washes for analysis by washing with a saline solution around the stomach mucosa during routine endoscopic examination. Moreover, given that cells exfoliate abundantly into the gastric washes and that undamaged DNA recovered from the washes can be assayed with sensitive and quantitative techniques, there is a strong biologic rationale to pursue this emerging technology. Here we identified six methylation markers for the detection of early gastric neoplasia. Applying this to DNA from gastric washes we found a high sensitivity and specificity in detecting gastric cancer.  Patient Characteristics and Sample Collection Training and test sets of gastric tumor tissues were collected from Korean patients who underwent endoscopic or surgical resection of gastric dysplasia or cancer at Yonsei University Wonju Christian Hospital (Wonju, Korea) from January 2000 to December 2004. A total of 131 tumor tissue samples from 131 patients ( Table 1A ) were randomly collected and examined; 40 gastric dysplasias, 48 early gastric cancers, and 43 advanced gastric cancers. Among 78 surgically resected cancer patients, 64 matched adjacent gastric samples found not to contain cancer cells and at least 2 cm distant from the lesion were also used for methylation analysis. In addition to the tumor samples, non-neoplastic gastric mucosal samples from 22 age-matched patients who underwent surgery for peptic ulcer disease during the same period were also obtained for the analysis. Serial sections from paraffin-embedded tissue blocks were obtained and used for both histologic diagnosis and tissue DNA extraction in all cases. For all cases, the cancer epithelial compartments were needle microdissected from 10 ?m thick sections. Microdissected areas were assessed by an expert pathologist (M.–Y., Cho) to estimate the percentage of gastric tumor cells in each preparation and the microdissected areas of the gastric tumors were estimated to contain >70% cellularity. For the validation set ( Table 1B ), we collected tumor tissues (T), adjacent normal tissues (ADJ), and stomach wash samples (W) from October 2005 to September 2006 in a different population of patients (Japanese) with localized gastric cancer. All patients had never been treated for their cancer at the time of sample collection at St. Marianna University School of Medicine Hospital (Kanagawa, Japan). Also, we collected stomach mucosal tissues (EN) and stomach wash samples (EW) from endoscopically normal patients who were undergoing endoscopy at the same hospital. No significant differences in age and sex were seen between the gastric cancer patients and the endoscopically normal subjects. This study protocol was approved by the institutional review board of both Yonsei University Wonju Christian Hospital and St. Marianna University School of Medicine, and informed consent was obtained from each patient. To obtain gastric washes, patients were required to swallow a liquid solution (100 ml of water containing 80 mg of dimethylpolysiloxane [Gascon: Kissei Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Matsumoto, Japan], 1 g of sodium bicarbonate, and 20,000 units of pronase [Pronase MS: Kaken Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan]) about 10 minutes before endoscopic examination. After local anesthesia had been administered, the endoscope was inserted into the stomach through the esophagus, and the effect of pre-medication with pronase on the visualization of the gastric mucosal wall was assessed. During endoscopic examination, the endoscopist washed the stomach wall with a washing solution of 5% Gascon in water. Wash solution was applied to the entire stomach wall, with no exclusive focus on areas that appeared abnormal. Gastric washes were aspirated through the suction channel of the endoscope into specimen collection containers (No.16200BZZ00045: Nippon Sherwood, Tokyo, Japan). The specimen collection container was directly connected to the endoscope modulator, and the washes were vacuumed manually. The samples were immediately centrifuged and the pellets were frozen at ?80°C. DNA was extracted using the standard phenol-chloroform method. After the collection of gastric washes, biopsies were carried out using biopsy forceps (Radial Jaw: Boston Scientific Corp., Natick, MA) under endoscopic guidance with a GIF-Q240 endoscope using the EVIS LUCERA system (Olympus, Inc., Tokyo, Japan). Mucosal samples of the gastric body 5 mm in diameter were collected for biopsy. In the endoscopically normal subjects, endoscopic biopsy was performed at the corpus. In gastric cancer patients, two biopsy samples were collected per site of cancer and adjacent tissue. The concentration and quantity of all DNA extracted from biopsied tissues and gastric washes were measured using the NanoDrop spectrophotometer (ND-1000 Spectrophotometer; [Nano Drop Technologies, Wilmington, DE]).  Endoscopic and Histopathologic Analysis of Gastric Neoplasia The endoscopic appearance of gastric dysplasia was classified based on gastroscopic findings, as protruded-type (0-I), flat-type (IIa or IIb) or depressed-type (IIc, IIc + IIa or III). Early gastric cancer was defined by a depth of tumor invasion limited to the submucosal layer of the stomach regardless of the presence of lymph node involvement. Advanced gastric cancer was classified endoscopically using the Borrmann classification. All resected gastric neoplasias were diagnosed histologically by a pathologist (M.–Y. C.) based on the World Health Organization classification. ( Supplementary Figure 1 )  Bisulfite PCR and Pyrosequencing Analysis of DNA Methylation Bisulfite treatment of gDNA was performed using an EpiTect bisulfite kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. One microliter of bisulfite-treated DNA was used as a template in subsequent polymerase chain reaction (PCR). All of the primers and PCR conditions used for amplifying promoter CpG DNA fragments of candidate methylation marker genes are listed in Supplementary Table 1A . For most assays, we used touchdown PCR. All PCR assays included a denaturation step at 95°C for 30 seconds, followed by an annealing step at various temperatures for 30 seconds, and an extension step at 72°C for 30 seconds. After PCR, the biotinylated strand was captured on steptavidin-coated beads (Amersham Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden) and incubated with sequencing primers ( Supplementary Table 1B ). Pyrosequencing was performed using PSQ HS 96 Gold single-nucleotide polymorphism reagents on a PSQ HS 96 pyrosequencing machine (Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden). The protocol for pyrosequencing has been described in detail previously 26 . Pyrosequencing quantitatively measures the methylation status of several CpG sites in a given promoter. These adjacent sites usually show highly concordant methylation. Therefore, the mean percentage of methylation of detected sites was used as a representative value for each gene promoter.  K-<italic>ras</italic> and p53 Mutation Analysis Using DNA from Tumor and Gastric Washes Direct sequencing was conducted to identify mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the K- ras gene and in exons 2 through 11 of the p53 gene in T and W samples; primer sequences were obtained from a previous report, with minor modifications 27 . PCR products were directly sequenced in the M. D. Anderson Core Sequencing Facility using the same primers.  Reverse transcription-PCR First-strand cDNA was prepared by reverse transcription of 5?g samples of total RNA using Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR was carried out using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays [GDNF, Hs00181185_m1; PRDM5, Hs00924598_m1; ADAM23, Hs01046804_m1; MLF1, Hs0023695_m1; RORA, Hs00536545_m1; and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, Hs_00266705_gl (Applied Biosystems)] with a 7500 Real-time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacture’s instructions 28 . SDS2.1 software (Applied Biosystems) was used to do comparative delta-Ct analysis. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase served as an endogenous control.  Detection of <italic>Helicobacter Pylori</italic> Using DNA from Gastric Washes PCR was used to evaluate the presence of ureA , to demonstrate H. pylori infection, using HPU1 and HPU2 primers 29 . PCR for cagA was performed to type the H. pylori strains, using cagA1 and cagA2 primers 30 .  Selection of Candidate Genes in Gastric Cancer for Methylation Analysis We first selected a total of 51 candidate genes. Eight of the 51 genes were identified as hypermethylated in multiple cancers by methylated CpG island (CGI) amplification and microarray (MCAM) 31 or methylated CGI amplification coupled with representational difference analysis (MCA–RDA) 32 . Also, we identified from a literature search 43 genes that were described as potential methylated tumor suppressor genes in gastric cancer cells or tissues.  Statistical Analysis All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS for Windows, version 12 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL) and PRISM software for Windows, version 4 (GraphPad Prism, Inc., San Diego, CA). Methylation level (%) was analyzed as a continuous variable for comparison of each gene with clinicopathologic features; mean and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. Comparisons of categorical variables were made using the chi-square test and Fisher’s exact test where appropriate. Associations between continuous variables or levels of promoter methylation and clinicopathologic variables were evaluated using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Student’s t- test. In parallel, we computed the median DNA methylation value and range for each sample, and we defined the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve in SPSS software. Z-score analysis was used to normalize the methylation levels of several genes in each sample. The Z-score for each gene was calculated as follows: Z-score = (methylation level of each sample –mean value of methylation level)/standard deviation of methylation level. In this analysis, a Z-score greater than 0 means that the methylation level is greater than the mean value for the population. We examined possible correlations between DNA promoter methylation levels and patient age in 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1) found in normal-appearing mucosa, by calculating Spearman nonparametric correlation coefficients ( r and p , respectively). All reported p values were two-sided, and p <0.05 was considered statistically significant.  Methods We studied 51 candidate genes in 7 gastric cancer cell lines and 24 samples (training set) and identified 6 for further studies. We examined the methylation status of these genes in a test set consisting of 131 gastric neoplasias at various stages. Finally, we validated the 6 candidate genes in a different population of 40 primary gastric cancer samples and 113 non-neoplastic gastric mucosa samples.  Results 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5, MLF1) showed frequent differential methylation between gastric cancer and normal mucosa in the training, test and validation sets. GDNF and MINT25 were most sensitive molecular markers of early stage gastric cancer while PRDM5 and MLF1 were markers of a field defect. There was a close correlation ( r =0.5 to 0.9, p =0.03 to 0.001) between methylation levels in tumor biopsy and gastric washes. MINT25 methylation had the best sensitivity (90%), specificity (96%), and area under the ROC curve (0.961) in terms of tumor detection in gastric washes.  Conclusions These findings suggest MINT25 is a sensitive and specific marker for screening in gastric cancer. Additionally we have developed a new methodology for gastric cancer detection by DNA methylation in gastric washes.  Materials and Methods Cell Lines Seven gastric cancer cell lines (Snu1, Snu5, AGS, MKN7, MKN74, MKN45, KatoIII) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) or Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources (Tokyo, Japan). To analyze restoration of each gene expression, cell lines were incubated for 96 hours with 1?M 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) after which they were harvested and their RNA was extracted for further analysis. Patient Characteristics and Sample Collection Training and test sets of gastric tumor tissues were collected from Korean patients who underwent endoscopic or surgical resection of gastric dysplasia or cancer at Yonsei University Wonju Christian Hospital (Wonju, Korea) from January 2000 to December 2004. A total of 131 tumor tissue samples from 131 patients ( Table 1A ) were randomly collected and examined; 40 gastric dysplasias, 48 early gastric cancers, and 43 advanced gastric cancers. Among 78 surgically resected cancer patients, 64 matched adjacent gastric samples found not to contain cancer cells and at least 2 cm distant from the lesion were also used for methylation analysis. In addition to the tumor samples, non-neoplastic gastric mucosal samples from 22 age-matched patients who underwent surgery for peptic ulcer disease during the same period were also obtained for the analysis. Serial sections from paraffin-embedded tissue blocks were obtained and used for both histologic diagnosis and tissue DNA extraction in all cases. For all cases, the cancer epithelial compartments were needle microdissected from 10 ?m thick sections. Microdissected areas were assessed by an expert pathologist (M.–Y., Cho) to estimate the percentage of gastric tumor cells in each preparation and the microdissected areas of the gastric tumors were estimated to contain >70% cellularity. For the validation set ( Table 1B ), we collected tumor tissues (T), adjacent normal tissues (ADJ), and stomach wash samples (W) from October 2005 to September 2006 in a different population of patients (Japanese) with localized gastric cancer. All patients had never been treated for their cancer at the time of sample collection at St. Marianna University School of Medicine Hospital (Kanagawa, Japan). Also, we collected stomach mucosal tissues (EN) and stomach wash samples (EW) from endoscopically normal patients who were undergoing endoscopy at the same hospital. No significant differences in age and sex were seen between the gastric cancer patients and the endoscopically normal subjects. This study protocol was approved by the institutional review board of both Yonsei University Wonju Christian Hospital and St. Marianna University School of Medicine, and informed consent was obtained from each patient. To obtain gastric washes, patients were required to swallow a liquid solution (100 ml of water containing 80 mg of dimethylpolysiloxane [Gascon: Kissei Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Matsumoto, Japan], 1 g of sodium bicarbonate, and 20,000 units of pronase [Pronase MS: Kaken Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan]) about 10 minutes before endoscopic examination. After local anesthesia had been administered, the endoscope was inserted into the stomach through the esophagus, and the effect of pre-medication with pronase on the visualization of the gastric mucosal wall was assessed. During endoscopic examination, the endoscopist washed the stomach wall with a washing solution of 5% Gascon in water. Wash solution was applied to the entire stomach wall, with no exclusive focus on areas that appeared abnormal. Gastric washes were aspirated through the suction channel of the endoscope into specimen collection containers (No.16200BZZ00045: Nippon Sherwood, Tokyo, Japan). The specimen collection container was directly connected to the endoscope modulator, and the washes were vacuumed manually. The samples were immediately centrifuged and the pellets were frozen at ?80°C. DNA was extracted using the standard phenol-chloroform method. After the collection of gastric washes, biopsies were carried out using biopsy forceps (Radial Jaw: Boston Scientific Corp., Natick, MA) under endoscopic guidance with a GIF-Q240 endoscope using the EVIS LUCERA system (Olympus, Inc., Tokyo, Japan). Mucosal samples of the gastric body 5 mm in diameter were collected for biopsy. In the endoscopically normal subjects, endoscopic biopsy was performed at the corpus. In gastric cancer patients, two biopsy samples were collected per site of cancer and adjacent tissue. The concentration and quantity of all DNA extracted from biopsied tissues and gastric washes were measured using the NanoDrop spectrophotometer (ND-1000 Spectrophotometer; [Nano Drop Technologies, Wilmington, DE]). Endoscopic and Histopathologic Analysis of Gastric Neoplasia The endoscopic appearance of gastric dysplasia was classified based on gastroscopic findings, as protruded-type (0-I), flat-type (IIa or IIb) or depressed-type (IIc, IIc + IIa or III). Early gastric cancer was defined by a depth of tumor invasion limited to the submucosal layer of the stomach regardless of the presence of lymph node involvement. Advanced gastric cancer was classified endoscopically using the Borrmann classification. All resected gastric neoplasias were diagnosed histologically by a pathologist (M.–Y. C.) based on the World Health Organization classification. ( Supplementary Figure 1 ) Bisulfite PCR and Pyrosequencing Analysis of DNA Methylation Bisulfite treatment of gDNA was performed using an EpiTect bisulfite kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. One microliter of bisulfite-treated DNA was used as a template in subsequent polymerase chain reaction (PCR). All of the primers and PCR conditions used for amplifying promoter CpG DNA fragments of candidate methylation marker genes are listed in Supplementary Table 1A . For most assays, we used touchdown PCR. All PCR assays included a denaturation step at 95°C for 30 seconds, followed by an annealing step at various temperatures for 30 seconds, and an extension step at 72°C for 30 seconds. After PCR, the biotinylated strand was captured on steptavidin-coated beads (Amersham Bioscience, Uppsala, Sweden) and incubated with sequencing primers ( Supplementary Table 1B ). Pyrosequencing was performed using PSQ HS 96 Gold single-nucleotide polymorphism reagents on a PSQ HS 96 pyrosequencing machine (Biotage, Uppsala, Sweden). The protocol for pyrosequencing has been described in detail previously 26 . Pyrosequencing quantitatively measures the methylation status of several CpG sites in a given promoter. These adjacent sites usually show highly concordant methylation. Therefore, the mean percentage of methylation of detected sites was used as a representative value for each gene promoter. K-<italic>ras</italic> and p53 Mutation Analysis Using DNA from Tumor and Gastric Washes Direct sequencing was conducted to identify mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the K- ras gene and in exons 2 through 11 of the p53 gene in T and W samples; primer sequences were obtained from a previous report, with minor modifications 27 . PCR products were directly sequenced in the M. D. Anderson Core Sequencing Facility using the same primers. Reverse transcription-PCR First-strand cDNA was prepared by reverse transcription of 5?g samples of total RNA using Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR was carried out using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays [GDNF, Hs00181185_m1; PRDM5, Hs00924598_m1; ADAM23, Hs01046804_m1; MLF1, Hs0023695_m1; RORA, Hs00536545_m1; and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, Hs_00266705_gl (Applied Biosystems)] with a 7500 Real-time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacture’s instructions 28 . SDS2.1 software (Applied Biosystems) was used to do comparative delta-Ct analysis. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase served as an endogenous control. Detection of <italic>Helicobacter Pylori</italic> Using DNA from Gastric Washes PCR was used to evaluate the presence of ureA , to demonstrate H. pylori infection, using HPU1 and HPU2 primers 29 . PCR for cagA was performed to type the H. pylori strains, using cagA1 and cagA2 primers 30 . Selection of Candidate Genes in Gastric Cancer for Methylation Analysis We first selected a total of 51 candidate genes. Eight of the 51 genes were identified as hypermethylated in multiple cancers by methylated CpG island (CGI) amplification and microarray (MCAM) 31 or methylated CGI amplification coupled with representational difference analysis (MCA–RDA) 32 . Also, we identified from a literature search 43 genes that were described as potential methylated tumor suppressor genes in gastric cancer cells or tissues. Statistical Analysis All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS for Windows, version 12 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL) and PRISM software for Windows, version 4 (GraphPad Prism, Inc., San Diego, CA). Methylation level (%) was analyzed as a continuous variable for comparison of each gene with clinicopathologic features; mean and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. Comparisons of categorical variables were made using the chi-square test and Fisher’s exact test where appropriate. Associations between continuous variables or levels of promoter methylation and clinicopathologic variables were evaluated using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Student’s t- test. In parallel, we computed the median DNA methylation value and range for each sample, and we defined the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve in SPSS software. Z-score analysis was used to normalize the methylation levels of several genes in each sample. The Z-score for each gene was calculated as follows: Z-score = (methylation level of each sample –mean value of methylation level)/standard deviation of methylation level. In this analysis, a Z-score greater than 0 means that the methylation level is greater than the mean value for the population. We examined possible correlations between DNA promoter methylation levels and patient age in 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1) found in normal-appearing mucosa, by calculating Spearman nonparametric correlation coefficients ( r and p , respectively). All reported p values were two-sided, and p <0.05 was considered statistically significant.  Cell Lines Seven gastric cancer cell lines (Snu1, Snu5, AGS, MKN7, MKN74, MKN45, KatoIII) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) or Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources (Tokyo, Japan). To analyze restoration of each gene expression, cell lines were incubated for 96 hours with 1?M 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) after which they were harvested and their RNA was extracted for further analysis.  Genetic Analysis Using Biopsy and Gastric Washes in Gastric Cancer We checked for the presence of mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the K- ras gene and in exons 4 through 10 of the p53 gene in T and W samples. No K -ras mutations were detected in codon 12 or 13 in any sample. Mutations of p53 were found in one of 20 T samples (5%) and in one of 20 W samples (5%). Both mutations were a one-base-pair deletion in exon 10 (1006delG, heterozygous), and the two samples were from the same patient.  Detection of <italic>Helicobacter Pylori</italic> H. pylori requires urease protein to survive in the stomach flora because it needs protection from the acidic solution secreted by parietal cells. Therefore, we use ureA gene detection as a positive control for H. pylori . Twenty-six gastric wash samples were found to be H. pylori positive, and 42 were H. pylori negative. Of the 26 H. pylori -positive subjects, 12 were from cancer patients (12/20, 60%) and 14 were from cancer-free individuals (14/48, 29%). Also, 9 subjects were cagA positive in W samples (9/20, 45%) and 6 were cagA positive in EW samples (6/48, 13%). We did not find any correlation between ureA- or cagA -positive detection and DNA methylation.  Results Clinicopathologic Characteristics of Patients Clinicopathologic characteristics of training set and test set patients with gastric dysplasia, early gastric cancer, or advanced gastric cancer and age-matched controls without neoplasia are listed in Table 1A . Table 1B lists the characteristics of validation set patients; in those, samples included Tumor tissue (T), normal appearing tissue adjacent to tumors (ADJ), stomach mucosal tissue in endoscopically normal patients (EN), stomach wash samples in gastric cancer patients (W), and stomach wash samples in endoscopically normal patient (EW). We observed no significant differences among these groups. Methylation of Selected Markers in Gastric Neoplastic Progression Using Training and Test Sets We determined the levels of methylation of all genes in 7 gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, KatoIII, MKN7, MKN45, MKN74, Snu1 and Snu5) and compared them with normal blood DNA obtained from two healthy individuals. Methylation was determined by bisulfite-pyrosequencing, a quantitative method that yields % methylated alleles in the studied DNA (examples in supplementary figure 2 ). The first criterion for marker selection among the candidate genes was hypermethylation (>15%) in more than three of the seven cancer cell lines but a lack of methylation (?15%) in normal peripheral blood DNA. We found that 51 genes were hypermethylated in more than three of the seven cell lines (data not shown). Next, we compared the levels of methylation of the 51 genes in a test set of 13 gastric cancer tissue samples and 11 age- and sex-matched normal gastric mucosa samples ( Supplementary Table 2 ). Based on differential methylation, we selected 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1) as potential markers for the detection of gastric neoplasia. Next, we tested these 6 potential markers using an independent set of gastric neoplasia samples (test set). The results are summarized in Table 2 and Figure 1 . Methylation levels increased significantly in gastric neoplastic progression from non-neoplastic gastric mucosa tissue to normal adjacent tissue to tumors and to early gastric cancer samples for all 6 marker genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1, p < .001, according to ANOVA). When considering progressive stages, two patterns were evident: 1) type 1 markers, showing consistently high levels of methylation in both gastric dysplasia and cancer (MINT25 and GDNF); 2) type 2 markers, showing high levels of methylation in early gastric cancer and gastric dysplasia but decreased levels in advanced gastric cancer (RORA, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1). Of interest, use of the type 2 markers revealed higher methylation levels in gastric dysplasia than in advanced gastric cancer ( p < .001), which is consistent with our studies in ulcerative colitis and colon cancer 33 . Epigenetic Silencing of Selected in Gastric Cancer Cell Lines To examine the expression profile of the candidate marker genes, we initially carried out real-time PCR using cDNA from normal colon and normal stomach tissues and 7 gastric cancer cells (MKN7, MKN74, MKN45, Snu1, Snu5, AGS, KatoIII). We detected expression of GDNF, PRDM5, ADAM23, MLF1 and RORA in both normal colon and stomach tissues; conversely, we detected weak expression of these genes in gastric cancer cells, and also an inverse correlation of expression with DNA methylation level. MINT25 is an alternatively spliced form of the CABIN1 gene and was therefore not studied. Treating those 7 cell lines with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-dC restored silenced gene expression ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). DNA Methylation Levels of the 6 Genes in the Validation Set To analyze the potential of these genes in screening for gastric cancer, we tested a validation set that also included gastric washes. We first measured DNA concentrations in T, N, W, EN, and EW samples. Gastric washes consistently yielded more DNA than did tissue biopsy samples from the same patients ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). To test the quality of recovered nucleic acids, we ran the DNA on 1% agarose gels and found higher molecular weight (intact) DNA in gastric washes from some cancer patients compared to healthy controls ( supplementary Figure 5 ). DNA spectrophotometer analysis also showed better quality of DNA from washes from cancer patients. Next, we stained gastric washes and we could see both cancer cells and normal cells in the washes (cancer cells were stained by CEA). Many cells were already breaking down in the gastric washes. Finally, we tested by PCR the quality of DNA and found that it was more difficult to amplify DNA from controls than from cancer patients, especially with fragments over 200 bp ( supplementary Figure 5 ). We next measured DNA methylation levels of the six genes (MINT25, RORA, PRDM5, MLF1, ADAM23, and GDNF) by pyrosequencing analysis in 153 validation set samples: T (20), ADJ (17), W (20), EN (48), and EW (48). The Z-scores of these 6 genes were significantly different in T and EN samples ( Figure 1B ). The difference in methylation densities between T and ADJ ( p < 0.0001), as well as between W and EW ( p < 0.0001), were highest in MINT25. The methylation levels of the genes tested in T samples did not differ significantly according to sex, age, or tumor stage except that methylation levels of MLF1 and ADAM23 showed a positive correlation with age (MLF1: r =0.5, p =0.001; ADAM23: r =0.3, p =0.05). The DNA methylation densities of PRDM5 and MLF1 were significantly different between T and EN ( p < 0.0001) and between W and EW ( p < 0.0001) samples. However, the results did not show a significant difference between T and ADJ samples ( p = 0.16). Moreover, DNA methylation densities in ADJ samples were significantly higher than methylation densities in EN samples ( p < 0.0001) suggesting that these two genes are potential markers of an epigenetic field defect ( Figure 1B ). Correlations in methylation levels between biopsy (T) and gastric wash (W) are shown in Figure 2 . The methylation levels of all 6 genes were closely correlated by Spearman analysis (MINT25: r = 0.7, p = 0.001; RORA: r = 0.5, p = 0.03; PRDM5: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; MLF1: r = 0.9, p < 0.001; ADAM23: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; GDNF: r = 0.9, p < 0.001). These results demonstrated that gastric washes closely mirrored gastric biopsy results. We therefore analyzed the sensitivity and specificity of the gastric wash methylation assays statistically using single-gene and multi-gene panels. Each cutoff value was determined using ROC curves ( Figure 3 ), and sensitivity and specificity were calculated. The best results were 90% sensitivity and 96% specificity using MINT25 alone and 95% sensitivity and 92% specificity using a combination of MINT25, ADAM23, and GDNF ( Table 3 ). Six early stage gastric cancer samples were included in validation sets. Methylation in gastric washes enabled detection of these cancers in 83.3% of cases (5/6) by MINT25, 66.7% (4/6) by GDNF and 83.3% (5/6) by PRDM5. These results suggest that DNA from gastric washes can be an appropriate alternative to DNA from biopsied tissue for the determination of methylation status in gastric cancer and to screen for this deadly disease. Genetic Analysis Using Biopsy and Gastric Washes in Gastric Cancer We checked for the presence of mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the K- ras gene and in exons 4 through 10 of the p53 gene in T and W samples. No K -ras mutations were detected in codon 12 or 13 in any sample. Mutations of p53 were found in one of 20 T samples (5%) and in one of 20 W samples (5%). Both mutations were a one-base-pair deletion in exon 10 (1006delG, heterozygous), and the two samples were from the same patient. Detection of <italic>Helicobacter Pylori</italic> H. pylori requires urease protein to survive in the stomach flora because it needs protection from the acidic solution secreted by parietal cells. Therefore, we use ureA gene detection as a positive control for H. pylori . Twenty-six gastric wash samples were found to be H. pylori positive, and 42 were H. pylori negative. Of the 26 H. pylori -positive subjects, 12 were from cancer patients (12/20, 60%) and 14 were from cancer-free individuals (14/48, 29%). Also, 9 subjects were cagA positive in W samples (9/20, 45%) and 6 were cagA positive in EW samples (6/48, 13%). We did not find any correlation between ureA- or cagA -positive detection and DNA methylation.  Results Clinicopathologic Characteristics of Patients Clinicopathologic characteristics of training set and test set patients with gastric dysplasia, early gastric cancer, or advanced gastric cancer and age-matched controls without neoplasia are listed in Table 1A . Table 1B lists the characteristics of validation set patients; in those, samples included Tumor tissue (T), normal appearing tissue adjacent to tumors (ADJ), stomach mucosal tissue in endoscopically normal patients (EN), stomach wash samples in gastric cancer patients (W), and stomach wash samples in endoscopically normal patient (EW). We observed no significant differences among these groups. Methylation of Selected Markers in Gastric Neoplastic Progression Using Training and Test Sets We determined the levels of methylation of all genes in 7 gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, KatoIII, MKN7, MKN45, MKN74, Snu1 and Snu5) and compared them with normal blood DNA obtained from two healthy individuals. Methylation was determined by bisulfite-pyrosequencing, a quantitative method that yields % methylated alleles in the studied DNA (examples in supplementary figure 2 ). The first criterion for marker selection among the candidate genes was hypermethylation (>15%) in more than three of the seven cancer cell lines but a lack of methylation (?15%) in normal peripheral blood DNA. We found that 51 genes were hypermethylated in more than three of the seven cell lines (data not shown). Next, we compared the levels of methylation of the 51 genes in a test set of 13 gastric cancer tissue samples and 11 age- and sex-matched normal gastric mucosa samples ( Supplementary Table 2 ). Based on differential methylation, we selected 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1) as potential markers for the detection of gastric neoplasia. Next, we tested these 6 potential markers using an independent set of gastric neoplasia samples (test set). The results are summarized in Table 2 and Figure 1 . Methylation levels increased significantly in gastric neoplastic progression from non-neoplastic gastric mucosa tissue to normal adjacent tissue to tumors and to early gastric cancer samples for all 6 marker genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1, p < .001, according to ANOVA). When considering progressive stages, two patterns were evident: 1) type 1 markers, showing consistently high levels of methylation in both gastric dysplasia and cancer (MINT25 and GDNF); 2) type 2 markers, showing high levels of methylation in early gastric cancer and gastric dysplasia but decreased levels in advanced gastric cancer (RORA, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1). Of interest, use of the type 2 markers revealed higher methylation levels in gastric dysplasia than in advanced gastric cancer ( p < .001), which is consistent with our studies in ulcerative colitis and colon cancer 33 . Epigenetic Silencing of Selected in Gastric Cancer Cell Lines To examine the expression profile of the candidate marker genes, we initially carried out real-time PCR using cDNA from normal colon and normal stomach tissues and 7 gastric cancer cells (MKN7, MKN74, MKN45, Snu1, Snu5, AGS, KatoIII). We detected expression of GDNF, PRDM5, ADAM23, MLF1 and RORA in both normal colon and stomach tissues; conversely, we detected weak expression of these genes in gastric cancer cells, and also an inverse correlation of expression with DNA methylation level. MINT25 is an alternatively spliced form of the CABIN1 gene and was therefore not studied. Treating those 7 cell lines with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-dC restored silenced gene expression ( Supplementary Figure 3 ). DNA Methylation Levels of the 6 Genes in the Validation Set To analyze the potential of these genes in screening for gastric cancer, we tested a validation set that also included gastric washes. We first measured DNA concentrations in T, N, W, EN, and EW samples. Gastric washes consistently yielded more DNA than did tissue biopsy samples from the same patients ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). To test the quality of recovered nucleic acids, we ran the DNA on 1% agarose gels and found higher molecular weight (intact) DNA in gastric washes from some cancer patients compared to healthy controls ( supplementary Figure 5 ). DNA spectrophotometer analysis also showed better quality of DNA from washes from cancer patients. Next, we stained gastric washes and we could see both cancer cells and normal cells in the washes (cancer cells were stained by CEA). Many cells were already breaking down in the gastric washes. Finally, we tested by PCR the quality of DNA and found that it was more difficult to amplify DNA from controls than from cancer patients, especially with fragments over 200 bp ( supplementary Figure 5 ). We next measured DNA methylation levels of the six genes (MINT25, RORA, PRDM5, MLF1, ADAM23, and GDNF) by pyrosequencing analysis in 153 validation set samples: T (20), ADJ (17), W (20), EN (48), and EW (48). The Z-scores of these 6 genes were significantly different in T and EN samples ( Figure 1B ). The difference in methylation densities between T and ADJ ( p < 0.0001), as well as between W and EW ( p < 0.0001), were highest in MINT25. The methylation levels of the genes tested in T samples did not differ significantly according to sex, age, or tumor stage except that methylation levels of MLF1 and ADAM23 showed a positive correlation with age (MLF1: r =0.5, p =0.001; ADAM23: r =0.3, p =0.05). The DNA methylation densities of PRDM5 and MLF1 were significantly different between T and EN ( p < 0.0001) and between W and EW ( p < 0.0001) samples. However, the results did not show a significant difference between T and ADJ samples ( p = 0.16). Moreover, DNA methylation densities in ADJ samples were significantly higher than methylation densities in EN samples ( p < 0.0001) suggesting that these two genes are potential markers of an epigenetic field defect ( Figure 1B ). Correlations in methylation levels between biopsy (T) and gastric wash (W) are shown in Figure 2 . The methylation levels of all 6 genes were closely correlated by Spearman analysis (MINT25: r = 0.7, p = 0.001; RORA: r = 0.5, p = 0.03; PRDM5: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; MLF1: r = 0.9, p < 0.001; ADAM23: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; GDNF: r = 0.9, p < 0.001). These results demonstrated that gastric washes closely mirrored gastric biopsy results. We therefore analyzed the sensitivity and specificity of the gastric wash methylation assays statistically using single-gene and multi-gene panels. Each cutoff value was determined using ROC curves ( Figure 3 ), and sensitivity and specificity were calculated. The best results were 90% sensitivity and 96% specificity using MINT25 alone and 95% sensitivity and 92% specificity using a combination of MINT25, ADAM23, and GDNF ( Table 3 ). Six early stage gastric cancer samples were included in validation sets. Methylation in gastric washes enabled detection of these cancers in 83.3% of cases (5/6) by MINT25, 66.7% (4/6) by GDNF and 83.3% (5/6) by PRDM5. These results suggest that DNA from gastric washes can be an appropriate alternative to DNA from biopsied tissue for the determination of methylation status in gastric cancer and to screen for this deadly disease. Genetic Analysis Using Biopsy and Gastric Washes in Gastric Cancer We checked for the presence of mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the K- ras gene and in exons 4 through 10 of the p53 gene in T and W samples. No K -ras mutations were detected in codon 12 or 13 in any sample. Mutations of p53 were found in one of 20 T samples (5%) and in one of 20 W samples (5%). Both mutations were a one-base-pair deletion in exon 10 (1006delG, heterozygous), and the two samples were from the same patient. Detection of <italic>Helicobacter Pylori</italic> H. pylori requires urease protein to survive in the stomach flora because it needs protection from the acidic solution secreted by parietal cells. Therefore, we use ureA gene detection as a positive control for H. pylori . Twenty-six gastric wash samples were found to be H. pylori positive, and 42 were H. pylori negative. Of the 26 H. pylori -positive subjects, 12 were from cancer patients (12/20, 60%) and 14 were from cancer-free individuals (14/48, 29%). Also, 9 subjects were cagA positive in W samples (9/20, 45%) and 6 were cagA positive in EW samples (6/48, 13%). We did not find any correlation between ureA- or cagA -positive detection and DNA methylation.  Clinicopathologic Characteristics of Patients Clinicopathologic characteristics of training set and test set patients with gastric dysplasia, early gastric cancer, or advanced gastric cancer and age-matched controls without neoplasia are listed in Table 1A . Table 1B lists the characteristics of validation set patients; in those, samples included Tumor tissue (T), normal appearing tissue adjacent to tumors (ADJ), stomach mucosal tissue in endoscopically normal patients (EN), stomach wash samples in gastric cancer patients (W), and stomach wash samples in endoscopically normal patient (EW). We observed no significant differences among these groups.  Clinicopathologic Characteristics of Patients Clinicopathologic characteristics of training set and test set patients with gastric dysplasia, early gastric cancer, or advanced gastric cancer and age-matched controls without neoplasia are listed in Table 1A . Table 1B lists the characteristics of validation set patients; in those, samples included Tumor tissue (T), normal appearing tissue adjacent to tumors (ADJ), stomach mucosal tissue in endoscopically normal patients (EN), stomach wash samples in gastric cancer patients (W), and stomach wash samples in endoscopically normal patient (EW). We observed no significant differences among these groups.  Methylation of Selected Markers in Gastric Neoplastic Progression Using Training and Test Sets We determined the levels of methylation of all genes in 7 gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, KatoIII, MKN7, MKN45, MKN74, Snu1 and Snu5) and compared them with normal blood DNA obtained from two healthy individuals. Methylation was determined by bisulfite-pyrosequencing, a quantitative method that yields % methylated alleles in the studied DNA (examples in supplementary figure 2 ). The first criterion for marker selection among the candidate genes was hypermethylation (>15%) in more than three of the seven cancer cell lines but a lack of methylation (?15%) in normal peripheral blood DNA. We found that 51 genes were hypermethylated in more than three of the seven cell lines (data not shown). Next, we compared the levels of methylation of the 51 genes in a test set of 13 gastric cancer tissue samples and 11 age- and sex-matched normal gastric mucosa samples ( Supplementary Table 2 ). Based on differential methylation, we selected 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1) as potential markers for the detection of gastric neoplasia. Next, we tested these 6 potential markers using an independent set of gastric neoplasia samples (test set). The results are summarized in Table 2 and Figure 1 . Methylation levels increased significantly in gastric neoplastic progression from non-neoplastic gastric mucosa tissue to normal adjacent tissue to tumors and to early gastric cancer samples for all 6 marker genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1, p < .001, according to ANOVA). When considering progressive stages, two patterns were evident: 1) type 1 markers, showing consistently high levels of methylation in both gastric dysplasia and cancer (MINT25 and GDNF); 2) type 2 markers, showing high levels of methylation in early gastric cancer and gastric dysplasia but decreased levels in advanced gastric cancer (RORA, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1). Of interest, use of the type 2 markers revealed higher methylation levels in gastric dysplasia than in advanced gastric cancer ( p < .001), which is consistent with our studies in ulcerative colitis and colon cancer 33 .  Methylation of Selected Markers in Gastric Neoplastic Progression Using Training and Test Sets We determined the levels of methylation of all genes in 7 gastric cancer cell lines (AGS, KatoIII, MKN7, MKN45, MKN74, Snu1 and Snu5) and compared them with normal blood DNA obtained from two healthy individuals. Methylation was determined by bisulfite-pyrosequencing, a quantitative method that yields % methylated alleles in the studied DNA (examples in supplementary figure 2 ). The first criterion for marker selection among the candidate genes was hypermethylation (>15%) in more than three of the seven cancer cell lines but a lack of methylation (?15%) in normal peripheral blood DNA. We found that 51 genes were hypermethylated in more than three of the seven cell lines (data not shown). Next, we compared the levels of methylation of the 51 genes in a test set of 13 gastric cancer tissue samples and 11 age- and sex-matched normal gastric mucosa samples ( Supplementary Table 2 ). Based on differential methylation, we selected 6 genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1) as potential markers for the detection of gastric neoplasia. Next, we tested these 6 potential markers using an independent set of gastric neoplasia samples (test set). The results are summarized in Table 2 and Figure 1 . Methylation levels increased significantly in gastric neoplastic progression from non-neoplastic gastric mucosa tissue to normal adjacent tissue to tumors and to early gastric cancer samples for all 6 marker genes (MINT25, RORA, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1, p < .001, according to ANOVA). When considering progressive stages, two patterns were evident: 1) type 1 markers, showing consistently high levels of methylation in both gastric dysplasia and cancer (MINT25 and GDNF); 2) type 2 markers, showing high levels of methylation in early gastric cancer and gastric dysplasia but decreased levels in advanced gastric cancer (RORA, ADAM23, PRDM5 and MLF1). Of interest, use of the type 2 markers revealed higher methylation levels in gastric dysplasia than in advanced gastric cancer ( p < .001), which is consistent with our studies in ulcerative colitis and colon cancer 33 .  Epigenetic Silencing of Selected in Gastric Cancer Cell Lines To examine the expression profile of the candidate marker genes, we initially carried out real-time PCR using cDNA from normal colon and normal stomach tissues and 7 gastric cancer cells (MKN7, MKN74, MKN45, Snu1, Snu5, AGS, KatoIII). We detected expression of GDNF, PRDM5, ADAM23, MLF1 and RORA in both normal colon and stomach tissues; conversely, we detected weak expression of these genes in gastric cancer cells, and also an inverse correlation of expression with DNA methylation level. MINT25 is an alternatively spliced form of the CABIN1 gene and was therefore not studied. Treating those 7 cell lines with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-dC restored silenced gene expression ( Supplementary Figure 3 ).  Epigenetic Silencing of Selected in Gastric Cancer Cell Lines To examine the expression profile of the candidate marker genes, we initially carried out real-time PCR using cDNA from normal colon and normal stomach tissues and 7 gastric cancer cells (MKN7, MKN74, MKN45, Snu1, Snu5, AGS, KatoIII). We detected expression of GDNF, PRDM5, ADAM23, MLF1 and RORA in both normal colon and stomach tissues; conversely, we detected weak expression of these genes in gastric cancer cells, and also an inverse correlation of expression with DNA methylation level. MINT25 is an alternatively spliced form of the CABIN1 gene and was therefore not studied. Treating those 7 cell lines with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-dC restored silenced gene expression ( Supplementary Figure 3 ).  DNA Methylation Levels of the 6 Genes in the Validation Set To analyze the potential of these genes in screening for gastric cancer, we tested a validation set that also included gastric washes. We first measured DNA concentrations in T, N, W, EN, and EW samples. Gastric washes consistently yielded more DNA than did tissue biopsy samples from the same patients ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). To test the quality of recovered nucleic acids, we ran the DNA on 1% agarose gels and found higher molecular weight (intact) DNA in gastric washes from some cancer patients compared to healthy controls ( supplementary Figure 5 ). DNA spectrophotometer analysis also showed better quality of DNA from washes from cancer patients. Next, we stained gastric washes and we could see both cancer cells and normal cells in the washes (cancer cells were stained by CEA). Many cells were already breaking down in the gastric washes. Finally, we tested by PCR the quality of DNA and found that it was more difficult to amplify DNA from controls than from cancer patients, especially with fragments over 200 bp ( supplementary Figure 5 ). We next measured DNA methylation levels of the six genes (MINT25, RORA, PRDM5, MLF1, ADAM23, and GDNF) by pyrosequencing analysis in 153 validation set samples: T (20), ADJ (17), W (20), EN (48), and EW (48). The Z-scores of these 6 genes were significantly different in T and EN samples ( Figure 1B ). The difference in methylation densities between T and ADJ ( p < 0.0001), as well as between W and EW ( p < 0.0001), were highest in MINT25. The methylation levels of the genes tested in T samples did not differ significantly according to sex, age, or tumor stage except that methylation levels of MLF1 and ADAM23 showed a positive correlation with age (MLF1: r =0.5, p =0.001; ADAM23: r =0.3, p =0.05). The DNA methylation densities of PRDM5 and MLF1 were significantly different between T and EN ( p < 0.0001) and between W and EW ( p < 0.0001) samples. However, the results did not show a significant difference between T and ADJ samples ( p = 0.16). Moreover, DNA methylation densities in ADJ samples were significantly higher than methylation densities in EN samples ( p < 0.0001) suggesting that these two genes are potential markers of an epigenetic field defect ( Figure 1B ). Correlations in methylation levels between biopsy (T) and gastric wash (W) are shown in Figure 2 . The methylation levels of all 6 genes were closely correlated by Spearman analysis (MINT25: r = 0.7, p = 0.001; RORA: r = 0.5, p = 0.03; PRDM5: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; MLF1: r = 0.9, p < 0.001; ADAM23: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; GDNF: r = 0.9, p < 0.001). These results demonstrated that gastric washes closely mirrored gastric biopsy results. We therefore analyzed the sensitivity and specificity of the gastric wash methylation assays statistically using single-gene and multi-gene panels. Each cutoff value was determined using ROC curves ( Figure 3 ), and sensitivity and specificity were calculated. The best results were 90% sensitivity and 96% specificity using MINT25 alone and 95% sensitivity and 92% specificity using a combination of MINT25, ADAM23, and GDNF ( Table 3 ). Six early stage gastric cancer samples were included in validation sets. Methylation in gastric washes enabled detection of these cancers in 83.3% of cases (5/6) by MINT25, 66.7% (4/6) by GDNF and 83.3% (5/6) by PRDM5. These results suggest that DNA from gastric washes can be an appropriate alternative to DNA from biopsied tissue for the determination of methylation status in gastric cancer and to screen for this deadly disease.  DNA Methylation Levels of the 6 Genes in the Validation Set To analyze the potential of these genes in screening for gastric cancer, we tested a validation set that also included gastric washes. We first measured DNA concentrations in T, N, W, EN, and EW samples. Gastric washes consistently yielded more DNA than did tissue biopsy samples from the same patients ( Supplementary Figure 4 ). To test the quality of recovered nucleic acids, we ran the DNA on 1% agarose gels and found higher molecular weight (intact) DNA in gastric washes from some cancer patients compared to healthy controls ( supplementary Figure 5 ). DNA spectrophotometer analysis also showed better quality of DNA from washes from cancer patients. Next, we stained gastric washes and we could see both cancer cells and normal cells in the washes (cancer cells were stained by CEA). Many cells were already breaking down in the gastric washes. Finally, we tested by PCR the quality of DNA and found that it was more difficult to amplify DNA from controls than from cancer patients, especially with fragments over 200 bp ( supplementary Figure 5 ). We next measured DNA methylation levels of the six genes (MINT25, RORA, PRDM5, MLF1, ADAM23, and GDNF) by pyrosequencing analysis in 153 validation set samples: T (20), ADJ (17), W (20), EN (48), and EW (48). The Z-scores of these 6 genes were significantly different in T and EN samples ( Figure 1B ). The difference in methylation densities between T and ADJ ( p < 0.0001), as well as between W and EW ( p < 0.0001), were highest in MINT25. The methylation levels of the genes tested in T samples did not differ significantly according to sex, age, or tumor stage except that methylation levels of MLF1 and ADAM23 showed a positive correlation with age (MLF1: r =0.5, p =0.001; ADAM23: r =0.3, p =0.05). The DNA methylation densities of PRDM5 and MLF1 were significantly different between T and EN ( p < 0.0001) and between W and EW ( p < 0.0001) samples. However, the results did not show a significant difference between T and ADJ samples ( p = 0.16). Moreover, DNA methylation densities in ADJ samples were significantly higher than methylation densities in EN samples ( p < 0.0001) suggesting that these two genes are potential markers of an epigenetic field defect ( Figure 1B ). Correlations in methylation levels between biopsy (T) and gastric wash (W) are shown in Figure 2 . The methylation levels of all 6 genes were closely correlated by Spearman analysis (MINT25: r = 0.7, p = 0.001; RORA: r = 0.5, p = 0.03; PRDM5: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; MLF1: r = 0.9, p < 0.001; ADAM23: r = 0.7, p < 0.001; GDNF: r = 0.9, p < 0.001). These results demonstrated that gastric washes closely mirrored gastric biopsy results. We therefore analyzed the sensitivity and specificity of the gastric wash methylation assays statistically using single-gene and multi-gene panels. Each cutoff value was determined using ROC curves ( Figure 3 ), and sensitivity and specificity were calculated. The best results were 90% sensitivity and 96% specificity using MINT25 alone and 95% sensitivity and 92% specificity using a combination of MINT25, ADAM23, and GDNF ( Table 3 ). Six early stage gastric cancer samples were included in validation sets. Methylation in gastric washes enabled detection of these cancers in 83.3% of cases (5/6) by MINT25, 66.7% (4/6) by GDNF and 83.3% (5/6) by PRDM5. These results suggest that DNA from gastric washes can be an appropriate alternative to DNA from biopsied tissue for the determination of methylation status in gastric cancer and to screen for this deadly disease.  Discussion Gastric cancer is still a lethal disease around the world. Early detection yields the opportunity for less invasive curative treatment and may improve prognosis. Some detection tools are currently being used such as fluoroscopy, endoscopy and tumor markers, however these tools lack sensitivity and may require invasive techniques 34 . Alternatively, serum DNA methylation can be used as a marker; however it provides only a narrow range of sensitivity 35 . Using stool DNA is not useful for gastric cancer detection because of DNA damage due to stomach acidity and the length of the GI tract. Here, we have identified sensitive markers of early gastric cancer and we developed a new method of gastric cancer detection using methylation analysis of gastric washes. The use of stomach juice as a molecular diagnostic or prediction tool has been previously shown to be unfeasible because DNA is easily denatured by gastric acidity. Therefore, it is important to obtain genomic DNA from fresh cells not affected by stomach acidity. Our data show that gastric washes can yield enough DNA from shed epithelium to be used for the screening and detection of gastric cancer, and that methylation analysis in this compartment confers a high sensitivity and specificity. We found a close correlation between methylation levels in biopsy and wash samples. Our data suggest that cancer cells from the mucosal layer are easily exfoliated into gastric washes, possibly because of loosening cell-to-cell junctions, whereas the exfoliation of normal mucosal cells is limited. In addition, the success of the technique may relate to the fact that, normally, DNA recovered from gastric washes is relatively degraded. In cancer patients, a significant proportion of the DNA derives from exfoliated cells, is of larger molecular weight, less degraded through the apoptotic process, easier to amplify by PCR and therefore its methylation reflects well that of the tumors ( Supplementary Figure 5 , 6 ). Therefore, we can obtain a larger fraction of cancer cells than normal cells in the washes, even if the area of the cancer site is smaller than that of the normal mucosa. Indeed, our approach was successful despite the fact that the washes were not specifically directed at diseased parts of the stomach. These data raise the hope that gastric washes without requiring an endoscope may also be successful in cancer detection, an approach that should be tested in future trials. We identified six frequently methylated genes in gastric neoplasia that can serve as biomarkers for the disease. Methylation changes of these markers during gastric carcinogenesis is gene- and tumor stage-dependent. Of these genes, MINT25 and GDNF were stable biomarkers, as they were highly methylated in gastric tumor samples irrespective of tumor stage. The six genes were already reported to be densely methylated in gastric cancer except for GDNF 36 , 37 . For 5 genes (AMAD23, PRDM5, GDNF, RORA, MLF1), we showed correlations between expression and methylation. For MINT25, this was not shown, because it corresponds to an alternate promoter of the CABIN1 gene. Our data do not address whether these genes are functionally involved in gastric neoplasia, but this criterion is not necessary for cancer detection.. Of the genes we studied, MINT25 had the best sensitivity (90%), specificity (96%), and area under the ROC curve (0.961) in terms of tumor detection. A combination of individual genes in methylation panels could increase the performance of these markers: MINT25+ADAM23+GDNF (sensitivity: 95%, specificity: 92%, area under the ROC curve: 0.965, PPV: 0.83, NPV: 0.98). The panel of MINT25+ADAM23+GDNF had greater sensitivity than MINT25 alone ( Table 3 ); thus, it may be better for screening. It will be important to validate gene combinations in separate data sets, however. In this study, we found surprising differences in DNA methylation between different stages of gastric cancer. Dysplasia and early cancer have clearly higher methylation than normal stomach. By contrast, advanced gastric cancer show significantly lower methylation than dysplasia and early cancer for all genes except for MINT25. This paradoxical situation is strikingly similar to what we previously observed in ulcerative colitis associated colon neoplasia 33 . Rather than a decrease in methylation with disease progression, we propose that the data are consistent with separate pathways to carcinogenesis. One pathway involves intense methylation and dysplasia/carcinoma progression. We hypothesize that a distinct, more aggressive pathway characterized by lower methylation evolves rapidly to advanced cancer with little time (if any) spent at the dysplasia stage. Comparing normal adjacent tissue to tumors (ADJ) from endoscopically normal patients (EN), 2 genes (PRDM5 and MLF1) showed significant differences. PRDM5 has previously been reported to be highly methylated in primary gastric cancer 38 . In our data, its methylation appears to be a very early event. It appears likely that these 2 genes are associated with field cancerization 22 and it would be interesting to determine prospectively whether this methylation can be found in ‘at risk’ populations prior to cancer development. DNA methylation analysis can be a useful biomarker of cancer, but it is important to consider detection methods. Pyrosequencing is a cost- and time-effective assay that provides quantitative screening. This allows one to set cutoff points, which makes accurate comparisons possible, and overcomes some of the problems associated with very sensitive bisulfite DNA amplification methods. Its applicability however is limited to situations where the tissue/DNA to be studied has a high fraction of tumor cells. In summary, we identified 6 methylation markers for detection of early gastric neoplasia, two of which could be useful as markers of the field cancerization. Moreover, we have developed a new methodology for gastric cancer detection by DNA methylation analysis in gastric washes. This technology should now be tested in prospective studies for evaluation and detection of gastric cancer.  Discussion Gastric cancer is still a lethal disease around the world. Early detection yields the opportunity for less invasive curative treatment and may improve prognosis. Some detection tools are currently being used such as fluoroscopy, endoscopy and tumor markers, however these tools lack sensitivity and may require invasive techniques 34 . Alternatively, serum DNA methylation can be used as a marker; however it provides only a narrow range of sensitivity 35 . Using stool DNA is not useful for gastric cancer detection because of DNA damage due to stomach acidity and the length of the GI tract. Here, we have identified sensitive markers of early gastric cancer and we developed a new method of gastric cancer detection using methylation analysis of gastric washes. The use of stomach juice as a molecular diagnostic or prediction tool has been previously shown to be unfeasible because DNA is easily denatured by gastric acidity. Therefore, it is important to obtain genomic DNA from fresh cells not affected by stomach acidity. Our data show that gastric washes can yield enough DNA from shed epithelium to be used for the screening and detection of gastric cancer, and that methylation analysis in this compartment confers a high sensitivity and specificity. We found a close correlation between methylation levels in biopsy and wash samples. Our data suggest that cancer cells from the mucosal layer are easily exfoliated into gastric washes, possibly because of loosening cell-to-cell junctions, whereas the exfoliation of normal mucosal cells is limited. In addition, the success of the technique may relate to the fact that, normally, DNA recovered from gastric washes is relatively degraded. In cancer patients, a significant proportion of the DNA derives from exfoliated cells, is of larger molecular weight, less degraded through the apoptotic process, easier to amplify by PCR and therefore its methylation reflects well that of the tumors ( Supplementary Figure 5 , 6 ). Therefore, we can obtain a larger fraction of cancer cells than normal cells in the washes, even if the area of the cancer site is smaller than that of the normal mucosa. Indeed, our approach was successful despite the fact that the washes were not specifically directed at diseased parts of the stomach. These data raise the hope that gastric washes without requiring an endoscope may also be successful in cancer detection, an approach that should be tested in future trials. We identified six frequently methylated genes in gastric neoplasia that can serve as biomarkers for the disease. Methylation changes of these markers during gastric carcinogenesis is gene- and tumor stage-dependent. Of these genes, MINT25 and GDNF were stable biomarkers, as they were highly methylated in gastric tumor samples irrespective of tumor stage. The six genes were already reported to be densely methylated in gastric cancer except for GDNF 36 , 37 . For 5 genes (AMAD23, PRDM5, GDNF, RORA, MLF1), we showed correlations between expression and methylation. For MINT25, this was not shown, because it corresponds to an alternate promoter of the CABIN1 gene. Our data do not address whether these genes are functionally involved in gastric neoplasia, but this criterion is not necessary for cancer detection.. Of the genes we studied, MINT25 had the best sensitivity (90%), specificity (96%), and area under the ROC curve (0.961) in terms of tumor detection. A combination of individual genes in methylation panels could increase the performance of these markers: MINT25+ADAM23+GDNF (sensitivity: 95%, specificity: 92%, area under the ROC curve: 0.965, PPV: 0.83, NPV: 0.98). The panel of MINT25+ADAM23+GDNF had greater sensitivity than MINT25 alone ( Table 3 ); thus, it may be better for screening. It will be important to validate gene combinations in separate data sets, however. In this study, we found surprising differences in DNA methylation between different stages of gastric cancer. Dysplasia and early cancer have clearly higher methylation than normal stomach. By contrast, advanced gastric cancer show significantly lower methylation than dysplasia and early cancer for all genes except for MINT25. This paradoxical situation is strikingly similar to what we previously observed in ulcerative colitis associated colon neoplasia 33 . Rather than a decrease in methylation with disease progression, we propose that the data are consistent with separate pathways to carcinogenesis. One pathway involves intense methylation and dysplasia/carcinoma progression. We hypothesize that a distinct, more aggressive pathway characterized by lower methylation evolves rapidly to advanced cancer with little time (if any) spent at the dysplasia stage. Comparing normal adjacent tissue to tumors (ADJ) from endoscopically normal patients (EN), 2 genes (PRDM5 and MLF1) showed significant differences. PRDM5 has previously been reported to be highly methylated in primary gastric cancer 38 . In our data, its methylation appears to be a very early event. It appears likely that these 2 genes are associated with field cancerization 22 and it would be interesting to determine prospectively whether this methylation can be found in ‘at risk’ populations prior to cancer development. DNA methylation analysis can be a useful biomarker of cancer, but it is important to consider detection methods. Pyrosequencing is a cost- and time-effective assay that provides quantitative screening. This allows one to set cutoff points, which makes accurate comparisons possible, and overcomes some of the problems associated with very sensitive bisulfite DNA amplification methods. Its applicability however is limited to situations where the tissue/DNA to be studied has a high fraction of tumor cells. In summary, we identified 6 methylation markers for detection of early gastric neoplasia, two of which could be useful as markers of the field cancerization. Moreover, we have developed a new methodology for gastric cancer detection by DNA methylation analysis in gastric washes. This technology should now be tested in prospective studies for evaluation and detection of gastric cancer.  Supplementary Material 01 02 Supplementary Figure 1 : Histopathology. The tumors were divided into 3 categories according to the Vienna classification of gastrointestinal epithelial neoplasia: (A) category 3, non-invasive low grade neoplasia – The dysplastic glands are lined by crowded elongated cells with large hyperchromatic pseudostratified nuclei. The dysplastic cells extend to the surface epithelium. (B & C) category 4, non-invasive high grade neoplasia – The glandular structures are irregular in shape and plumper and larger nuclei with pleomorphism and loss of polarity. (D) category 5, invasive neoplasia, intramucosal carcinoma or beyond (H&E stain ×200). 03 Supplementary Figure 2 : Representative results of bisulfite pyrosequencing in 6 candidate genes. Methylation percentages of each CpG sites are indicated on the top. 04 Supplementary Figure 3 : Comparison of DNA quantity obtained in different categories of samples. T: genomic DNA from endoscopic biopsies at tumor site in gastric cancer patients, ADJ: genomic DNA from adjacent non-tumor tissue obtained by biopsy in gastric cancer patients, W: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained in gastric cancer patients, EN: genomic DNA from normal gastric mucosa obtained by biopsy in 48 cancer free individuals, and EW: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained endoscopically in 48 cancer free individuals. (* p <.0001). 05 Supplementary Figure 4: Gene expression. The expression profile of 5 genes (ADAM23, PRDM5, GDNF, RORA, MLF1) as determined by quantitative PCR is shown, along with effects of 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) in 7 gastric cancer cells. 06 Supplementary Figure 5: Comparison of DNA quality obtained in different categories of samples. T: genomic DNA from endoscopic biopsies at tumor site in gastric cancer patients, ADJ: genomic DNA from adjacent non-tumor tissue obtained by biopsy in gastric cancer patients, W: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained in gastric cancer patients, EN: genomic DNA from normal gastric mucosa obtained by biopsy in 48 cancer free individuals, and EW: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained endoscopically in 48 cancer free individuals. (* p <.005) 07 Supplementary Figure 6: Cytological features of gastric washes. A and B panels show papanicolaou staining, C and D panels show carcinoembryonic antigen staining.  Supplementary Material 01 02 Supplementary Figure 1 : Histopathology. The tumors were divided into 3 categories according to the Vienna classification of gastrointestinal epithelial neoplasia: (A) category 3, non-invasive low grade neoplasia – The dysplastic glands are lined by crowded elongated cells with large hyperchromatic pseudostratified nuclei. The dysplastic cells extend to the surface epithelium. (B & C) category 4, non-invasive high grade neoplasia – The glandular structures are irregular in shape and plumper and larger nuclei with pleomorphism and loss of polarity. (D) category 5, invasive neoplasia, intramucosal carcinoma or beyond (H&E stain ×200). 03 Supplementary Figure 2 : Representative results of bisulfite pyrosequencing in 6 candidate genes. Methylation percentages of each CpG sites are indicated on the top. 04 Supplementary Figure 3 : Comparison of DNA quantity obtained in different categories of samples. T: genomic DNA from endoscopic biopsies at tumor site in gastric cancer patients, ADJ: genomic DNA from adjacent non-tumor tissue obtained by biopsy in gastric cancer patients, W: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained in gastric cancer patients, EN: genomic DNA from normal gastric mucosa obtained by biopsy in 48 cancer free individuals, and EW: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained endoscopically in 48 cancer free individuals. (* p <.0001). 05 Supplementary Figure 4: Gene expression. The expression profile of 5 genes (ADAM23, PRDM5, GDNF, RORA, MLF1) as determined by quantitative PCR is shown, along with effects of 5-aza-2?-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) in 7 gastric cancer cells. 06 Supplementary Figure 5: Comparison of DNA quality obtained in different categories of samples. T: genomic DNA from endoscopic biopsies at tumor site in gastric cancer patients, ADJ: genomic DNA from adjacent non-tumor tissue obtained by biopsy in gastric cancer patients, W: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained in gastric cancer patients, EN: genomic DNA from normal gastric mucosa obtained by biopsy in 48 cancer free individuals, and EW: genomic DNA from gastric washes obtained endoscopically in 48 cancer free individuals. (* p <.005) 07 Supplementary Figure 6: Cytological features of gastric washes. A and B panels show papanicolaou staining, C and D panels show carcinoembryonic antigen staining.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Methylation in gastric cancer. Methylation levels of 6 genes (MINT25, RORAa, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5, and MLF1) was measured by bisulfite pyrosequencing and normalized by the Z-score method. (A) Results of individual genes in the test set. (B) Results of individual genes in the validation set. EGC, early gastric cancer; AGC, advanced gastric cancer; GD, gastric dysplasia; NGM, non-neoplastic gastric mucosa; T, Tumor tissue in gastric cancer patient; ADJ, normal adjacent tissue to tumors; W, stomach wash sample in gastric cancer patient; EN, stomach mucosal tissue in endoscopically normal patient, EW, stomach wash sample in endoscopically normal patient. (* p <0.05) Figure 2 Correlation of methylation levels between tumor and gastric washes samples. Shown are Spearman correlation coefficients r and p values. Lines show linear regression models. Figure 3 Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for methylation based detection of gastric cancer. Z-score of DNA methylation in test (A) and validation sets (B) were plotted using the top 4 candidate genes in each (test set, MINT25, RORAa, GDNF, ADAM23; validation set, MINT25, ADAM23, PRDM5, GDNF). Table 1 Clinicopathological characteristics of patients and controls studied. A. Test set Nonneoplastic (N=22) Dysplasias (N=40) Early cancer (N=48) Advanced cancer (N=43) Age (Mean(SD)) * Years 61 (14) 65 (8) 63 (12) 60 (11) Sex * Male 18 31 35 32 Female 4 9 13 11 Location Proximal ** 1 4 14 22 Distal ** 21 36 34 21 Endoscopic findings Protruded - 5 2 - Flat - 33 11 - Depressed - 2 35 - Bormann type 1 - - - 3 Bormann type 2 - - - 12 Bormann type 3 - - - 25 Bormann type 4 - - - 3 Histological grades Low grade dysplasia - 19 - - High grade dysplasia - 21 - - Differentiation Well or moderate - - 25 10 Poorly or signet-ring cell type - - 23 33 Lauren classification Intestinal - - 40 30 Diffuse - - 8 13 B. Validation set (Gastric washes) Nonneoplastic (N=48) Gastric cancer (N=20) Age (Mean(SD)) ** * Years 66 (20) 65 (18) Sex ** * Male 20 13 Female 28 7 Location Proximal ** - 11 Distal ** - 9 <20mm in tumor size - 4 Lauren classification Intestinal - 10 Diffuse - 10 UICC Clinical Stage Stage I - 6 Stage II - 4 Stage III - 9 Stage IV - 1 * , Mean age and gender were not different among 4 groups; ** , Proximal, cardia, fundus and body; Distal, angle and antrum. Table 2 Methylation status of the six differentially methylated markers according to gastric neoplastic progression. Gene Methylation (%) NGM (N=22) ADJ (N=64) GD (N=40) EGC (N=48) AGC (N=43) Cut-off a P value b MINT25 Mean c 5.9 (2.7–9) 16.7 (7.2–26.3) 67.4 e (57.2–77.5) 58.6 e (45.3–71.8) 60.3 e (49.9–70.7) 17.2 <.001 Frequency c 6.7 23.3 89.7 77.8 84.4 RORAa Mean c 6.4 (5.3–7.6) 9.7 d (7.4–12.0) 36.8 e (31.7–41.9) 32.4 e (26.1–38.7) 17.6 (13.0–22.1) 11.6 <.001 Frequency c 0 23 92.5 83.3 58.1 GDNF Mean c 9.7 (7.9–11.6) 16.6 d (13.1–20.1) 35.4 e (29.2–41.5) 39.8 e (33.8–45.9) 27 e (22.0–32.0) 17.9 <.001 Frequency c 4.5 31.6 76.3 84.8 74.4 ADAM23 Mean c 2.8 (1.2–4.4) 10.1 d (4.9–15.4) 38.7 e (31.0–46.4) 27.4 e (18.0–36.7) 19.3 (12.0–26.5) 10.2 <.001 Frequency c 9.5 18.3 89.7 54.5 48.8 PRDM5 Mean c 25.1 (18.4–31.7) 31.8 (24.9–38.8) 74.3 e (64.5–84.1) 59.4 e (48.2–70.6) 38.8 (29.3–48.2) 52.6 <.001 Frequency c 0 25.5 85.3 63.6 33.3 MLF1 Mean c 11 (8.2–13.7) 14.2 (11.8–16.6) 35.8 e (29.2–42.3) 26.5 e (19.9–33.0) 19.4 (14.9–23.9) 23.5 <.001 Frequency c 4.5 16.7 67.5 50 41.9 a The cutoff value for the seven hypermethylated genes was determined according to the mean methylation level of each gene + two SDs. b The methylation levels in the five groups were compared using ANOVA. c % methylation level with 95% CI and frequency. d Significantly different from nonneoplastic gastric mucosa in t-test (P < .05). e Significantly different from nonneoplastic gastric mucosa in Tukey’s multiple comparisons (P < .05). ADJ, normal-appearing gastric mucosa adjacent to gastric cancer. EGC, early gastric cancer; AGC, advanced gastric cancer; GD, gastric dysplasia; NGM, non-neoplastic gastric mucosa. Table 3 Performance of genes markers for the detection of gastric neoplasia SE, standard error. PPV, positive predictive value. NPV, negative predictive value. W gastric wash in cancer patients. EW, gastric wash in cancer free controls. A: Test Set (Cancer vs. Normal) Neoplasm Normal Marker Area (S.E.) Cut off (z-score) Positive Total Positive Total Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%) PPV NPV MINT25 0.943 (0.025) ?0.4541 75 88 1 15 84.1 90.9 0.99 0.52 RORAa 0.887 (0.026) ?0.7135 114 131 8 22 83.2 86.4 0.93 0.45 GDNF 0.884 (0.027) ?0.4911 104 127 2 22 81.9 90.9 0.98 0.47 ADAM23 0.812 (0.036) ?0.7876 83 126 2 20 65.9 90.0 0.98 0.30 PRDM5 0.754 (0.042) 0.5094 68 106 1 19 64.2 94.7 0.99 0.32 MLF1 0.727 (0.040) ?0.4170 81 131 4 22 61.8 81.8 0.95 0.26 B. Validation set (Gastric washes in cancer patients vs controls) W EW Variable Area (S.E.) Cut off (z-score) Positive Total Positive Total Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%) PPV NPV MINT25 0.961 (0.025) 0.0571 18 20 2 48 90.0 95.8 0.90 0.96 RORAa 0.707 (0.076) ?0.4213 11 19 7 48 60.0 85.4 0.61 0.84 GDNF 0.740 (0.083) 0.0285 13 20 5 47 65.0 89.6 0.72 0.86 ADAM23 0.864 (0.047) ?0.4949 13 19 8 48 70.0 83.3 0.62 0.87 PRDM5 0.827 (0.054) 0.0939 13 20 3 48 65.0 93.7 0.81 0.87 MLF1 0.678 (0.089) 0.2411 12 20 7 48 60.0 85.4 0.63 0.84 MINT25 + PRDM5 + ADAM23 0.963 (0.020) ?0.6015 18 20 4 48 90.0 91.7 0.82 0.96 MINT25 + ADAM23 + GDNF 0.965 (0.020) ?0.8141 19 20 4 48 95.0 91.7 0.83 0.98  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Methylation in gastric cancer. Methylation levels of 6 genes (MINT25, RORAa, GDNF, ADAM23, PRDM5, and MLF1) was measured by bisulfite pyrosequencing and normalized by the Z-score method. (A) Results of individual genes in the test set. (B) Results of individual genes in the validation set. EGC, early gastric cancer; AGC, advanced gastric cancer; GD, gastric dysplasia; NGM, non-neoplastic gastric mucosa; T, Tumor tissue in gastric cancer patient; ADJ, normal adjacent tissue to tumors; W, stomach wash sample in gastric cancer patient; EN, stomach mucosal tissue in endoscopically normal patient, EW, stomach wash sample in endoscopically normal patient. (* p <0.05) Figure 2 Correlation of methylation levels between tumor and gastric washes samples. Shown are Spearman correlation coefficients r and p values. Lines show linear regression models. Figure 3 Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for methylation based detection of gastric cancer. Z-score of DNA methylation in test (A) and validation sets (B) were plotted using the top 4 candidate genes in each (test set, MINT25, RORAa, GDNF, ADAM23; validation set, MINT25, ADAM23, PRDM5, GDNF). Table 1 Clinicopathological characteristics of patients and controls studied. A. Test set Nonneoplastic (N=22) Dysplasias (N=40) Early cancer (N=48) Advanced cancer (N=43) Age (Mean(SD)) * Years 61 (14) 65 (8) 63 (12) 60 (11) Sex * Male 18 31 35 32 Female 4 9 13 11 Location Proximal ** 1 4 14 22 Distal ** 21 36 34 21 Endoscopic findings Protruded - 5 2 - Flat - 33 11 - Depressed - 2 35 - Bormann type 1 - - - 3 Bormann type 2 - - - 12 Bormann type 3 - - - 25 Bormann type 4 - - - 3 Histological grades Low grade dysplasia - 19 - - High grade dysplasia - 21 - - Differentiation Well or moderate - - 25 10 Poorly or signet-ring cell type - - 23 33 Lauren classification Intestinal - - 40 30 Diffuse - - 8 13 B. Validation set (Gastric washes) Nonneoplastic (N=48) Gastric cancer (N=20) Age (Mean(SD)) ** * Years 66 (20) 65 (18) Sex ** * Male 20 13 Female 28 7 Location Proximal ** - 11 Distal ** - 9 <20mm in tumor size - 4 Lauren classification Intestinal - 10 Diffuse - 10 UICC Clinical Stage Stage I - 6 Stage II - 4 Stage III - 9 Stage IV - 1 * , Mean age and gender were not different among 4 groups; ** , Proximal, cardia, fundus and body; Distal, angle and antrum. Table 2 Methylation status of the six differentially methylated markers according to gastric neoplastic progression. Gene Methylation (%) NGM (N=22) ADJ (N=64) GD (N=40) EGC (N=48) AGC (N=43) Cut-off a P value b MINT25 Mean c 5.9 (2.7–9) 16.7 (7.2–26.3) 67.4 e (57.2–77.5) 58.6 e (45.3–71.8) 60.3 e (49.9–70.7) 17.2 <.001 Frequency c 6.7 23.3 89.7 77.8 84.4 RORAa Mean c 6.4 (5.3–7.6) 9.7 d (7.4–12.0) 36.8 e (31.7–41.9) 32.4 e (26.1–38.7) 17.6 (13.0–22.1) 11.6 <.001 Frequency c 0 23 92.5 83.3 58.1 GDNF Mean c 9.7 (7.9–11.6) 16.6 d (13.1–20.1) 35.4 e (29.2–41.5) 39.8 e (33.8–45.9) 27 e (22.0–32.0) 17.9 <.001 Frequency c 4.5 31.6 76.3 84.8 74.4 ADAM23 Mean c 2.8 (1.2–4.4) 10.1 d (4.9–15.4) 38.7 e (31.0–46.4) 27.4 e (18.0–36.7) 19.3 (12.0–26.5) 10.2 <.001 Frequency c 9.5 18.3 89.7 54.5 48.8 PRDM5 Mean c 25.1 (18.4–31.7) 31.8 (24.9–38.8) 74.3 e (64.5–84.1) 59.4 e (48.2–70.6) 38.8 (29.3–48.2) 52.6 <.001 Frequency c 0 25.5 85.3 63.6 33.3 MLF1 Mean c 11 (8.2–13.7) 14.2 (11.8–16.6) 35.8 e (29.2–42.3) 26.5 e (19.9–33.0) 19.4 (14.9–23.9) 23.5 <.001 Frequency c 4.5 16.7 67.5 50 41.9 a The cutoff value for the seven hypermethylated genes was determined according to the mean methylation level of each gene + two SDs. b The methylation levels in the five groups were compared using ANOVA. c % methylation level with 95% CI and frequency. d Significantly different from nonneoplastic gastric mucosa in t-test (P < .05). e Significantly different from nonneoplastic gastric mucosa in Tukey’s multiple comparisons (P < .05). ADJ, normal-appearing gastric mucosa adjacent to gastric cancer. EGC, early gastric cancer; AGC, advanced gastric cancer; GD, gastric dysplasia; NGM, non-neoplastic gastric mucosa. Table 3 Performance of genes markers for the detection of gastric neoplasia SE, standard error. PPV, positive predictive value. NPV, negative predictive value. W gastric wash in cancer patients. EW, gastric wash in cancer free controls. A: Test Set (Cancer vs. Normal) Neoplasm Normal Marker Area (S.E.) Cut off (z-score) Positive Total Positive Total Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%) PPV NPV MINT25 0.943 (0.025) ?0.4541 75 88 1 15 84.1 90.9 0.99 0.52 RORAa 0.887 (0.026) ?0.7135 114 131 8 22 83.2 86.4 0.93 0.45 GDNF 0.884 (0.027) ?0.4911 104 127 2 22 81.9 90.9 0.98 0.47 ADAM23 0.812 (0.036) ?0.7876 83 126 2 20 65.9 90.0 0.98 0.30 PRDM5 0.754 (0.042) 0.5094 68 106 1 19 64.2 94.7 0.99 0.32 MLF1 0.727 (0.040) ?0.4170 81 131 4 22 61.8 81.8 0.95 0.26 B. Validation set (Gastric washes in cancer patients vs controls) W EW Variable Area (S.E.) Cut off (z-score) Positive Total Positive Total Sensitivity (%) Specificity (%) PPV NPV MINT25 0.961 (0.025) 0.0571 18 20 2 48 90.0 95.8 0.90 0.96 RORAa 0.707 (0.076) ?0.4213 11 19 7 48 60.0 85.4 0.61 0.84 GDNF 0.740 (0.083) 0.0285 13 20 5 47 65.0 89.6 0.72 0.86 ADAM23 0.864 (0.047) ?0.4949 13 19 8 48 70.0 83.3 0.62 0.87 PRDM5 0.827 (0.054) 0.0939 13 20 3 48 65.0 93.7 0.81 0.87 MLF1 0.678 (0.089) 0.2411 12 20 7 48 60.0 85.4 0.63 0.84 MINT25 + PRDM5 + ADAM23 0.963 (0.020) ?0.6015 18 20 4 48 90.0 91.7 0.82 0.96 MINT25 + ADAM23 + GDNF 0.965 (0.020) ?0.8141 19 20 4 48 95.0 91.7 0.83 0.98 