DNA methylation changes in prostate cancer: current developments and future clinical implementation Promoter hypermethylation is associated with loss of expression of tumor suppressor genes in cancer. Currently, several genome-wide technologies are available and have been utilized to examine the extent of DNA methylation in discovery-based studies involving several physiological and disease states. Although early in the process, aberrant DNA methylation is gaining strength in the fields of cancer risk assessment, diagnosis, and therapy monitoring in different cancer types. There is a need to improve existing methods for early diagnosis of prostate cancer (CaP) and to identify men at risk for developing aggressive disease. Because of the ubiquity of DNA methylation changes and the ability to detect methylated DNA in several body fluids (blood, urine), this specifically altered DNA may serve, on the one hand, as a possible new screening marker for CaP and, on the other hand, as a tool for therapy monitoring in patients having had neoplastic disease of the prostate. As many CaP patients present with advanced disease or some of the men with non-specific elevation of PSA without CaP, early detection with high-specificity and sensitivity to be one of the most important approaches to reduce mortality and unwanted tension of the men with high PSA. Therefore, an effective screening test would have substantial clinical benefits. Furthermore, methylation markers of risk of progression of disease in patients having CaP permits immediate commencement of specific treatment regimens and probably longer survival and better quality of life. This review illustrates the current benefits and limitations of potentially useful CaP methylation markers that have considerable existing data and touches upon other future markers as well as the field of methylation in CaP.  DNA METHYLATION ANALYSIS IN CLINICAL SAMPLES: CURRENTLY AVAILABLE METHODS Differences in methylation patterns have also emerged as markers( 81 ).. For example, differences between tumor and normal cells can be used to detect the presence of tumor cells in biopsy specimens or to identify tumor-derived DNA in blood samples ( 22 , 23 , 27 - 33 , 53 , 82 - 85 ). Differences in methylation patterns among tumors can be associated with patient outcome or other clinical responses, and can be used as markers to classify tumors. For these uses, methylation does not necessarily have to induce gene silencing, but simply be specific to tumor cells or have a pattern that is associated with clinically important information. Assays for methylation are appealing for translational research since they can utilize amplification techniques, such as methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and thereby utilize small amounts of samples. Due to its relative simplicity, safety, and sensitivity, methylation-specific PCR is the most commonly employed method for methylation analysis ( 86 ). Table 2 summarizes recent techniques that are evaluated in bodily fluids for prostate cancer detection. Table 3 showed recent findings of methylation of different gene or panel of genes as a prognostic marker. A brief outline of some the most promising techniques use for methylation analysis is described below: Conventional Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) The conventional MSP assay uses two sets of primers specifically designed to amplify the methylated or unmethylated sequence, and the PCR products are run in a gel( 86 ). Bisulfite-modified DNA are use as a template for PCR ( 86 ). The results of MSP at a particular DNA region are simply reported as methylated or unmethylated, not allowing quantitation or identification of partial methylation. The advantages of this method include a simple PCR based technique and can be perform any molecular biology laboratory, short time of analysis, the possibility of obtaining results from small amounts of DNA, specificity provided by primers and a significant sensitivity; methylation is detected even when only 0.1% of alleles are methylated. Additional drawbacks of this method, similarly to other PCR techniques, are connected with the possibility of contamination of the analyzed sample and obtaining false-positive results ( 86 , 87 ). It is not automated and the interpretation of the data may be subjective. MS-nested-PCR It is a modified version of conventional MSP that involve a double-stage PCR ( 88 ). During the first step, the applied primers (primer with no CpG) recognized templates modified by sodium bisulfite, but they do not differentiate methylated sequences from unmethylated ones. Reaction products are diluted and amplified with two pairs of internal primers, one of them is specific for the methylated sequence and the other for the unmethylated one. The nested-PCR reaction increases the method’s sensitivity to 105, which made it possible to detect DNA methylation in saliva samples collected from patients with small cell lung cancer ( 89 ). Althoughnested-MSP are simple techniques that can easily be incorporated in most molecular biology laboratories, the ability to accurately determine the promoter methylation status of genes largely depends upon the careful design of MSP primers as well as other steps. The chances of contamination increase due to increasing number of PCR. This technique allow the analysis of individual (nested-MSP) or multiple (multiplex nested-MSP) promoters in samples with low quantity (e.g., macrodissected specimens) and/or quality (e.g., paraffin-embedded samples) ( 90 , 91 ). This strategy is particularly attractive for assessing the methylation status of gene promoters in archival specimens for which clinical outcome (e.g., response to treatment, survival) is known ( 92 ) as well as for sensitive molecular detection ( 82 ). For prostate cancer these strategies can be useful for performing methylation profiling of large number of genes where only small of DNA are available like prostate intraepithelial neoplasia. This modified technique can also be use for the development of non-invasive assay (screening tool) using serum or urine DNA of high-risk man. Quantitative analysis of methylated alleles (QAMA) This technique is a newer version of Real-Time PCR, which applies TaqMan probes based on groove binder (MGB) technology. There are two types of probes: specific for methylated and unmethylated sequences, which is achieved by means of using different fluorescent dyes (VIC and FAM) ( 106 , 107 ). The method is single stage, it ensures a high efficiency of methylation evaluation and the assessment of methylated and unmethylated sequences during one reaction, and it shortens significantly the time of analysis and diminishes the probability of contamination. Mutations and polymorphous sequences may hinder probes binding. The probes recognize only completely methylated or unmethylated sequences, which makes it impossible to analyze partially methylated areas ( 107 ). Quantitative Methylation specific PCR (QMSP) In this assay also bisulfite-modified DNA are use as a template for fluorescence-based real-time PCR, as previously described( 12 , 23 , 25 , 26 ) ( 108 ). QMSP is based on continuous monitoring of a progressive fluorogenic PCR by an optical system. Specific primers are designed to incorporate the CpG sites in order to detect the methylated form of the gene promoter, as described previously ( 86 ). QMSP is a variation which adds the use of a fluorescent probe across the CpG rich regions to add specificity ( 109 ). The probe is labeled with two fluorescent dyes: one serves as a reporter on the 5?-end (FAM), and its emission spectra is quenched by a second fluorescent dye on the 3?-end (TAMRA), when the two dyes are in close proximity. During the extension phase of the PCR, the 5? to 3? exonuclease activity of the Taq DNA polymerase cleaves the reporter from the probe, thus releasing it from the quencher, leading to fluorescence. If amplification occurs, this reaction results in an exponential increase in the fluorescent emission of the reporter dye and is monitored during the PCR process. ?-actin (ACTB) is amplified in conjunction as a representative housekeeping gene to which the genes of interest are normalized, thus leading to a semi-quantitative result. This is important to ensure that there is a significant degree of methylation within sample, and not just trace amounts or contamination. The Fluorogenic amplification reactions are carried out usually in triplicate in a volume of 20 ?L that contained 3 ?L of bisulfite-modified DNA; 600 nM concentrations of forward and reverse primers; 200 nM probe; 5 U of platinum Taq polymerase (Invitrogen); 200 ?M concentrations each of dATP, dCTP, and dGTP; 200 ?M dTTP; and 5.5 mM MgCl2. Fluorogenic probes were custom synthesized by PE Applied Biosystems. PCR primers were synthesized by Life Technologies (Gaithersburg, MD).Thermal cycling was initiated with a first denaturation step of 95° C for 10 min. The thermal profile for the PCR is 95°C for 15 s, 60° C(varies depending on gene and primer sequences) for 30 s and 72° C for 1 min. Data obtained following 50 cycles of amplification were analyzed. The later is just an example. Due to changing in technology and new enzyme and buffers, the PCR conditions are modified according to the investigator preference and the region of the genome to be amplified. Amplification reactions were usually carried out in 384-well plates in a 7900 sequence detector (Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems) and are analyzed by a sequence detector system (SDS 2.2.1; Applied Biosystems). Each plate included patient DNA samples, positive (in vitro methylated leukocyte DNA) and negative (normal leukocyte DNA or DNA from a known unmethylated cell line) controls, and multiple water blanks. Leukocyte DNA from a healthy individual was methylated in vitro with excess SssI methyltransferase (New England Biolabs Inc., Beverly, MA) to generate completely methylated DNA. This enzyme adds methyl-groups to all CpG dinucleotides within the genomic DNA. Thus, in vitro methylated DNA is 100% positive for gene of interest promoter methylation after sodium-bisulfite treatment. Serial dilutions (90–0.009 ng) of this in vitro methylated DNA are used to construct a calibration curve for each plate. All samples should be within the assay’s range of sensitivity and reproducibility based on amplification of internal reference standard (threshold cycle [CT] value for ACTB of 40). The relative level of methylated DNA for each gene in each sample is determined as a ratio of methylation specific PCR-amplified gene to ACTB (reference gene) and then multiplied by 1000 for easier tabulation (average value of triplicates of gene of interest divided by the average value of triplicates of ACTB x 1000). The samples are categorized as unmethylated or methylated based on the sensitivity of the assay. The QMSP assay provides several distinct advantages over conventional MSP: ( a ) omission of all of the post-amplification steps reduces the risk of contamination and increases the throughput of the system; ( b ) the assay is more stringent and more specific because in addition to the two PCR primers, the fluorescent-labeled hybridization probe has to anneal correctly between the two primers; ( c ) the assay is quantitative, automated, and readily adaptable to clinical setting and screening studies; and ( d ) the assay is amenable to multiplex amplification for the analysis of panels in clinical samples. At present, we can use four different dyes for the amplification of four distinct markers, but further developments in dye chemistry will improve the multi-marker diagnostic approach (presently, we can use four different dyes in Taqman technology) from nanogram quantities of low molecular weight DNA. These advances are unlikely to follow in conventional MSP. Quantification of DNA methylation differences at specific sites using MS-SNuPE Single-nucleotide primer extension is a well-established method which has been successfully used for the detection of gene mutations ( 110 ) and for the quantitation of allele specific expression ( 111 - 113 ). MSSNuPE relies on single nucleotide primer extension to assess DNA methylation at a specific cytosine ( 114 ). An initial round of PCR is carried out using bisulfite DNA-specific primers, followed by a second PCR step in which radio-labeled dCTP and dTTP and an internal primer which terminates precisely 5? of the single nucleotide whose methylation status is to be determined are added. The radio-labeled products are then run on a 15% polyacrylamide gel under denaturing conditions and by visualized via exposure to an auto-radiographic film or a phosphor-image screen. The intensity of the observed bands can be then quantified to determine the proportion of C/T at the cytosine of interest. MS-SNuPE can be carried out in multiplex reactions, allowing for the quantification of more than a single CpG site per assay. MS-SNuPE is a viable alternative when sensitive quantitation of a single or few CpG sites is desired and small amounts of DNA are available. Heavy-Methyl: PCR amplification of methylated DNA using methylation-specific oligonucleotide blockers This is an innovative real-time variant of the MSPCR assay ( 86 ), which, because of its unique design, allows for the detection of methylated sequences at remarkably low concentration in a DNA mixture with high specificity ( 115 ). In this technique, the PCR priming is methylation specific, but the high specificity of the assay stems from the use of non-extendable oligo-nucleotide blockers. The blockers are designed to bind to the bisulfite-treated DNA template in a methylation-dependent manner and their binding sites are selected so as to overlap with the 3? primer binding sites. Using primers specific for GSTP1, Heavy Methyl has been successfully used to detect 30 pg of in vitro methylated and bisulfite-treated DNA in a background of 50 ng unmethylated DNA ( 115 ). The high sensitivity of Heavy Methyl makes it suitable for clinical applications, such as the analysis of DNA methylation in serum, where the amount of non-cell bound free-floating DNA in healthy patients is estimated at 10–50 ng/ml ( 116 , 117 ). An interesting feature of Heavy-Methyl is that it can be adapted for qualitative as well as quantitative analysis of DNA methylation. It is important to note that Heavy-Methyl requires more components and potentially more optimization than conventional MS-PCR, which has been used with high sensitivity and specificity for a large number of genes. Thus, Heavy-Methyl could provide an attractive technical alternative when convention MS-PCR is unsuitable for the goal of a given research endeavor. Quantitative bisulfite sequencing using the pyrosequencing technology Pyrosequencing is a sequence-by-synthesis approach that is based on the luminometric detection of pyrophosphate release following nucleotide incorporation ( 118 , 119 ). Depending on the chemistry used, a three-to four-enzyme cascade converts the released pyrophosphate to ATP, which is immediately hydrolyzed to produce light. Since a single known nucleotide is added sequentially in each step, the obtained. One advantage of this method is that quantification can be achieved using SYBR Green I, which eliminates the need for fluorescently labeled probes, thus reducing the overall cost of the assay. Furthermore, given the widespread use of SYBR Green I in conventional real-time PCR assays, this technique could provide a suitable initial approach to DNA methylation analysis for researchers without prior experience in the DNA methylation field. However, as is the case with other PCR-based techniques described, careful primer design and optimization of the PCR reaction are critical to ensure the detection of the intended target sequence. Prostate cancer-specific methylation markers in bodily fluids for early detection Cancer is a disease initiated and driven by the clonal evolution of cells transformed by genetic and epigenetic alterations, which can occur as either inherited (germline) mutations or acquired (somatic) mutations of key genes( 120 ). Methylation, a epigenetic alterations (promoter methylation) can be used as targets for the detection of tumor cells in clinical specimens such as tissue biopsies or body fluids such as serum and plasma ( Figure 1 ). SERUM A potential cancer biomarker, cell-free circulating DNA, was already discovered in 1977 ( 121 ). Cancer patients have distinctly increased levels of cell-free DNA in comparison to healthy individuals and patients with non-malignant disorders ( 122 ). Although the assessment of cell-free DNA concentrations in serum/plasma is useful to identify patients with malignant disease, it was suggested that qualitative changes (i.e., presence of cancer-specific DNA alterations) provide the most accurate diagnostic information ( 123 ). One of the earliest and most common somatic alterations in CaP is DNA CpG island (CGI) hypermethylation. For instance, CGI hypermethylation at the GSTP1 promoter was detected in approximately 80% of PCA tissues ( 124 , 125 ). The use of two or more methylated genes even increased diagnostic accuracy (e.g. “GSTP1 and PTGS2”: sensitivity and specificity to 96–100%) ( 53 , 63 ). Previous studies reported detection of hypermethylated DNA in serum and plasma of CaP patients: GSTP1 hypermethylation was detected in 12–30% of patients with metastatic disease ( 33 , 105 ), and nearly in 100% of patients with metastatic PCA ( 83 , 105 ). The presence of hypermethylated GSTP1 DNA fragments in serum was the strongest independent predictor of early PSA recurrence in patients undergoing radical prostatectomy for clinically localized CaP ( 105 ). Previous studies analyzing serum/plasma DNA focused on the detection of CGI hypermethylation at a single gene site in clinically localized CaP ( 33 , 83 , 105 , 126 ). We are continuously discovering cancer-specific methylated gene by discovery approach ( 18 ). These genes are being tested for clinical utility such as diagnosis, prognosis etc. Specificity of methylation markers for diagnosis is depended on the compartment of the body. As for examples some methylation marker may be 100% specific for prostate cancer testing the serum. However, this marker may be terribly non-specific when urine is tested. Some methylation markers tested by our group and others have strong promise for developing screening tools using serum/plasma DNA. URINE As mentioned above, methylation of deoxycytidine residues within CpG islands in the upstream regulatory regions of a number of genes occurs in a very high percentage of prostate cancers and is not found to any significant extent in normal prostate tissues in most studies. Therefore, a number of groups ( 12 , 33 , 83 , 84 , 94 , 127 ) have attempted to improve on the ability of serum PSA to predict a positive biopsy using methylation analysis of several cancer related genes in the urine and a number of these studies have been reviewed( 128 , 129 ). These studies have identified DNA methylation markers in the urine of men with prostate cancer as the basis for a confirmatorytest. Cairns et al.( 94 ) reported that, when patients had methylation of GSTP1 detected in their tumor, 27% of cases were positive for DNA methylation in voided urine specimens. Jeronimo et al.( 33 ) later showed sensitivity in urine of 23%. Gonzalgo et al.( 84 ) demonstrated that GSTP1 methylation could be detected in the post-biopsy urine specimens of 39% of patients with prostate cancer. Rogers et al.( 127 ) later demonstrated a high concordance between post-biopsy and post-DRE urinary samples for methylation of GSTP1 , APC , and EDNRB . Goessl et al.( 93 ) demonstrated a sensitivity of 73% at a specificity of 98% in urine sediments collected after prostate massage. Additional markers could potentially increase the sensitivity. For example, more recently, we found that a combination of CDKN2A (formerly p16 ), PSCD2 (formerly ARF ), MGMT , and GSTP1 could theoretically enable the detection of 87% of prostate cancers at 100% specificity( 12 ). In that study, GSTP1 alone demonstrated a sensitivity of 48% at a specificity of 100%. A study by Roupret et al.( 95 ) examined GSTP1 , RARB , APC , and RASSF1 . The authors found a sensitivity of 86% at a specificity of 89%; however, they used a 1-min prostate massage and bladder catheterization, which would hinder widespread adoption. One of the first studies using DNA-based tests was by Goessl et al( 83 )who used MSP to detect GSTP1 hypermethylation in bodily fluids. Although GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation was not detectable in prostate tissue and bodily fluids from patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia, these authors reported that methylation was detected in 94% of tumors (16 of 17), 72% of plasma or serum samples (23 of 32), 50% of ejaculate (4 of 8), and 36% of urine (4 of 11) from patients with prostate cancer. Additionally, MSP identified circulating tumor cells in 30% (10 of 33) of prostate cancer patients. Goessl et al ( 93 ) also used MSP to detect GSTP1 hypermethylation in urine sediments from patients after prostate massage and found an overall sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 98%, although some of these patients had advanced prostate cancer. Roupre’t et al ( 95 )recently used a 10 gene MSP approach in which urine samples were obtained from 95 consecutive radical prostatectomy patients and from 38 age-matched males (controls) with no history of genitourinary malignancy, negative prostate biopsies, and with or without benign prostatic hyperplasia. Radical prostatectomy patients underwent prostate massage and the first urine stream was then collected. The authors reported a sensitivity of 86% and a specificity of 89% for the 10 gene panel. Results of another very recent study have been reported by Woodson et al( 96 ) in which 100 men were referred for prostate needle biopsy due to increased PSA, abnormal digital rectal exam, or related symptoms. In this study, methylation of GSTP1 in post-massage urine had 75% sensitivity and 98% specificity for cancer. It is not clear why this latter study showed such high performance, but the results imply that perhaps the use of GSTP1 alone will be valuable as a molecular marker in prostate cancer in urine specimens. Until now all of the studies that have detected methylation of genomic DNA in bodily fluids for the detection of prostate cancer have relied on some form of methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR). One major limitation of this approach is that the DNA must be first treated with sodium bisulfite, which is a very harsh treatment and results in damage to what are often already low quantities of DNA. Development of new kits for bisulfite treatment may overcome these issues. New technologies are also developing that can be use for detection of prostate cancer in bodily fluids DNA even without bisulfite treatment. One of such assay was recently developed by Yegnasubramanian et al( 85 ). This assay, referred to as COMPARE-MS (combination methylated-DNA precipitation and methylation sensitive restriction enzymes) that does not rely on bisulfite treatment of DNA and this approach promises to increase the sensitivity of detecting CpG island hypermethylation. The approach, which results in very high sensitivity and specificity, features fragmenting genomic DNA with restriction enzymes including restriction enzymes that only cut when the target sequence is unmethylated, capture of methylated DNA using a purified recombinant methyl-binding domain polypeptide fragment from the human MBD2 protein, followed by PCR for the gene of interest. The assay was found to be highly sensitive and specific( 85 ). It is anticipated that this type of approach may indeed improve upon existing approaches for both specific genes and for the ability to multiplex a number of genes. Prostate cancer -specific methylation markers in primary tumors for the prediction of risk During the past 15 years, widespread clinical use of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test has resulted in a significant increase in the proportion of patients presenting with early stages of disease. Currently, ~80% of newly diagnosed patients present with no clinical evidence of metastatic disease ( 130 ). Data from uncontrolled studies suggest that 30% to 50% of patients treated with local modalities will show evidence of biochemical (PSA) relapse within a 10-year follow-up period( 5 , 131 - 133 ). We evaluated the methylation status of the promoters of six genes, and their ability to add to known risk factors in predicting time to recurrence in prostate cancer patients following prostatectomy. These genes were chosen based on their ability to differentiate between benign hyperplasia of the prostate and prostate cancer ( 32 ). These genes were frequently found to be hypermethylated in prostate cancer and, in some studies, were related to certain clinicopathologic characteristics ( 58 ). Patient population was unique for two reasons. First, all patients had the same Gleason grade of 3 + 4 = 7. Second, none of the patients received any additional treatment after radical prostatectomy until metastatic disease was evident. This allowed us to evaluate the significance of hypermethylation in predicting aggressiveness of prostate cancer in a relatively homogeneous group of patients without interference in the natural biological history of the disease. A Gleason score of 7 was chosen because it represents the most heterogeneous group of patients in terms of outcome. Most patients with a Gleason score of ?6 will be cured with radical prostatectomy only. In patients with a Gleason score of ?8, the probability of recurrence is very high. In the multivariate analysis, including the most significant clinical and pathologic prognostic factors, hypermethylation of APC and a combined methylation profile of APC and cyclin D2 were significant predictors for TTP. The HR of combined APC and cyclin D2 hypermethylation was higher and more significant than the HR given by lymph node status or by the Kattan nomogram ( 134 , 135 ). The latter combines the best-known clinical and pathologic risk factors for recurrence. These findings are especially significant because we evaluated a relatively homogenous group of patients with the same Gleason score. In a recent study Cottrell et al.( 102 ) discovered and validate 3 new DNA methylation markers for prostate cancer prognosis. They first used a genome-wide scan to identify new methylation targets and subsequently applied to a microarray of radical prostatectomy specimens to determine clinically relevant patterns of disease recurrence. Methylation levels of the 3 marker candidates GPR7, ABHD9 and an expressed sequence tag on chromosome 3 (Chr3-EST) were significantly increased in patients who did vs did not experience early PSA recurrence (Bonferroni correction p _0.05). Furthermore, these markers were also informative when the sample set was restricted to 68 mid range Gleason score (6 or 7) samples only. We developed real-time polymerase chain reaction assays for ABHD9 and Chr3-EST, and measured methylation in paraffin embedded, formalin fixed prostatectomy samples from an independent set of 223 patients. Methylation of the 2 markers was significantly higher in patients with early PSA recurrence compared to that in patients who did not experience PSA recurrence. They conclude that 3 novel markers GPR7, ABHD9 and Chr3-EST are significantly associated with prostate cancer prognosis. Incorporation of these methylation markers into clinical practice will result in more accurate prediction of which patients are likely to experience PSA recurrence. The next step ahead is to perform properly designed, prospective clinical trials to test new molecular markers if we hope to continue improving the outcomes of our patients. Only then the true usefulness of molecular markers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis are validated. To understand the prognostic role of methylated genes in circulating cells DNA, Roupret et al.( 136 ) tested ten gene promoter regions (GSTP1, RASSF1a, CDH1 (E-Cadherin), APC, DAPK, MGMT, p14, p16, RARb2 and TIMP3) in DNA extracted from whole blood for aberrant methylation by QMSP. They compared hypermethylation of circulating cell DNA from prostate cancer patients with (Group 1, n =20) and without (Group 2, n=22) disease progression and age-matched controls (benign prostatic hyperplasia, Group 3, n=22). They measured hypermethylation of 10 gene promoters in 2 sequential venous samples, obtained at diagnosis and during disease progression (median time, 15 months later). Matched time samples were obtained in the non-progressing patients. They found that more hypermethylation was detected in the diagnostic sample from the patients with cancer than in controls for GSTP1, RASSF1a, APC and RAR?2 (p < 0.0001). Patients undergoing disease progression had a significant increase in methylation levels of these 4 genes when compared to the other patients (p < 0.001). Patients at risk of disease progression have higher detectable concentrations of circulating cell hypermethylation, than those without progression. The extent of this hypermethylation increases during disease progression and they suggested that this approach can be used to identify the extent and duration of treatment response in prostate cancer. It is unclear why they targeted whole blood DNA for methylation study. Usually serum and plasma are the ideal source of DNA for methylation study for the detection and prognosis. Lymphocyte DNA in whole blood is not the source to test cancer related aberrant methylation. Tested DNA from all the three compartments (plasma, serum and lymphocyte) are needed to understand the specificity of their findings. If they found methylation in lymphocyte DNA, it can not be use as prognostic markers. However further study are essential to confirm their findings. Expert Commentary Methylation based markers have an enormous potential in ( 1 ) cancer risk assessment, ( 2 ) early detection, and ( 3 ) therapy monitoring. Numerous studies support the possible power of aberrant DNA-methylation for the development of screening tests to predict the individual risk for different types of cancer including prostate cancer. The identification of patients who are at high risk of cancer through screening could be very helpful for prophylactic treatment. The use of aberrant methylation as a cancer risk marker seems to be promising in recent years although multicenter blinded longitudinal studies are needed before using in a clinical setting. As a diagnostic marker, methylation marker has several advantages over protein, RNA or mutations markers. Firstly, the methylation signal can be amplified and therefore DNA methylation analysis by PCR is very sensitive although vigorous validation is needed to minimize false positive. Secondly, DNA is a very stable molecule in comparison to protein or RNA. In addition, DNA hypermethylation takes place in a defined area of the gene (usually in the “CpG island” of the promoter region), whereas mutations can take place in various regions of a gene that can be missed if total gene are not sequenced. For these reasons methylation analysis seems to be a promising tool in molecular diagnostics. In addition, paired normal is necessary for the exclusion of germline mutation while methylation markers if validated in age and gender matched normal, it is not necessary to test paired normal. For most types of cancer, early detection of the disease is associated with an improved clinical outcome. Because DNA methylation changes have been reported to occur early in carcinogenesis the identification of aberrant DNA methylation offers the exciting possibility of developing diagnostic tests. With a panel of prostate cancer specific methylated genes, urologists and pathologists have a tool of molecular diagnosis and a highly sensitive and specific non-invasive test not only for diagnosis but also for surveillance strategies. One advantage is the so-called multimarker strategy. Since one molecular marker fails to detect heterogeneous group of prostate cancers in a highly specific and sensitive manner, the methylation test (consist of panel of highly specific genes) examines panel of genes that includes all the important pathway genes that alter in prostate cancer. Quantitaive measurement of methylation at single base resolution will facilitate these endeavors. Technologies are now developing very rapidly for detecting methylation in a small amount of DNA. Multi-Plex PCR will allow including maximum number of genes in the diagnostic panel. This will also allow performing the test in a cost effective manner. The ongoing discussions about the usefulness of PSA as a marker for presence of prostate cancer can be overcome by addition of set of methylation markers in urine or serum. Presence of elevated PSA and promoter hypermethylation of certain genes in bodily fluids (urine, serum, prostate message fluids) may increase the specificity of the assay. As mentioned before, another advantage of DNA based screening test (like methylation test) is the stability of DNA, the bodily fluids can be collected by health workers and methylation markers can be tested in a centralize laboratory. So this screening strategy based on methylation markers may be useful for resource poor region. Analyzing methylation markers in serum can be use for monitoring of disease after complete prostatectomy. Five-year view For a biomarker to be clinically applicable, it must be specific, sensitive, and detectable in specimens obtained through minimally invasive procedures. Promising results have already been obtained since aberrantly methylated CpG islands have been detected in DNA samples derived from urine, serum, sputum, and stool of cancer patients. Of importance, it should be noted that changes in DNA methylation also occur in normal epithelia. Thus, extensive research is currently underway to identify tumor specific DNA methylation events that afford enough sensitivity and specificity to be utilized as biomarkers. Another major obstacle to overcome is the fact that tumor DNA is present only in minimal amounts in bodily fluids. Thus, exquisitely sensitive techniques need to be utilized to detect and analyze tumor-derived DNA. There are currently many different approaches to generate DNA methylation data. A large number of these are well-established and have been important tools for epigenetic analysis for many years. However, no single technique provides an unambiguous approach to DNA methylation data harvesting. Thus, I have tried to provide a description of the advantages and disadvantages of various techniques, in an attempt to provide a framework useful when deciding which method to use to generate the most meaningful data. I would like to emphasize the critical role of DNA methylation assays as tools for the assessment of the effectiveness and safety of DNA demethylating agents, as they potentially develop into standard regiments for cancer therapy. Drugs such as decitabine have shown promising results in clinical trials focused on the treatment of solid and liquid tumors. However, due to the nonspecific nature of nucleotide analogs, it is critical to monitor their effect not only on neoplastic cells but also on normal tissues to ensure that no long-term damage is inflicted to unaffected targets.A large body of evidence now exists indicating that not all possible DNA methylation targets in the human genome are affected equally in the disease state. The biological mechanism behind these observations is currently not fully understood, but could involve selection pressure or an intrinsic difference in sequence susceptibility to aberrant epigenetic changes. Thus, the use of sensitive assays to monitor DNA methylation changes will play a key role in the development and implementation of new therapies aimed at modulating the epigenome.  Conventional Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) The conventional MSP assay uses two sets of primers specifically designed to amplify the methylated or unmethylated sequence, and the PCR products are run in a gel( 86 ). Bisulfite-modified DNA are use as a template for PCR ( 86 ). The results of MSP at a particular DNA region are simply reported as methylated or unmethylated, not allowing quantitation or identification of partial methylation. The advantages of this method include a simple PCR based technique and can be perform any molecular biology laboratory, short time of analysis, the possibility of obtaining results from small amounts of DNA, specificity provided by primers and a significant sensitivity; methylation is detected even when only 0.1% of alleles are methylated. Additional drawbacks of this method, similarly to other PCR techniques, are connected with the possibility of contamination of the analyzed sample and obtaining false-positive results ( 86 , 87 ). It is not automated and the interpretation of the data may be subjective.  MS-nested-PCR It is a modified version of conventional MSP that involve a double-stage PCR ( 88 ). During the first step, the applied primers (primer with no CpG) recognized templates modified by sodium bisulfite, but they do not differentiate methylated sequences from unmethylated ones. Reaction products are diluted and amplified with two pairs of internal primers, one of them is specific for the methylated sequence and the other for the unmethylated one. The nested-PCR reaction increases the method’s sensitivity to 105, which made it possible to detect DNA methylation in saliva samples collected from patients with small cell lung cancer ( 89 ). Althoughnested-MSP are simple techniques that can easily be incorporated in most molecular biology laboratories, the ability to accurately determine the promoter methylation status of genes largely depends upon the careful design of MSP primers as well as other steps. The chances of contamination increase due to increasing number of PCR. This technique allow the analysis of individual (nested-MSP) or multiple (multiplex nested-MSP) promoters in samples with low quantity (e.g., macrodissected specimens) and/or quality (e.g., paraffin-embedded samples) ( 90 , 91 ). This strategy is particularly attractive for assessing the methylation status of gene promoters in archival specimens for which clinical outcome (e.g., response to treatment, survival) is known ( 92 ) as well as for sensitive molecular detection ( 82 ). For prostate cancer these strategies can be useful for performing methylation profiling of large number of genes where only small of DNA are available like prostate intraepithelial neoplasia. This modified technique can also be use for the development of non-invasive assay (screening tool) using serum or urine DNA of high-risk man.  Quantitative analysis of methylated alleles (QAMA) This technique is a newer version of Real-Time PCR, which applies TaqMan probes based on groove binder (MGB) technology. There are two types of probes: specific for methylated and unmethylated sequences, which is achieved by means of using different fluorescent dyes (VIC and FAM) ( 106 , 107 ). The method is single stage, it ensures a high efficiency of methylation evaluation and the assessment of methylated and unmethylated sequences during one reaction, and it shortens significantly the time of analysis and diminishes the probability of contamination. Mutations and polymorphous sequences may hinder probes binding. The probes recognize only completely methylated or unmethylated sequences, which makes it impossible to analyze partially methylated areas ( 107 ).  Quantitative Methylation specific PCR (QMSP) In this assay also bisulfite-modified DNA are use as a template for fluorescence-based real-time PCR, as previously described( 12 , 23 , 25 , 26 ) ( 108 ). QMSP is based on continuous monitoring of a progressive fluorogenic PCR by an optical system. Specific primers are designed to incorporate the CpG sites in order to detect the methylated form of the gene promoter, as described previously ( 86 ). QMSP is a variation which adds the use of a fluorescent probe across the CpG rich regions to add specificity ( 109 ). The probe is labeled with two fluorescent dyes: one serves as a reporter on the 5?-end (FAM), and its emission spectra is quenched by a second fluorescent dye on the 3?-end (TAMRA), when the two dyes are in close proximity. During the extension phase of the PCR, the 5? to 3? exonuclease activity of the Taq DNA polymerase cleaves the reporter from the probe, thus releasing it from the quencher, leading to fluorescence. If amplification occurs, this reaction results in an exponential increase in the fluorescent emission of the reporter dye and is monitored during the PCR process. ?-actin (ACTB) is amplified in conjunction as a representative housekeeping gene to which the genes of interest are normalized, thus leading to a semi-quantitative result. This is important to ensure that there is a significant degree of methylation within sample, and not just trace amounts or contamination. The Fluorogenic amplification reactions are carried out usually in triplicate in a volume of 20 ?L that contained 3 ?L of bisulfite-modified DNA; 600 nM concentrations of forward and reverse primers; 200 nM probe; 5 U of platinum Taq polymerase (Invitrogen); 200 ?M concentrations each of dATP, dCTP, and dGTP; 200 ?M dTTP; and 5.5 mM MgCl2. Fluorogenic probes were custom synthesized by PE Applied Biosystems. PCR primers were synthesized by Life Technologies (Gaithersburg, MD).Thermal cycling was initiated with a first denaturation step of 95° C for 10 min. The thermal profile for the PCR is 95°C for 15 s, 60° C(varies depending on gene and primer sequences) for 30 s and 72° C for 1 min. Data obtained following 50 cycles of amplification were analyzed. The later is just an example. Due to changing in technology and new enzyme and buffers, the PCR conditions are modified according to the investigator preference and the region of the genome to be amplified. Amplification reactions were usually carried out in 384-well plates in a 7900 sequence detector (Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems) and are analyzed by a sequence detector system (SDS 2.2.1; Applied Biosystems). Each plate included patient DNA samples, positive (in vitro methylated leukocyte DNA) and negative (normal leukocyte DNA or DNA from a known unmethylated cell line) controls, and multiple water blanks. Leukocyte DNA from a healthy individual was methylated in vitro with excess SssI methyltransferase (New England Biolabs Inc., Beverly, MA) to generate completely methylated DNA. This enzyme adds methyl-groups to all CpG dinucleotides within the genomic DNA. Thus, in vitro methylated DNA is 100% positive for gene of interest promoter methylation after sodium-bisulfite treatment. Serial dilutions (90–0.009 ng) of this in vitro methylated DNA are used to construct a calibration curve for each plate. All samples should be within the assay’s range of sensitivity and reproducibility based on amplification of internal reference standard (threshold cycle [CT] value for ACTB of 40). The relative level of methylated DNA for each gene in each sample is determined as a ratio of methylation specific PCR-amplified gene to ACTB (reference gene) and then multiplied by 1000 for easier tabulation (average value of triplicates of gene of interest divided by the average value of triplicates of ACTB x 1000). The samples are categorized as unmethylated or methylated based on the sensitivity of the assay. The QMSP assay provides several distinct advantages over conventional MSP: ( a ) omission of all of the post-amplification steps reduces the risk of contamination and increases the throughput of the system; ( b ) the assay is more stringent and more specific because in addition to the two PCR primers, the fluorescent-labeled hybridization probe has to anneal correctly between the two primers; ( c ) the assay is quantitative, automated, and readily adaptable to clinical setting and screening studies; and ( d ) the assay is amenable to multiplex amplification for the analysis of panels in clinical samples. At present, we can use four different dyes for the amplification of four distinct markers, but further developments in dye chemistry will improve the multi-marker diagnostic approach (presently, we can use four different dyes in Taqman technology) from nanogram quantities of low molecular weight DNA. These advances are unlikely to follow in conventional MSP.  Quantification of DNA methylation differences at specific sites using MS-SNuPE Single-nucleotide primer extension is a well-established method which has been successfully used for the detection of gene mutations ( 110 ) and for the quantitation of allele specific expression ( 111 - 113 ). MSSNuPE relies on single nucleotide primer extension to assess DNA methylation at a specific cytosine ( 114 ). An initial round of PCR is carried out using bisulfite DNA-specific primers, followed by a second PCR step in which radio-labeled dCTP and dTTP and an internal primer which terminates precisely 5? of the single nucleotide whose methylation status is to be determined are added. The radio-labeled products are then run on a 15% polyacrylamide gel under denaturing conditions and by visualized via exposure to an auto-radiographic film or a phosphor-image screen. The intensity of the observed bands can be then quantified to determine the proportion of C/T at the cytosine of interest. MS-SNuPE can be carried out in multiplex reactions, allowing for the quantification of more than a single CpG site per assay. MS-SNuPE is a viable alternative when sensitive quantitation of a single or few CpG sites is desired and small amounts of DNA are available.  Heavy-Methyl: PCR amplification of methylated DNA using methylation-specific oligonucleotide blockers This is an innovative real-time variant of the MSPCR assay ( 86 ), which, because of its unique design, allows for the detection of methylated sequences at remarkably low concentration in a DNA mixture with high specificity ( 115 ). In this technique, the PCR priming is methylation specific, but the high specificity of the assay stems from the use of non-extendable oligo-nucleotide blockers. The blockers are designed to bind to the bisulfite-treated DNA template in a methylation-dependent manner and their binding sites are selected so as to overlap with the 3? primer binding sites. Using primers specific for GSTP1, Heavy Methyl has been successfully used to detect 30 pg of in vitro methylated and bisulfite-treated DNA in a background of 50 ng unmethylated DNA ( 115 ). The high sensitivity of Heavy Methyl makes it suitable for clinical applications, such as the analysis of DNA methylation in serum, where the amount of non-cell bound free-floating DNA in healthy patients is estimated at 10–50 ng/ml ( 116 , 117 ). An interesting feature of Heavy-Methyl is that it can be adapted for qualitative as well as quantitative analysis of DNA methylation. It is important to note that Heavy-Methyl requires more components and potentially more optimization than conventional MS-PCR, which has been used with high sensitivity and specificity for a large number of genes. Thus, Heavy-Methyl could provide an attractive technical alternative when convention MS-PCR is unsuitable for the goal of a given research endeavor.  Quantitative bisulfite sequencing using the pyrosequencing technology Pyrosequencing is a sequence-by-synthesis approach that is based on the luminometric detection of pyrophosphate release following nucleotide incorporation ( 118 , 119 ). Depending on the chemistry used, a three-to four-enzyme cascade converts the released pyrophosphate to ATP, which is immediately hydrolyzed to produce light. Since a single known nucleotide is added sequentially in each step, the obtained. One advantage of this method is that quantification can be achieved using SYBR Green I, which eliminates the need for fluorescently labeled probes, thus reducing the overall cost of the assay. Furthermore, given the widespread use of SYBR Green I in conventional real-time PCR assays, this technique could provide a suitable initial approach to DNA methylation analysis for researchers without prior experience in the DNA methylation field. However, as is the case with other PCR-based techniques described, careful primer design and optimization of the PCR reaction are critical to ensure the detection of the intended target sequence.  Prostate cancer-specific methylation markers in bodily fluids for early detection Cancer is a disease initiated and driven by the clonal evolution of cells transformed by genetic and epigenetic alterations, which can occur as either inherited (germline) mutations or acquired (somatic) mutations of key genes( 120 ). Methylation, a epigenetic alterations (promoter methylation) can be used as targets for the detection of tumor cells in clinical specimens such as tissue biopsies or body fluids such as serum and plasma ( Figure 1 ).  SERUM A potential cancer biomarker, cell-free circulating DNA, was already discovered in 1977 ( 121 ). Cancer patients have distinctly increased levels of cell-free DNA in comparison to healthy individuals and patients with non-malignant disorders ( 122 ). Although the assessment of cell-free DNA concentrations in serum/plasma is useful to identify patients with malignant disease, it was suggested that qualitative changes (i.e., presence of cancer-specific DNA alterations) provide the most accurate diagnostic information ( 123 ). One of the earliest and most common somatic alterations in CaP is DNA CpG island (CGI) hypermethylation. For instance, CGI hypermethylation at the GSTP1 promoter was detected in approximately 80% of PCA tissues ( 124 , 125 ). The use of two or more methylated genes even increased diagnostic accuracy (e.g. “GSTP1 and PTGS2”: sensitivity and specificity to 96–100%) ( 53 , 63 ). Previous studies reported detection of hypermethylated DNA in serum and plasma of CaP patients: GSTP1 hypermethylation was detected in 12–30% of patients with metastatic disease ( 33 , 105 ), and nearly in 100% of patients with metastatic PCA ( 83 , 105 ). The presence of hypermethylated GSTP1 DNA fragments in serum was the strongest independent predictor of early PSA recurrence in patients undergoing radical prostatectomy for clinically localized CaP ( 105 ). Previous studies analyzing serum/plasma DNA focused on the detection of CGI hypermethylation at a single gene site in clinically localized CaP ( 33 , 83 , 105 , 126 ). We are continuously discovering cancer-specific methylated gene by discovery approach ( 18 ). These genes are being tested for clinical utility such as diagnosis, prognosis etc. Specificity of methylation markers for diagnosis is depended on the compartment of the body. As for examples some methylation marker may be 100% specific for prostate cancer testing the serum. However, this marker may be terribly non-specific when urine is tested. Some methylation markers tested by our group and others have strong promise for developing screening tools using serum/plasma DNA.  URINE As mentioned above, methylation of deoxycytidine residues within CpG islands in the upstream regulatory regions of a number of genes occurs in a very high percentage of prostate cancers and is not found to any significant extent in normal prostate tissues in most studies. Therefore, a number of groups ( 12 , 33 , 83 , 84 , 94 , 127 ) have attempted to improve on the ability of serum PSA to predict a positive biopsy using methylation analysis of several cancer related genes in the urine and a number of these studies have been reviewed( 128 , 129 ). These studies have identified DNA methylation markers in the urine of men with prostate cancer as the basis for a confirmatorytest. Cairns et al.( 94 ) reported that, when patients had methylation of GSTP1 detected in their tumor, 27% of cases were positive for DNA methylation in voided urine specimens. Jeronimo et al.( 33 ) later showed sensitivity in urine of 23%. Gonzalgo et al.( 84 ) demonstrated that GSTP1 methylation could be detected in the post-biopsy urine specimens of 39% of patients with prostate cancer. Rogers et al.( 127 ) later demonstrated a high concordance between post-biopsy and post-DRE urinary samples for methylation of GSTP1 , APC , and EDNRB . Goessl et al.( 93 ) demonstrated a sensitivity of 73% at a specificity of 98% in urine sediments collected after prostate massage. Additional markers could potentially increase the sensitivity. For example, more recently, we found that a combination of CDKN2A (formerly p16 ), PSCD2 (formerly ARF ), MGMT , and GSTP1 could theoretically enable the detection of 87% of prostate cancers at 100% specificity( 12 ). In that study, GSTP1 alone demonstrated a sensitivity of 48% at a specificity of 100%. A study by Roupret et al.( 95 ) examined GSTP1 , RARB , APC , and RASSF1 . The authors found a sensitivity of 86% at a specificity of 89%; however, they used a 1-min prostate massage and bladder catheterization, which would hinder widespread adoption. One of the first studies using DNA-based tests was by Goessl et al( 83 )who used MSP to detect GSTP1 hypermethylation in bodily fluids. Although GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation was not detectable in prostate tissue and bodily fluids from patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia, these authors reported that methylation was detected in 94% of tumors (16 of 17), 72% of plasma or serum samples (23 of 32), 50% of ejaculate (4 of 8), and 36% of urine (4 of 11) from patients with prostate cancer. Additionally, MSP identified circulating tumor cells in 30% (10 of 33) of prostate cancer patients. Goessl et al ( 93 ) also used MSP to detect GSTP1 hypermethylation in urine sediments from patients after prostate massage and found an overall sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 98%, although some of these patients had advanced prostate cancer. Roupre’t et al ( 95 )recently used a 10 gene MSP approach in which urine samples were obtained from 95 consecutive radical prostatectomy patients and from 38 age-matched males (controls) with no history of genitourinary malignancy, negative prostate biopsies, and with or without benign prostatic hyperplasia. Radical prostatectomy patients underwent prostate massage and the first urine stream was then collected. The authors reported a sensitivity of 86% and a specificity of 89% for the 10 gene panel. Results of another very recent study have been reported by Woodson et al( 96 ) in which 100 men were referred for prostate needle biopsy due to increased PSA, abnormal digital rectal exam, or related symptoms. In this study, methylation of GSTP1 in post-massage urine had 75% sensitivity and 98% specificity for cancer. It is not clear why this latter study showed such high performance, but the results imply that perhaps the use of GSTP1 alone will be valuable as a molecular marker in prostate cancer in urine specimens. Until now all of the studies that have detected methylation of genomic DNA in bodily fluids for the detection of prostate cancer have relied on some form of methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR). One major limitation of this approach is that the DNA must be first treated with sodium bisulfite, which is a very harsh treatment and results in damage to what are often already low quantities of DNA. Development of new kits for bisulfite treatment may overcome these issues. New technologies are also developing that can be use for detection of prostate cancer in bodily fluids DNA even without bisulfite treatment. One of such assay was recently developed by Yegnasubramanian et al( 85 ). This assay, referred to as COMPARE-MS (combination methylated-DNA precipitation and methylation sensitive restriction enzymes) that does not rely on bisulfite treatment of DNA and this approach promises to increase the sensitivity of detecting CpG island hypermethylation. The approach, which results in very high sensitivity and specificity, features fragmenting genomic DNA with restriction enzymes including restriction enzymes that only cut when the target sequence is unmethylated, capture of methylated DNA using a purified recombinant methyl-binding domain polypeptide fragment from the human MBD2 protein, followed by PCR for the gene of interest. The assay was found to be highly sensitive and specific( 85 ). It is anticipated that this type of approach may indeed improve upon existing approaches for both specific genes and for the ability to multiplex a number of genes.  Prostate cancer -specific methylation markers in primary tumors for the prediction of risk During the past 15 years, widespread clinical use of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test has resulted in a significant increase in the proportion of patients presenting with early stages of disease. Currently, ~80% of newly diagnosed patients present with no clinical evidence of metastatic disease ( 130 ). Data from uncontrolled studies suggest that 30% to 50% of patients treated with local modalities will show evidence of biochemical (PSA) relapse within a 10-year follow-up period( 5 , 131 - 133 ). We evaluated the methylation status of the promoters of six genes, and their ability to add to known risk factors in predicting time to recurrence in prostate cancer patients following prostatectomy. These genes were chosen based on their ability to differentiate between benign hyperplasia of the prostate and prostate cancer ( 32 ). These genes were frequently found to be hypermethylated in prostate cancer and, in some studies, were related to certain clinicopathologic characteristics ( 58 ). Patient population was unique for two reasons. First, all patients had the same Gleason grade of 3 + 4 = 7. Second, none of the patients received any additional treatment after radical prostatectomy until metastatic disease was evident. This allowed us to evaluate the significance of hypermethylation in predicting aggressiveness of prostate cancer in a relatively homogeneous group of patients without interference in the natural biological history of the disease. A Gleason score of 7 was chosen because it represents the most heterogeneous group of patients in terms of outcome. Most patients with a Gleason score of ?6 will be cured with radical prostatectomy only. In patients with a Gleason score of ?8, the probability of recurrence is very high. In the multivariate analysis, including the most significant clinical and pathologic prognostic factors, hypermethylation of APC and a combined methylation profile of APC and cyclin D2 were significant predictors for TTP. The HR of combined APC and cyclin D2 hypermethylation was higher and more significant than the HR given by lymph node status or by the Kattan nomogram ( 134 , 135 ). The latter combines the best-known clinical and pathologic risk factors for recurrence. These findings are especially significant because we evaluated a relatively homogenous group of patients with the same Gleason score. In a recent study Cottrell et al.( 102 ) discovered and validate 3 new DNA methylation markers for prostate cancer prognosis. They first used a genome-wide scan to identify new methylation targets and subsequently applied to a microarray of radical prostatectomy specimens to determine clinically relevant patterns of disease recurrence. Methylation levels of the 3 marker candidates GPR7, ABHD9 and an expressed sequence tag on chromosome 3 (Chr3-EST) were significantly increased in patients who did vs did not experience early PSA recurrence (Bonferroni correction p _0.05). Furthermore, these markers were also informative when the sample set was restricted to 68 mid range Gleason score (6 or 7) samples only. We developed real-time polymerase chain reaction assays for ABHD9 and Chr3-EST, and measured methylation in paraffin embedded, formalin fixed prostatectomy samples from an independent set of 223 patients. Methylation of the 2 markers was significantly higher in patients with early PSA recurrence compared to that in patients who did not experience PSA recurrence. They conclude that 3 novel markers GPR7, ABHD9 and Chr3-EST are significantly associated with prostate cancer prognosis. Incorporation of these methylation markers into clinical practice will result in more accurate prediction of which patients are likely to experience PSA recurrence. The next step ahead is to perform properly designed, prospective clinical trials to test new molecular markers if we hope to continue improving the outcomes of our patients. Only then the true usefulness of molecular markers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis are validated. To understand the prognostic role of methylated genes in circulating cells DNA, Roupret et al.( 136 ) tested ten gene promoter regions (GSTP1, RASSF1a, CDH1 (E-Cadherin), APC, DAPK, MGMT, p14, p16, RARb2 and TIMP3) in DNA extracted from whole blood for aberrant methylation by QMSP. They compared hypermethylation of circulating cell DNA from prostate cancer patients with (Group 1, n =20) and without (Group 2, n=22) disease progression and age-matched controls (benign prostatic hyperplasia, Group 3, n=22). They measured hypermethylation of 10 gene promoters in 2 sequential venous samples, obtained at diagnosis and during disease progression (median time, 15 months later). Matched time samples were obtained in the non-progressing patients. They found that more hypermethylation was detected in the diagnostic sample from the patients with cancer than in controls for GSTP1, RASSF1a, APC and RAR?2 (p < 0.0001). Patients undergoing disease progression had a significant increase in methylation levels of these 4 genes when compared to the other patients (p < 0.001). Patients at risk of disease progression have higher detectable concentrations of circulating cell hypermethylation, than those without progression. The extent of this hypermethylation increases during disease progression and they suggested that this approach can be used to identify the extent and duration of treatment response in prostate cancer. It is unclear why they targeted whole blood DNA for methylation study. Usually serum and plasma are the ideal source of DNA for methylation study for the detection and prognosis. Lymphocyte DNA in whole blood is not the source to test cancer related aberrant methylation. Tested DNA from all the three compartments (plasma, serum and lymphocyte) are needed to understand the specificity of their findings. If they found methylation in lymphocyte DNA, it can not be use as prognostic markers. However further study are essential to confirm their findings.  Expert Commentary Methylation based markers have an enormous potential in ( 1 ) cancer risk assessment, ( 2 ) early detection, and ( 3 ) therapy monitoring. Numerous studies support the possible power of aberrant DNA-methylation for the development of screening tests to predict the individual risk for different types of cancer including prostate cancer. The identification of patients who are at high risk of cancer through screening could be very helpful for prophylactic treatment. The use of aberrant methylation as a cancer risk marker seems to be promising in recent years although multicenter blinded longitudinal studies are needed before using in a clinical setting. As a diagnostic marker, methylation marker has several advantages over protein, RNA or mutations markers. Firstly, the methylation signal can be amplified and therefore DNA methylation analysis by PCR is very sensitive although vigorous validation is needed to minimize false positive. Secondly, DNA is a very stable molecule in comparison to protein or RNA. In addition, DNA hypermethylation takes place in a defined area of the gene (usually in the “CpG island” of the promoter region), whereas mutations can take place in various regions of a gene that can be missed if total gene are not sequenced. For these reasons methylation analysis seems to be a promising tool in molecular diagnostics. In addition, paired normal is necessary for the exclusion of germline mutation while methylation markers if validated in age and gender matched normal, it is not necessary to test paired normal. For most types of cancer, early detection of the disease is associated with an improved clinical outcome. Because DNA methylation changes have been reported to occur early in carcinogenesis the identification of aberrant DNA methylation offers the exciting possibility of developing diagnostic tests. With a panel of prostate cancer specific methylated genes, urologists and pathologists have a tool of molecular diagnosis and a highly sensitive and specific non-invasive test not only for diagnosis but also for surveillance strategies. One advantage is the so-called multimarker strategy. Since one molecular marker fails to detect heterogeneous group of prostate cancers in a highly specific and sensitive manner, the methylation test (consist of panel of highly specific genes) examines panel of genes that includes all the important pathway genes that alter in prostate cancer. Quantitaive measurement of methylation at single base resolution will facilitate these endeavors. Technologies are now developing very rapidly for detecting methylation in a small amount of DNA. Multi-Plex PCR will allow including maximum number of genes in the diagnostic panel. This will also allow performing the test in a cost effective manner. The ongoing discussions about the usefulness of PSA as a marker for presence of prostate cancer can be overcome by addition of set of methylation markers in urine or serum. Presence of elevated PSA and promoter hypermethylation of certain genes in bodily fluids (urine, serum, prostate message fluids) may increase the specificity of the assay. As mentioned before, another advantage of DNA based screening test (like methylation test) is the stability of DNA, the bodily fluids can be collected by health workers and methylation markers can be tested in a centralize laboratory. So this screening strategy based on methylation markers may be useful for resource poor region. Analyzing methylation markers in serum can be use for monitoring of disease after complete prostatectomy.  Five-year view For a biomarker to be clinically applicable, it must be specific, sensitive, and detectable in specimens obtained through minimally invasive procedures. Promising results have already been obtained since aberrantly methylated CpG islands have been detected in DNA samples derived from urine, serum, sputum, and stool of cancer patients. Of importance, it should be noted that changes in DNA methylation also occur in normal epithelia. Thus, extensive research is currently underway to identify tumor specific DNA methylation events that afford enough sensitivity and specificity to be utilized as biomarkers. Another major obstacle to overcome is the fact that tumor DNA is present only in minimal amounts in bodily fluids. Thus, exquisitely sensitive techniques need to be utilized to detect and analyze tumor-derived DNA. There are currently many different approaches to generate DNA methylation data. A large number of these are well-established and have been important tools for epigenetic analysis for many years. However, no single technique provides an unambiguous approach to DNA methylation data harvesting. Thus, I have tried to provide a description of the advantages and disadvantages of various techniques, in an attempt to provide a framework useful when deciding which method to use to generate the most meaningful data. I would like to emphasize the critical role of DNA methylation assays as tools for the assessment of the effectiveness and safety of DNA demethylating agents, as they potentially develop into standard regiments for cancer therapy. Drugs such as decitabine have shown promising results in clinical trials focused on the treatment of solid and liquid tumors. However, due to the nonspecific nature of nucleotide analogs, it is critical to monitor their effect not only on neoplastic cells but also on normal tissues to ensure that no long-term damage is inflicted to unaffected targets.A large body of evidence now exists indicating that not all possible DNA methylation targets in the human genome are affected equally in the disease state. The biological mechanism behind these observations is currently not fully understood, but could involve selection pressure or an intrinsic difference in sequence susceptibility to aberrant epigenetic changes. Thus, the use of sensitive assays to monitor DNA methylation changes will play a key role in the development and implementation of new therapies aimed at modulating the epigenome. 