Development and validation of measures of religious involvement and the cancer experience among African Americans Research indicates that African Americans diagnosed with cancer tend to use religion in coping, however less is known about the specific role that religion plays in the coping process. Based on previous qualitative work, five instruments were developed to assess the role of religious involvement in cancer coping: God as helper, God as healer, Faith in healing, Control over cancer, and New perspective. The instruments were administered to 100 African Americans with cancer. Each exhibited high internal reliability, and concurrent and discriminant validity. These instruments may have applied value for the development of church-based cancer support/survivorship interventions.  The present study The present study reports on the development and validation of five instruments assessing constructs involving the perceived role of religious involvement in cancer coping in an African American patient sample. The work was based on a previous qualitative phase in which African American men and women with a diagnosis of cancer completed semi-structured interviews to discuss the role of religious involvement in their cancer experience (Holt, Caplan, Schulz, Blake, Southward, Buckner, & Lawrence, 2008). Grounded theory methods ( Glaser, 1992 ) were used to analyze this data, resulting in several important themes for which no existing instruments to assess these constructs could be identified in the present literature. This use of qualitative data for instrument development is recommended in the development of novel instruments ( Jenkins & Pargament, 1995 ; Krause, 2002 ). There is a well-established positive association between religious involvement and cancer coping in the literature. The next step was to determine how religious involvement relates to coping, or which aspects are important for coping with cancer. But there must be valid and reliable measures of these constructs if the field is to move from qualitative exploration to quantitative verification and model/theory testing. The study of the religion-health connection in general suffers from a lack of theoretical guidance ( Idler, 1987 ). If more is known about the role of religious involvement in cancer coping, we would be better able to inform faith-based support efforts and improve their efficacy. The NIH agenda for social science research involves “expanding research on social and interpersonal factors that influence health, including…religion and spirituality” and the “cultural, social, and biological mechanisms through which they affect health” ( Bachrach & Abeles, 2004 ).  Method Sampling and eligibility criteria Data collection was conducted through the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Recruitment and Retention Shared Facility. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). Eligible individuals (screened using a telephone script) were African Americans who had been diagnosed with cancer at least 6 months ago but not more than 5 years ago. Five years was used as the upper bound for time since diagnosis because after that, coping may take on a different meaning, as patients are generally considered to be in remission at that time. Patients with cancer of any site were eligible, with the exception of skin cancer, which is generally less severe and not life-threatening (patients with melanoma were eligible). Patients were not eligible until 6 months after diagnosis, to allow time for treatment and out of respect for the initial adjustment period. Participant recruitment began by targeting various cancer support groups throughout the city. However most of these individuals had been diagnosed more than 5 years ago. Therefore, the recruitment strategy was extended to the media, such as local radio stations and a local African American newspaper. We also received assistance from several oncologist offices, key community leaders and other community organizations. After extending recruitment beyond support groups, the identification of eligible participants increased dramatically for both men and women. No eligible individual refused to participate. Nine were ineligible, eight of whom were diagnosed outside of the eligibility time frames, and one individual actually did not have cancer. One eligible individual was deemed incapable of participating because of his health condition at the time of the interview. Interviewing and data collection The UAB Recruitment and Retention Shared Facility specializes in recruitment and data collection for medical research studies. The interviewer was an African American female, who was extensively trained in the interview protocol and in the sensitivity required for interviewing cancer patients about a topic like coping and religious involvement. Interested patients called the interviewer who screened them for eligibility criteria. Interested and eligible participants completed the interview at this time or scheduled an appointment to do so at their convenience. Interviews began with a verbal informed consent script and the participant being provided with an opportunity to ask questions about the project. The structured interview began with questions about the role of support from others in the cancer experience, moved gradually into questions of a more religious nature, and ended with a standard demographics module. Participants received by mail an incentive in the amount of $25 for their participation. Participant demographic characteristics are shown in Table 1 . Measures Five instruments were developed, based on a previous qualitative phase that identified particular religious constructs important in cancer coping ( Holt, Caplan, Schulz, Blake, Southward, Buckner, & Lawrence, 2007 ), and using the general systematic process as outlined by Krause (2002) . The investigative team drafted items based on the constructs that emerged in the qualitative phase. This resulted in a pool of items that were reviewed for face validity and edited using an iterative process. The instruments were then formatted and pilot tested with a small sample for logistics of telephone administration. They were then finalized for validation sample. The instrument characteristics are presented in Table 2 , and items are listed in Table 3 . All items used a strongly disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, strongly agree Likert-type response format. God as helper This construct reflected the perceived assistance received from God in coping with cancer. Items involved the idea that God gives a person strength and comfort through the cancer experience, without which one may not have been able to make it through. God as Healer This construct reflected the perception of God as a healer, either directly or through doctors. This dual role of God in healing is reflected in a two-dimensional factor solution (see below). Faith in healing This construct reflected the idea that if a patient has enough faith, they can recover from cancer. Items involved the notion that one’s faith may be tested or renewed as a result of the cancer experience. Control over cancer This construct reflected the idea that by speaking or thinking negatively or positively, one can impact one’s cancer outcomes in a negative or positive way, respectively. Items also reflected the idea of giving one’s problems over to God, and that if one cannot control something it is not something one should worry about. New perspective This construct reflected the process of gaining a new perspective on life as a result of going through cancer. Items reflected the idea that the cancer experience may have even had a positive impact on one’s life, through a realignment of one’s priorities, or not worrying about insignificant things. Instruments for assessment of convergent and discriminant validity Religious coping was assessed with the widely used Brief RCOPE ( Pargament, Smith, Koenig, & Perez, 1998 ). This 14-item instrument assesses positive (e.g., “Looked for a stronger connection with God.”) and negative (e.g., “Wondered whether God had abandoned me.”) religious coping and has demonstrated adequate internal consistency (? = .87–.90, ? = .78–.81, respectively). The factorial validity was demonstrated, supporting the two-factor solution. Items are assessed in 4-point Likert-type format (not at all…a great deal). Negative affect was assessed using the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988 ). The PANAS consists of 20 emotions (10 negative; 10 positive) and participants are asked to rate the extent to which they have felt that way in the past week on a 5-point Likert-type scale (very slightly or not at all…extremely). Internal reliability was high for the negative affect scale (? = .84–.87). The positive and negative affect subscales share 1–5% of their variance. Test-retest reliability for one year was .60 and for a few weeks was .48. The scale also showed factorial, convergent, and discriminant validity. Data analysis Internal reliability was calculated using Cronbach’s alpha. Item-total scale correlations were examined as well as item-level skew statistics. Convergent validity was examined through correlations with another religious coping instrument ( Pargament, Smith, Koenig, & Perez, 1998 ). Discriminant validity was examined through correlations with negative affect ( Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988 ). Factor structure was explored using principal components analysis with varimax rotation. Eigenvalues were examined as well as percentage of variance accounted for. An exploratory approach was taken because it was not known in advance how many factors to expect.  Sampling and eligibility criteria Data collection was conducted through the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Recruitment and Retention Shared Facility. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). Eligible individuals (screened using a telephone script) were African Americans who had been diagnosed with cancer at least 6 months ago but not more than 5 years ago. Five years was used as the upper bound for time since diagnosis because after that, coping may take on a different meaning, as patients are generally considered to be in remission at that time. Patients with cancer of any site were eligible, with the exception of skin cancer, which is generally less severe and not life-threatening (patients with melanoma were eligible). Patients were not eligible until 6 months after diagnosis, to allow time for treatment and out of respect for the initial adjustment period. Participant recruitment began by targeting various cancer support groups throughout the city. However most of these individuals had been diagnosed more than 5 years ago. Therefore, the recruitment strategy was extended to the media, such as local radio stations and a local African American newspaper. We also received assistance from several oncologist offices, key community leaders and other community organizations. After extending recruitment beyond support groups, the identification of eligible participants increased dramatically for both men and women. No eligible individual refused to participate. Nine were ineligible, eight of whom were diagnosed outside of the eligibility time frames, and one individual actually did not have cancer. One eligible individual was deemed incapable of participating because of his health condition at the time of the interview.  Interviewing and data collection The UAB Recruitment and Retention Shared Facility specializes in recruitment and data collection for medical research studies. The interviewer was an African American female, who was extensively trained in the interview protocol and in the sensitivity required for interviewing cancer patients about a topic like coping and religious involvement. Interested patients called the interviewer who screened them for eligibility criteria. Interested and eligible participants completed the interview at this time or scheduled an appointment to do so at their convenience. Interviews began with a verbal informed consent script and the participant being provided with an opportunity to ask questions about the project. The structured interview began with questions about the role of support from others in the cancer experience, moved gradually into questions of a more religious nature, and ended with a standard demographics module. Participants received by mail an incentive in the amount of $25 for their participation. Participant demographic characteristics are shown in Table 1 .  Measures Five instruments were developed, based on a previous qualitative phase that identified particular religious constructs important in cancer coping ( Holt, Caplan, Schulz, Blake, Southward, Buckner, & Lawrence, 2007 ), and using the general systematic process as outlined by Krause (2002) . The investigative team drafted items based on the constructs that emerged in the qualitative phase. This resulted in a pool of items that were reviewed for face validity and edited using an iterative process. The instruments were then formatted and pilot tested with a small sample for logistics of telephone administration. They were then finalized for validation sample. The instrument characteristics are presented in Table 2 , and items are listed in Table 3 . All items used a strongly disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, strongly agree Likert-type response format. God as helper This construct reflected the perceived assistance received from God in coping with cancer. Items involved the idea that God gives a person strength and comfort through the cancer experience, without which one may not have been able to make it through. God as Healer This construct reflected the perception of God as a healer, either directly or through doctors. This dual role of God in healing is reflected in a two-dimensional factor solution (see below). Faith in healing This construct reflected the idea that if a patient has enough faith, they can recover from cancer. Items involved the notion that one’s faith may be tested or renewed as a result of the cancer experience. Control over cancer This construct reflected the idea that by speaking or thinking negatively or positively, one can impact one’s cancer outcomes in a negative or positive way, respectively. Items also reflected the idea of giving one’s problems over to God, and that if one cannot control something it is not something one should worry about. New perspective This construct reflected the process of gaining a new perspective on life as a result of going through cancer. Items reflected the idea that the cancer experience may have even had a positive impact on one’s life, through a realignment of one’s priorities, or not worrying about insignificant things. Instruments for assessment of convergent and discriminant validity Religious coping was assessed with the widely used Brief RCOPE ( Pargament, Smith, Koenig, & Perez, 1998 ). This 14-item instrument assesses positive (e.g., “Looked for a stronger connection with God.”) and negative (e.g., “Wondered whether God had abandoned me.”) religious coping and has demonstrated adequate internal consistency (? = .87–.90, ? = .78–.81, respectively). The factorial validity was demonstrated, supporting the two-factor solution. Items are assessed in 4-point Likert-type format (not at all…a great deal). Negative affect was assessed using the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988 ). The PANAS consists of 20 emotions (10 negative; 10 positive) and participants are asked to rate the extent to which they have felt that way in the past week on a 5-point Likert-type scale (very slightly or not at all…extremely). Internal reliability was high for the negative affect scale (? = .84–.87). The positive and negative affect subscales share 1–5% of their variance. Test-retest reliability for one year was .60 and for a few weeks was .48. The scale also showed factorial, convergent, and discriminant validity.  God as helper This construct reflected the perceived assistance received from God in coping with cancer. Items involved the idea that God gives a person strength and comfort through the cancer experience, without which one may not have been able to make it through.  God as Healer This construct reflected the perception of God as a healer, either directly or through doctors. This dual role of God in healing is reflected in a two-dimensional factor solution (see below).  Faith in healing This construct reflected the idea that if a patient has enough faith, they can recover from cancer. Items involved the notion that one’s faith may be tested or renewed as a result of the cancer experience.  Control over cancer This construct reflected the idea that by speaking or thinking negatively or positively, one can impact one’s cancer outcomes in a negative or positive way, respectively. Items also reflected the idea of giving one’s problems over to God, and that if one cannot control something it is not something one should worry about.  New perspective This construct reflected the process of gaining a new perspective on life as a result of going through cancer. Items reflected the idea that the cancer experience may have even had a positive impact on one’s life, through a realignment of one’s priorities, or not worrying about insignificant things.  Instruments for assessment of convergent and discriminant validity Religious coping was assessed with the widely used Brief RCOPE ( Pargament, Smith, Koenig, & Perez, 1998 ). This 14-item instrument assesses positive (e.g., “Looked for a stronger connection with God.”) and negative (e.g., “Wondered whether God had abandoned me.”) religious coping and has demonstrated adequate internal consistency (? = .87–.90, ? = .78–.81, respectively). The factorial validity was demonstrated, supporting the two-factor solution. Items are assessed in 4-point Likert-type format (not at all…a great deal). Negative affect was assessed using the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988 ). The PANAS consists of 20 emotions (10 negative; 10 positive) and participants are asked to rate the extent to which they have felt that way in the past week on a 5-point Likert-type scale (very slightly or not at all…extremely). Internal reliability was high for the negative affect scale (? = .84–.87). The positive and negative affect subscales share 1–5% of their variance. Test-retest reliability for one year was .60 and for a few weeks was .48. The scale also showed factorial, convergent, and discriminant validity.  Data analysis Internal reliability was calculated using Cronbach’s alpha. Item-total scale correlations were examined as well as item-level skew statistics. Convergent validity was examined through correlations with another religious coping instrument ( Pargament, Smith, Koenig, & Perez, 1998 ). Discriminant validity was examined through correlations with negative affect ( Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988 ). Factor structure was explored using principal components analysis with varimax rotation. Eigenvalues were examined as well as percentage of variance accounted for. An exploratory approach was taken because it was not known in advance how many factors to expect.  Results The internal reliability of each of the instruments was high as evidenced by Cronbach’s alphas well above .80 (see Table 2 ). Table 3 shows skewness and item-total correlation statistics as well as the factor analysis results. Convergent validity was evidenced through significant correlations with positive religious coping (see Table 4 ). Discriminant validity was evidenced through nonsignificant correlations with negative affect. The factor structure was unidimensional for three of the instruments ( God as helper, eigenvalue=6.37, 70.90% variance accounted for; Faith in healing, eigenvalue=5.60, 62.23% variance accounted for; New perspective, eigenvalue=5.39, 53.86% of variance accounted for ). The other two showed a two-factor solution. For God as healer , the first factor appears to involve the direct role of God in healing ( eigenvalue=4.49, 49.89% variance accounted for ), while the other appears to involve God working through doctors to provide healing ( eigenvalue=1.17, 12.96% variance accounted for ). Two of the items had inconclusive factor loadings. For the Control over cancer instrument, the first factor appeared to involve the notion of not being in control of cancer and needing to stay positive ( eigenvalue=4.87, 48.70% variance accounted for ). The second factor appeared to involve the notion of the power of thoughts and words, both positive or negative, to bring about outcomes ( eigenvalue=1.39, 13.88% variance accounted for ).  Results The internal reliability of each of the instruments was high as evidenced by Cronbach’s alphas well above .80 (see Table 2 ). Table 3 shows skewness and item-total correlation statistics as well as the factor analysis results. Convergent validity was evidenced through significant correlations with positive religious coping (see Table 4 ). Discriminant validity was evidenced through nonsignificant correlations with negative affect. The factor structure was unidimensional for three of the instruments ( God as helper, eigenvalue=6.37, 70.90% variance accounted for; Faith in healing, eigenvalue=5.60, 62.23% variance accounted for; New perspective, eigenvalue=5.39, 53.86% of variance accounted for ). The other two showed a two-factor solution. For God as healer , the first factor appears to involve the direct role of God in healing ( eigenvalue=4.49, 49.89% variance accounted for ), while the other appears to involve God working through doctors to provide healing ( eigenvalue=1.17, 12.96% variance accounted for ). Two of the items had inconclusive factor loadings. For the Control over cancer instrument, the first factor appeared to involve the notion of not being in control of cancer and needing to stay positive ( eigenvalue=4.87, 48.70% variance accounted for ). The second factor appeared to involve the notion of the power of thoughts and words, both positive or negative, to bring about outcomes ( eigenvalue=1.39, 13.88% variance accounted for ).  Discussion These five areas emerged from previous qualitative interviews with African Americans with cancer, as being ways in which religious involvement is used in coping with the disease. The item development phase appeared to produce instruments with initial strong reliability and validity in this sample. Where the factor structured deviated from unidimensional, they were largely interpretable. The exception is with two items on the God as healer instrument that loaded similarly on both factors. In practice, these items could likely be eliminated from further use without hindering the psychometric properties of the instrument. Convergent validity was evidenced through significant correlations with positive religious coping, however the correlations with negative religious coping were not significant. More research should be done to examine the individuals who are in a religious struggle and experiencing negative religious coping. Religious struggle, involving potential anger at a higher power, wondering how a higher power could have allowed a crisis to happen to the individual (“why me”), or wondering if the higher power had forgotten about the individual, was associated with depressive symptoms and emotional distress among outpatients with diabetes, congestive heart failure, and inpatients with cancer ( Fitchett, Murphy, Jo, Gibbons, Cameron, & Davis, 2004 ). In a longitudinal sample of elderly individuals who had received inpatient services, religious struggle was predictive of increased mortality ( Pargament, Koenig, Tarakeshwar, & Hahn, 2001 ). These studies suggest that there are negative aspects of religious coping that are prevalent and have negative outcomes for those who experience them. Though these five constructs reflect the foundational qualitative phase when patients were discussing the role of religious involvement in cancer coping, it should be noted that not all five reflect religious involvement directly. For the Control Over Cancer construct, some of the items reflect God directly while others do not; they reflect beliefs about the power of speaking or thinking negatively or positively over cancer progression or recurrence. The New Perspective construct does not reflect religious involvement. However, both constructs were included in the instrument development phase due to their importance to the patients within the context of the broader, and perhaps spiritual cancer coping trajectory. The New Perspective construct is similar to the constructs reflected in the Post Traumatic Growth Inventory ( Tedeschi & Calhoun, 1996 ), however the latter is more individual-focused and is of course broader, not being cancer-specific. The context and findings of the present study relate to previous work in religious coping. Scores on the current five instruments suggest that the sample does find these aspects of religious involvement as important in coping with cancer, and that this is an active as opposed to a passive coping process. Religious involvement was viewed as an active coping mechanism in previous research ( Jenkins & Pargament, 1988 ). However, there are still individual differences, such that religious involvement may facilitate coping in some patients and hinder it in others. More specific measures of religious coping were offered and further work encouraged ( Jenkins & Pargament, 1995 ), which is where the present study contributes. The present study provides an in-depth look at the complex construct of control in the cancer experience. Though it is not intended to be a comprehensive treatment of control or locus of control, the current instrument is consistent with the ideas that God is an important source of external control. However, similar to Jenkins and Pargament (1988) , this is an empowering and active source as opposed to a fatalistic and passive source. In a sample of cancer patients (mostly White), they found the predictors of adjustment included perceived personal control and God control, the latter being of this empowering nature. The present study suggests this individual-God partnership is important, similar to the collaborative religious coping style ( Phillips, Pargament, Lynn, & Crossley, 2004 ; Holt, Clark, & Klem, 2007 ). However, these new instruments provide unique dimensions of the role of religious involvement in cancer coping beyond previous instruments such as the Brief RCOPE ( Pargament, Smith, Koenig, & Perez, 1998 ). While the Brief RCOPE illustrates styles of religious coping, the present instruments reflect more specific beliefs and strategies used by African Americans coping with cancer. It is therefore a somewhat more targeted instrument suitable for use with these populations. However, further testing would be warranted to determine suitability for other populations and health conditions. It would also be appropriate to determine how scores on these new instruments relate to scores on religious coping dimensions such as passive deferral, active surrender, and collaborative coping ( Pargament, Kennell, Hathaway, Grevengoed, Newman, & Jones, 1988 ). The current findings should be considered within the context of several limitations. First, the generalizability of the sample is modest. The current instruments may not perform as well, nor may they capture constructs that are as relevant to African Americans outside of the deep South, or to individuals of other racial/ethnic groups. For example, phrases such as “power of the tongue” may not apply to groups outside of the southeastern United States. Certainly these instruments were developed on a largely Christian sample, which is evidenced by the use of the term “God” to reference a higher power or creator. Were the instruments to be used with a non-Christian group, minor wording modifications would have to occur. Future research should test these instruments with additional demographic groups. The sample size was limited to 100, thus precluding more sophisticated techniques for measurement modeling, such as structural equation modeling. With the current sample size, even the factor analyses had to be run individually rather than running one model including all 47 items. It is likely that individuals high in religious involvement and having a positive religious coping experience were likely to participate in the study. This results in a selection bias that should be kept in mind when interpreting study findings. In addition, participants were recruited six months after diagnosis. It is possible that, even though they retrospectively discussed the time of diagnosis, different themes may have emerged had we talked with people immediately post-diagnosis. It is notable that these five instruments reflect a largely positive role of religious involvement in cancer coping. While the potential negative aspects are not represented (e.g. religious struggle; Pargament, Koenig, Tarakeshwar, & Hahn, 2001 ), only material that was present in the foundational qualitative work could be included in the instrument development phase. These five instruments provide a deeper assessment of ways in which African American men and women use their religious involvement in coping with cancer than is currently available. These instruments should not be considered an exhaustive coverage of the role of religious involvement in cancer coping, but they do provide substantially more conceptual coverage than was previously available. The instruments have value not only for the understanding of the role of religious involvement in coping with serious illness, but also for their applicability to other serious illness or circumstances. There is potential applied value as well, where these instruments could be used as assessment tools in spiritual or pastoral counseling applications. Responses to the instruments could also be used to target or tailor cancer coping and/or support interventions to the respondents. In this way, the needs of African Americans with cancer can be better addressed, in the context of reducing the disparities that are present in cancer survivorship among this underserved group.  Discussion These five areas emerged from previous qualitative interviews with African Americans with cancer, as being ways in which religious involvement is used in coping with the disease. The item development phase appeared to produce instruments with initial strong reliability and validity in this sample. Where the factor structured deviated from unidimensional, they were largely interpretable. The exception is with two items on the God as healer instrument that loaded similarly on both factors. In practice, these items could likely be eliminated from further use without hindering the psychometric properties of the instrument. Convergent validity was evidenced through significant correlations with positive religious coping, however the correlations with negative religious coping were not significant. More research should be done to examine the individuals who are in a religious struggle and experiencing negative religious coping. Religious struggle, involving potential anger at a higher power, wondering how a higher power could have allowed a crisis to happen to the individual (“why me”), or wondering if the higher power had forgotten about the individual, was associated with depressive symptoms and emotional distress among outpatients with diabetes, congestive heart failure, and inpatients with cancer ( Fitchett, Murphy, Jo, Gibbons, Cameron, & Davis, 2004 ). In a longitudinal sample of elderly individuals who had received inpatient services, religious struggle was predictive of increased mortality ( Pargament, Koenig, Tarakeshwar, & Hahn, 2001 ). These studies suggest that there are negative aspects of religious coping that are prevalent and have negative outcomes for those who experience them. Though these five constructs reflect the foundational qualitative phase when patients were discussing the role of religious involvement in cancer coping, it should be noted that not all five reflect religious involvement directly. For the Control Over Cancer construct, some of the items reflect God directly while others do not; they reflect beliefs about the power of speaking or thinking negatively or positively over cancer progression or recurrence. The New Perspective construct does not reflect religious involvement. However, both constructs were included in the instrument development phase due to their importance to the patients within the context of the broader, and perhaps spiritual cancer coping trajectory. The New Perspective construct is similar to the constructs reflected in the Post Traumatic Growth Inventory ( Tedeschi & Calhoun, 1996 ), however the latter is more individual-focused and is of course broader, not being cancer-specific. The context and findings of the present study relate to previous work in religious coping. Scores on the current five instruments suggest that the sample does find these aspects of religious involvement as important in coping with cancer, and that this is an active as opposed to a passive coping process. Religious involvement was viewed as an active coping mechanism in previous research ( Jenkins & Pargament, 1988 ). However, there are still individual differences, such that religious involvement may facilitate coping in some patients and hinder it in others. More specific measures of religious coping were offered and further work encouraged ( Jenkins & Pargament, 1995 ), which is where the present study contributes. The present study provides an in-depth look at the complex construct of control in the cancer experience. Though it is not intended to be a comprehensive treatment of control or locus of control, the current instrument is consistent with the ideas that God is an important source of external control. However, similar to Jenkins and Pargament (1988) , this is an empowering and active source as opposed to a fatalistic and passive source. In a sample of cancer patients (mostly White), they found the predictors of adjustment included perceived personal control and God control, the latter being of this empowering nature. The present study suggests this individual-God partnership is important, similar to the collaborative religious coping style ( Phillips, Pargament, Lynn, & Crossley, 2004 ; Holt, Clark, & Klem, 2007 ). However, these new instruments provide unique dimensions of the role of religious involvement in cancer coping beyond previous instruments such as the Brief RCOPE ( Pargament, Smith, Koenig, & Perez, 1998 ). While the Brief RCOPE illustrates styles of religious coping, the present instruments reflect more specific beliefs and strategies used by African Americans coping with cancer. It is therefore a somewhat more targeted instrument suitable for use with these populations. However, further testing would be warranted to determine suitability for other populations and health conditions. It would also be appropriate to determine how scores on these new instruments relate to scores on religious coping dimensions such as passive deferral, active surrender, and collaborative coping ( Pargament, Kennell, Hathaway, Grevengoed, Newman, & Jones, 1988 ). The current findings should be considered within the context of several limitations. First, the generalizability of the sample is modest. The current instruments may not perform as well, nor may they capture constructs that are as relevant to African Americans outside of the deep South, or to individuals of other racial/ethnic groups. For example, phrases such as “power of the tongue” may not apply to groups outside of the southeastern United States. Certainly these instruments were developed on a largely Christian sample, which is evidenced by the use of the term “God” to reference a higher power or creator. Were the instruments to be used with a non-Christian group, minor wording modifications would have to occur. Future research should test these instruments with additional demographic groups. The sample size was limited to 100, thus precluding more sophisticated techniques for measurement modeling, such as structural equation modeling. With the current sample size, even the factor analyses had to be run individually rather than running one model including all 47 items. It is likely that individuals high in religious involvement and having a positive religious coping experience were likely to participate in the study. This results in a selection bias that should be kept in mind when interpreting study findings. In addition, participants were recruited six months after diagnosis. It is possible that, even though they retrospectively discussed the time of diagnosis, different themes may have emerged had we talked with people immediately post-diagnosis. It is notable that these five instruments reflect a largely positive role of religious involvement in cancer coping. While the potential negative aspects are not represented (e.g. religious struggle; Pargament, Koenig, Tarakeshwar, & Hahn, 2001 ), only material that was present in the foundational qualitative work could be included in the instrument development phase. These five instruments provide a deeper assessment of ways in which African American men and women use their religious involvement in coping with cancer than is currently available. These instruments should not be considered an exhaustive coverage of the role of religious involvement in cancer coping, but they do provide substantially more conceptual coverage than was previously available. The instruments have value not only for the understanding of the role of religious involvement in coping with serious illness, but also for their applicability to other serious illness or circumstances. There is potential applied value as well, where these instruments could be used as assessment tools in spiritual or pastoral counseling applications. Responses to the instruments could also be used to target or tailor cancer coping and/or support interventions to the respondents. In this way, the needs of African Americans with cancer can be better addressed, in the context of reducing the disparities that are present in cancer survivorship among this underserved group. 