Cytokine, Sickness Behavior, and Depression Summary Sufficient evidence is now available to accept the concept that the brain recognizes cytokines as molecular signals of sickness. Clarifying the way the brain processes information generated by the innate immune system is accompanied by a progressive elucidation of the cellular and molecular components of the intricate system that mediates cytokine-induced sickness behavior. We are still far, however, from understanding the whole. Among the hundreds of genes that proinflammatory cytokines can induce in their cellular targets, only a handful has been examined functionally. In addition, a dynamic view of the cellular interactions that occur at the brain sites of cytokine production and action is missing, together with a clarification of the mechanisms that favor the transition toward pathology.  Pathophysiologic implications Based on previous evidence, sickness behavior seems to be nothing else than the outward expression of a reversible episode of cytokine expression and action in the brain in response to peripheral immune stimulation. Sickness behavior, however, is not a passive response, in the form of a temporary disappearance of the usual activities of the host. The proinflammatory cytokines that are produced by activated innate immune cells serve as sensory signals that are recognized and interpreted by the brain. The brain representation of peripheral immune activation resets the organism’s priorities to enable the subjects at risk to deal with infection in the most efficient way allowed to them. The expression of sickness behavior is not simply the result of the changes in internal state experienced by sick subjects but the joint function of the changes in their internal state and the environmental constraints to which they are exposed [ 1 ], [ 61 ]. This is characteristic of motivated behavior. An experiment performed on sickness behavior in lactating mice, in which caring for their pups is the predominant motivation, provides a good example of the motivational conflict that can take place in sick individuals. Lactating mice were made sick by an appropriate dose of systemic LPS. They remained inactive and indifferent to the solicitations of their pups until the pups were dispersed in the cage and the nest was removed. In this situation, their maternal motivation took over their sickness motivation, and they engaged in pup retrieval. Furthermore, when provided with cotton wool, which they normally use to build a nest, they did not engage in nest building in addition to pup retrieval unless the ambient temperature dropped to 6°C [ 62 ]. Because cytokine-induced sickness behavior is the expression of a motivational state that is triggered by activation of the peripheral innate immune system, it is not pathologic per se but as normal as the fear response that occurs in individuals exposed to the threat of a predator ( Fig. 2 ). Like fear, sickness behavior can become abnormal or pathologic when it occurs out of context (i.e, in the absence of any inflammatory stimulus) or when it is exaggerated in intensity or duration. Several conditions can be responsible for this situation: (1) proinflammatory cytokines can be produced in higher quantities and for a longer duration than normal; (2) the regulatory molecules that normally downregulate activation of the molecular and cellular components of the sickness response are faulty; or (3) the neuronal circuits that are the targets of inflammatory mediators and organize sickness behavior become sensitized. Because of the close similarities between symptoms of sickness and clinical signs of depression, any of these conditions is likely a risk factor for the occurrence of major depressive disorders. Evidence for the possibility of a shift from sickness behavior to depression is available from two different sources, clinical research and experimental studies on animal models of depressive disorders. At the clinical level, there is growing evidence that major depression is associated with significant elevations in circulating levels of proinflammatory cytokines, in particular IL-6 [ 63 ], [ 64 ], [ 65 ], [ 66 ], [ 67 ], [ 68 ]. (See the article by Irwin and colleagues elsewhere in this issue for further discussion of the relationship between depression and immunity.) Conversely, chronic activation of the innate immune system can precipitate the development of depressive disorders, as exemplified by the psychopathologic alterations that occur in patients receiving repeated injections of recombinant cytokines, mainly IL-2 or interferon (INF)-?, for the treatment of viral infections (hepatitis C) or cancer. During the first stages of cytokine therapy, all patients usually develop a full-blown episode of sickness behavior, characterized by the symptoms of fever, malaise, anorexia, pain, and fatigue. At later stages of treatment, up to one third of patients develop alterations in mood that are characteristic of depression, including sadness, inability to feel, depressed mood, and even suicidal ideation [ 69 ]. The onset of depressive symptoms depends on the cytokine and treatment modalities (eg, dosage and administration route). The occurrence of depression can be prevented by pretreatment with paroxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor with antidepressant properties. Nevertheless, pretreatment with paroxetine has a minimal or null effect on the development of neurovegetative symptoms of sickness, including fever, fatigue, and anorexia, confirming the dissociation between sickness behavior and depression [ 70 ]. These findings can be interpreted to suggest that depressive disorders develop from cytokine-induced sickness behavior only in vulnerable patients ( Fig. 3 ). Vulnerability, in the present context, refers to an innate or acquired predisposition to develop a given pathology when causal factors are present. Dysfunction in genes controlling key proteins in cytokine production (e.g., IL-6 [ 71 ]) and serotoninergic neurotransmission (e.g, activity of the serotonin transporter [ 71 ] or serotonin receptor subtype [ 72 ]) are identified as vulnerability factors for cytokine-induced depression. Vulnerability to cytokine-induced depression can be revealed by psychologic features. Patients who have high scores on depression scales (including the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale and the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale) at the start of cytokine treatment are more likely to develop depressive syndrome in response to immunotherapy than patients who have a low score at baseline [ 73 ], [ 74 ]. Vulnerability also can be revealed by physiologic features. Patients who respond to the first injection of IFN-? by an exaggerated pituitary-adrenal response are more likely to become depressed in response to repeated administration of IFN-? than patients who display a lower pituitary-adrenal response [ 75 ]. These two different characteristics are markers of vulnerability. They can help to identify patients who are at risk, but they do not explain why patients who have these characteristics are more vulnerable than those who do not have them. The model of cytokine-induced depression has the advantage of providing clinicians with the possibility of observing development of depressive symptoms over time in a large number of patients who can be monitored closely from the time they start receiving immunotherapy. Furthermore, patients who develop depression can be compared transversally to patients who remain free of any mood disorder. The model of cytokine-induced depression, therefore, provides valuable insights into the relationship between cytokines and depression. At the clinical level, there is evidence that symptoms of mood disorder are more polymorphic than just depression. A study of patients who had hepatitis C and were treated with IFN-? shows, for instance, that dysphoria and mixed states dominate the clinical presentation of patients, with increases in irritability and anxiety as the main symptoms [ 76 ]. The reasons for the differences between patients who have hepatitis C and patients who have cancer who present mainly with depressed mood are not known. They could be because of medical context (cytokine immunotherapy is palliative only for patients who have cancer, whereas it usually is curative for patients who have hepatitis C), immunologic context (immune responses of patients infected by a virus are different from those of patients who have cancer), or simply variations in treatment modalities (high doses of IFN-? administered intravenously and daily to patients who have malignant melanoma versus low doses of pegylated IFN-? administered together with ribavirin once a week to patients who have chronic hepatitis C). These variations also could be related to differences in affective and psychiatric background, because many patients who have chronic hepatitis C have a history of substance abuse. At the pathophysiologic level, an insight into the chain of events linking cytokines to mood alterations has emerged from the observation that patients who have cancer and are treated with cytokines develop a drastic decrease in plasma tryptophan levels that correlates with depression scores at 4 weeks of treatment [ 77 ]. This decrease in plasma trytophan levels previously was noted but in a qualitative rather than quantitative manner [ 78 ]. These findings are important, because bioavailability of tryptophan is the limiting factor for the synthesis of serotonin. The acute depletion of tryptophan produced by feeding excess amounts of large neutral aminoacids that compete with tryptophan for entry into the brain results in the development of depressed mood in subjects at risk for depression. A likely candidate for this decrease in plasma tryptophan in patients submitted to cytokine immunotherapy is the enzyme, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), that degrades tryptophan into kynurenine and quinolinic acid ( Fig. 4 ). IDO is present in macrophages and monocytes, endothelial cells, and brain glial cells. It is potently activated by proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-? and IFN-?, both at the periphery and in the brain [ 79 ]. Its activation results in a decrease in tryptophan bioavailability for the synthesis of serotonin and in the formation of neuroactive compounds, such as kynurenine and quinolinic acid, that act, respectively, as antagonist and agonist of glutamate receptors. Experiments carried out in mice submitted to acute inflammation in response to LPS or to chronic inflammation with Bacillus Calmette-Geurin, an attenuated form of Mycobacterium bovis , reveal the gradual emergence of depressive-like behavior after waning of the sickness response [ 80 ] [ 81 ]. The emergence of depressive-like behavior is associated with activation of IDO [ 82 ] and furthermore blockade of IDO by interfering with the cytokine response or directly inhibiting IDO results in the abrogation of depressive-like behavior [ 83 ]. In the same manner, blockade of TNFa in psoriasis patients results in an attenuation of fatigue and depression symptoms before the medical condition resolves [ 84 ]. The interference of proinflammatory cytokines with serotoninergic neurotransmission can explain some of the clinical signs, such as impulsivity and depressed mood, that develop in vulnerable patients. Another possible mechanism is the production of kynurenine metabolites that act as agonists of the glutamate receptors [ 85 ] [ 86 ]. The interference of cytokines with serotoninergic neurotransmission does not account, however, for the anhedonia, fatigue, and psychomotor retardation observed in patients treated with cytokine [ 69 ]. These symptoms probably reflect a decrease in dopaminergic neurotransmission. This hypothesis is supported by neuroimaging studies showing alterations in the activity of basal ganglia during cytokine therapy [ 87 ], [ 88 ]. Despite its heuristic value, the clinical relevance of the model of cytokine-induced depression could be questioned, because it is a rather extreme situation. There is evidence, however, that overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines also is associated with mood disorders in chronic inflammatory medical conditions, including coronary heart disease. Of course, the relationship between cytokines and depression is less easy to reveal, because patients who have such medical conditions are examined at different stages of their disease process. This may result in much higher interindividual variability. Despite these constraints, it is possible to observe higher levels of myocardial cytokines and higher antibody titers against microbial pathogens possibly involved in the pathophysiology of coronary heart disease in patients suffering from vital exhaustion at the time of coronary bypass [ 89 ]. In the same manner, depressive disorders that develop over time in postischemic coronary patients are associated with endothelial cell activation and probably inflammation, although the therapeutic use of statins that have anti-inflammatory actions attenuates differences betweens cases and controls [ 90 ].  Pathophysiologic implications Based on previous evidence, sickness behavior seems to be nothing else than the outward expression of a reversible episode of cytokine expression and action in the brain in response to peripheral immune stimulation. Sickness behavior, however, is not a passive response, in the form of a temporary disappearance of the usual activities of the host. The proinflammatory cytokines that are produced by activated innate immune cells serve as sensory signals that are recognized and interpreted by the brain. The brain representation of peripheral immune activation resets the organism’s priorities to enable the subjects at risk to deal with infection in the most efficient way allowed to them. The expression of sickness behavior is not simply the result of the changes in internal state experienced by sick subjects but the joint function of the changes in their internal state and the environmental constraints to which they are exposed [ 1 ], [ 61 ]. This is characteristic of motivated behavior. An experiment performed on sickness behavior in lactating mice, in which caring for their pups is the predominant motivation, provides a good example of the motivational conflict that can take place in sick individuals. Lactating mice were made sick by an appropriate dose of systemic LPS. They remained inactive and indifferent to the solicitations of their pups until the pups were dispersed in the cage and the nest was removed. In this situation, their maternal motivation took over their sickness motivation, and they engaged in pup retrieval. Furthermore, when provided with cotton wool, which they normally use to build a nest, they did not engage in nest building in addition to pup retrieval unless the ambient temperature dropped to 6°C [ 62 ]. Because cytokine-induced sickness behavior is the expression of a motivational state that is triggered by activation of the peripheral innate immune system, it is not pathologic per se but as normal as the fear response that occurs in individuals exposed to the threat of a predator ( Fig. 2 ). Like fear, sickness behavior can become abnormal or pathologic when it occurs out of context (i.e, in the absence of any inflammatory stimulus) or when it is exaggerated in intensity or duration. Several conditions can be responsible for this situation: (1) proinflammatory cytokines can be produced in higher quantities and for a longer duration than normal; (2) the regulatory molecules that normally downregulate activation of the molecular and cellular components of the sickness response are faulty; or (3) the neuronal circuits that are the targets of inflammatory mediators and organize sickness behavior become sensitized. Because of the close similarities between symptoms of sickness and clinical signs of depression, any of these conditions is likely a risk factor for the occurrence of major depressive disorders. Evidence for the possibility of a shift from sickness behavior to depression is available from two different sources, clinical research and experimental studies on animal models of depressive disorders. At the clinical level, there is growing evidence that major depression is associated with significant elevations in circulating levels of proinflammatory cytokines, in particular IL-6 [ 63 ], [ 64 ], [ 65 ], [ 66 ], [ 67 ], [ 68 ]. (See the article by Irwin and colleagues elsewhere in this issue for further discussion of the relationship between depression and immunity.) Conversely, chronic activation of the innate immune system can precipitate the development of depressive disorders, as exemplified by the psychopathologic alterations that occur in patients receiving repeated injections of recombinant cytokines, mainly IL-2 or interferon (INF)-?, for the treatment of viral infections (hepatitis C) or cancer. During the first stages of cytokine therapy, all patients usually develop a full-blown episode of sickness behavior, characterized by the symptoms of fever, malaise, anorexia, pain, and fatigue. At later stages of treatment, up to one third of patients develop alterations in mood that are characteristic of depression, including sadness, inability to feel, depressed mood, and even suicidal ideation [ 69 ]. The onset of depressive symptoms depends on the cytokine and treatment modalities (eg, dosage and administration route). The occurrence of depression can be prevented by pretreatment with paroxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor with antidepressant properties. Nevertheless, pretreatment with paroxetine has a minimal or null effect on the development of neurovegetative symptoms of sickness, including fever, fatigue, and anorexia, confirming the dissociation between sickness behavior and depression [ 70 ]. These findings can be interpreted to suggest that depressive disorders develop from cytokine-induced sickness behavior only in vulnerable patients ( Fig. 3 ). Vulnerability, in the present context, refers to an innate or acquired predisposition to develop a given pathology when causal factors are present. Dysfunction in genes controlling key proteins in cytokine production (e.g., IL-6 [ 71 ]) and serotoninergic neurotransmission (e.g, activity of the serotonin transporter [ 71 ] or serotonin receptor subtype [ 72 ]) are identified as vulnerability factors for cytokine-induced depression. Vulnerability to cytokine-induced depression can be revealed by psychologic features. Patients who have high scores on depression scales (including the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale and the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale) at the start of cytokine treatment are more likely to develop depressive syndrome in response to immunotherapy than patients who have a low score at baseline [ 73 ], [ 74 ]. Vulnerability also can be revealed by physiologic features. Patients who respond to the first injection of IFN-? by an exaggerated pituitary-adrenal response are more likely to become depressed in response to repeated administration of IFN-? than patients who display a lower pituitary-adrenal response [ 75 ]. These two different characteristics are markers of vulnerability. They can help to identify patients who are at risk, but they do not explain why patients who have these characteristics are more vulnerable than those who do not have them. The model of cytokine-induced depression has the advantage of providing clinicians with the possibility of observing development of depressive symptoms over time in a large number of patients who can be monitored closely from the time they start receiving immunotherapy. Furthermore, patients who develop depression can be compared transversally to patients who remain free of any mood disorder. The model of cytokine-induced depression, therefore, provides valuable insights into the relationship between cytokines and depression. At the clinical level, there is evidence that symptoms of mood disorder are more polymorphic than just depression. A study of patients who had hepatitis C and were treated with IFN-? shows, for instance, that dysphoria and mixed states dominate the clinical presentation of patients, with increases in irritability and anxiety as the main symptoms [ 76 ]. The reasons for the differences between patients who have hepatitis C and patients who have cancer who present mainly with depressed mood are not known. They could be because of medical context (cytokine immunotherapy is palliative only for patients who have cancer, whereas it usually is curative for patients who have hepatitis C), immunologic context (immune responses of patients infected by a virus are different from those of patients who have cancer), or simply variations in treatment modalities (high doses of IFN-? administered intravenously and daily to patients who have malignant melanoma versus low doses of pegylated IFN-? administered together with ribavirin once a week to patients who have chronic hepatitis C). These variations also could be related to differences in affective and psychiatric background, because many patients who have chronic hepatitis C have a history of substance abuse. At the pathophysiologic level, an insight into the chain of events linking cytokines to mood alterations has emerged from the observation that patients who have cancer and are treated with cytokines develop a drastic decrease in plasma tryptophan levels that correlates with depression scores at 4 weeks of treatment [ 77 ]. This decrease in plasma trytophan levels previously was noted but in a qualitative rather than quantitative manner [ 78 ]. These findings are important, because bioavailability of tryptophan is the limiting factor for the synthesis of serotonin. The acute depletion of tryptophan produced by feeding excess amounts of large neutral aminoacids that compete with tryptophan for entry into the brain results in the development of depressed mood in subjects at risk for depression. A likely candidate for this decrease in plasma tryptophan in patients submitted to cytokine immunotherapy is the enzyme, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), that degrades tryptophan into kynurenine and quinolinic acid ( Fig. 4 ). IDO is present in macrophages and monocytes, endothelial cells, and brain glial cells. It is potently activated by proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-? and IFN-?, both at the periphery and in the brain [ 79 ]. Its activation results in a decrease in tryptophan bioavailability for the synthesis of serotonin and in the formation of neuroactive compounds, such as kynurenine and quinolinic acid, that act, respectively, as antagonist and agonist of glutamate receptors. Experiments carried out in mice submitted to acute inflammation in response to LPS or to chronic inflammation with Bacillus Calmette-Geurin, an attenuated form of Mycobacterium bovis , reveal the gradual emergence of depressive-like behavior after waning of the sickness response [ 80 ] [ 81 ]. The emergence of depressive-like behavior is associated with activation of IDO [ 82 ] and furthermore blockade of IDO by interfering with the cytokine response or directly inhibiting IDO results in the abrogation of depressive-like behavior [ 83 ]. In the same manner, blockade of TNFa in psoriasis patients results in an attenuation of fatigue and depression symptoms before the medical condition resolves [ 84 ]. The interference of proinflammatory cytokines with serotoninergic neurotransmission can explain some of the clinical signs, such as impulsivity and depressed mood, that develop in vulnerable patients. Another possible mechanism is the production of kynurenine metabolites that act as agonists of the glutamate receptors [ 85 ] [ 86 ]. The interference of cytokines with serotoninergic neurotransmission does not account, however, for the anhedonia, fatigue, and psychomotor retardation observed in patients treated with cytokine [ 69 ]. These symptoms probably reflect a decrease in dopaminergic neurotransmission. This hypothesis is supported by neuroimaging studies showing alterations in the activity of basal ganglia during cytokine therapy [ 87 ], [ 88 ]. Despite its heuristic value, the clinical relevance of the model of cytokine-induced depression could be questioned, because it is a rather extreme situation. There is evidence, however, that overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines also is associated with mood disorders in chronic inflammatory medical conditions, including coronary heart disease. Of course, the relationship between cytokines and depression is less easy to reveal, because patients who have such medical conditions are examined at different stages of their disease process. This may result in much higher interindividual variability. Despite these constraints, it is possible to observe higher levels of myocardial cytokines and higher antibody titers against microbial pathogens possibly involved in the pathophysiology of coronary heart disease in patients suffering from vital exhaustion at the time of coronary bypass [ 89 ]. In the same manner, depressive disorders that develop over time in postischemic coronary patients are associated with endothelial cell activation and probably inflammation, although the therapeutic use of statins that have anti-inflammatory actions attenuates differences betweens cases and controls [ 90 ].  Figures Fig. 1 Mechanisms of brain actions of cytokines. Proinflammatory cytokines are released by activated innate immune cells at the periphery in response to PAMP. PAMP and circulating cytokines act on TLRs on macrophage-like cells in the CVOs and choroid plexus, leading to the production of brain cytokines that diffuse by volume propagation into the brain parenchyma. The action of peripheral proinflammatory cytokines also can be relayed to the brain by afferent nerves, resulting in the production of brain proinflammatory cytokines by microglial cells. In both cases, the action of brain proinflammatory cytokines can be mediated by prostaglandins that diffuse to brain targets or by activation of neural pathways within the brain, which enables the immune message to be transported far away from its site of origin. Prostaglandins can be synthesized only by endothelial cells of brain venules in response to circulating cytokines. Dotted arrows represent instances of neural transmission of the immune message from the periphery to the brain or within the brain itself. Fig. 2 Motivational model of sickness. Like fear, sickness has motivational properties in the sense that it organizes the organism’s functioning at three levels—subjective, behavioral, and visceral—so as to cope with the threat to which the organism is exposed. Fig. 3 The two-hit model of cytokine-induced depression. Production of proinflammatory cytokines induces sickness behavior that usually is terminated by endogenous anti-inflammatory molecules. Sustained production of proinflammatory cytokines in the context of insufficient production of anti-inflammatory molecules can lead to depression in vulnerable individuals. Many factors, acquired or genetic, can contribute to vulnerability. Fig. 4 Mechanisms of the depressing effects of cytokines on mood. Activation of the innate immune system is triggered by cytokine immunotherapy or psychosocial stressors (via a ?2-adrenergic receptor). It results in the overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines. The same condition occurs during chronic inflammation. Cytokines, such as TNF-? and IFN-?, increase activity of the enzyme, IDO, that degrades tryptophan along the kynurenine/quinolinic acid metabolic pathway, resulting in a decrease in tryptophan and an increase in kynurenine. The decreased tryptophan bioavailability leads to decreased serotoninergic neurotransmission and depressed mood. Depression itself can be accompanied by altered immunity, including activation of the innate immune system, further increasing the proinflammatory cytokine load.  Figures Fig. 1 Mechanisms of brain actions of cytokines. Proinflammatory cytokines are released by activated innate immune cells at the periphery in response to PAMP. PAMP and circulating cytokines act on TLRs on macrophage-like cells in the CVOs and choroid plexus, leading to the production of brain cytokines that diffuse by volume propagation into the brain parenchyma. The action of peripheral proinflammatory cytokines also can be relayed to the brain by afferent nerves, resulting in the production of brain proinflammatory cytokines by microglial cells. In both cases, the action of brain proinflammatory cytokines can be mediated by prostaglandins that diffuse to brain targets or by activation of neural pathways within the brain, which enables the immune message to be transported far away from its site of origin. Prostaglandins can be synthesized only by endothelial cells of brain venules in response to circulating cytokines. Dotted arrows represent instances of neural transmission of the immune message from the periphery to the brain or within the brain itself. Fig. 2 Motivational model of sickness. Like fear, sickness has motivational properties in the sense that it organizes the organism’s functioning at three levels—subjective, behavioral, and visceral—so as to cope with the threat to which the organism is exposed. Fig. 3 The two-hit model of cytokine-induced depression. Production of proinflammatory cytokines induces sickness behavior that usually is terminated by endogenous anti-inflammatory molecules. Sustained production of proinflammatory cytokines in the context of insufficient production of anti-inflammatory molecules can lead to depression in vulnerable individuals. Many factors, acquired or genetic, can contribute to vulnerability. Fig. 4 Mechanisms of the depressing effects of cytokines on mood. Activation of the innate immune system is triggered by cytokine immunotherapy or psychosocial stressors (via a ?2-adrenergic receptor). It results in the overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines. The same condition occurs during chronic inflammation. Cytokines, such as TNF-? and IFN-?, increase activity of the enzyme, IDO, that degrades tryptophan along the kynurenine/quinolinic acid metabolic pathway, resulting in a decrease in tryptophan and an increase in kynurenine. The decreased tryptophan bioavailability leads to decreased serotoninergic neurotransmission and depressed mood. Depression itself can be accompanied by altered immunity, including activation of the innate immune system, further increasing the proinflammatory cytokine load. 