Epithelioid Sarcoma of the Vulva in a 17-year-old Pregnant Woman Epithelioid sarcoma of the vulva is an extremely rare neoplasm with aggressive behavior and poor outcome. Herein, we report a case of vulvar epithelioid sarcoma presenting in a 17-year-old very early in her pregnancy. The patient presented with an asymptomatic nodule of the right labia majora of 1-year duration. Computerized tomographic scans showed enlarged inguinal lymph nodes and numerous lung nodules. Positron emission tomography was performed and revealed no suspicious lesions for metastatic disease. The patient underwent local excision of her vulvar lesion. On the basis of morphology and extensive immunohistochemistry, the lesion was classified as epithelioid sarcoma. The patient was referred to radiation therapy and upon evaluation, she was found to be in her sixth week of gestation. The patient continued with her pregnancy and underwent a lymph node dissection, which was positive. We review the literature of only the well-documented cases extensively studied by immunohistochemical analysis. We summarize the clinical presentation, clinical impression, treatment modalities, and outcomes of these cases. On account of the rarity of this disease in the vulva, there is no clear consensus on treatment modalities, but it seems that early aggressive surgical resection is the treatment of choice, with the role of adjuvant therapy to be determined.  DISCUSSION Epithelioid sarcoma is a rare soft tissue malignancy, which occurs in younger adults (mean age 26 years) with a male predilection, and generally involves the distal and proximal extremities. 19 ES involving the vulva is exceptionally rare; only 20 cases are reported in the literature and a mere 8 out of these 20 cases have supportive IHC studies. The clinical and pathologic findings of the 8 cases are summarized in Table 1 . The patients ranged in age from 23 to 57 years. Our patient (17 years old) is the youngest patient ever to be reported. The clinical impression varied, with Bartholin cyst being the most common impression, followed by fibroma, dermoid cysts, viral warts, and squamous cell carcinoma. The lesions generally presented as nodular masses ranging in size from 1.5 to 6 cm. ES is considered to be of unknown lineage and is often misdiagnosed as a benign lesion, especially as a benign granulomatous process. In these cases, two were initially misdiagnosed as hidradenoma papilleferum, and granulomatous inflammation with hyperplastic scarring. The interval between initial presentation and recurrence was 1 year for the former and nearly 7 years for the latter. 4 , 7 Morphologically, it is necessary to distinguish ES from other epithelioid-looking tumors such as epithelioid peripheral nerve sheath tumor, epithelioid leiomyosarcoma, epithelioid angiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, malignant melanoma, and poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. IHC studies are very helpful in making this distinction. ES is positive for vimentin, keratin, EMA, CD34 (50% of cases), and muscles actin (HHF-35) (1/3 of cases). Epithelioid peripheral nerve sheath tumors are usually S-100+ and keratin?, malignant melanoma (S-100+, HMB45+), epithelioid leiomyosarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma (muscle markers with negative keratin), and epithelioid angiosarcoma (keratin+, factor VIII+, CD34+, CD31+) and poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (keratin+ and all endothelial markers?). IHC studies in our case demonstrated immunoreactivity for AE1/3, EMA, vimentin, CD34, CD31, and factor VIII. On account of the positivity of CD31, epithelioid angiosarcoma was present in our differential diagnosis. However, the characteristic morphology was consistent with ES. Positive staining for CD31 is exceptionally rare and may represent the first case reported, leading us to confirm that ES is in fact of unknown lineage and can express a number of immunomarkers. In the past, the electron microscopic study showed a range of ultrastructural features wherein none were specific for ES, such as intercellular cytoplasmic interdigitations, ample cytoplasm with rough endoplasmic reticulum, intermediate-sized cytoplasmic filaments that lack condensation plaques, conspicuous Golgi complexes, and a moderate number of small, elongated mitochondria, lipid droplets, lysosomes, and glycogen. 2 The cytogenetic studies of ES are very limited and have not revealed a specific alteration specific to these tumors. Various chromosomal deletions and gains, none of which were specific, were noted on 7p, 8q, 9p, 9q, 18q11, and 22q11. 9 There are numerous factors that can predict poor prognosis. These include necrosis, vascular invasion, and mitotic index >2/10 HPF. 20 Clinically, locoregional lymph node involvement, a tumor size greater than 2 cm and deep localization are also poor prognostic factors. Metastatic disease of vulvar ES is common, with frequent involvement of the lungs and lymph nodes. Our patient had many poor prognostic factors: she presented with a lesion of 3 cm with necrosis, high mitotic index, and locoregional lymph node involvement. Surgical resection with wide margins (>2 cm) is considered the mainstay of treatment. Adjuvant therapy, especially radiation therapy may be beneficial, but treatment should be considered on an individual basis. In pregnancy, treatment options are very limited, especially in our case in which the patient refused to terminate her pregnancy. Treatment for pregnant women with ES is unexplored, as this is the second reported case of ES occurring during pregnancy. In the earlier case, the patient presented at 36 weeks of gestation and treatment consisted of a radical hemivulvectomy 6 weeks post-partum followed by chemotherapy. In our case, the treatment is limited and local excision with bilateral inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy would be the course of treatment for our patient. In addition, we are confronted with another challenge in that the patient is not compliant and she was lost to follow-up just before any treatment could be given. In conclusion, vulvar ES is a highly aggressive neoplasm with frequent locoregional and distant metastasis. Despite its rarity, both gynecologists and pathologists should be aware of its existence. The primary treatment modality remains extensive surgical resection with inguinal lymphadenectomy as early as possible in the disease course.  DISCUSSION Epithelioid sarcoma is a rare soft tissue malignancy, which occurs in younger adults (mean age 26 years) with a male predilection, and generally involves the distal and proximal extremities. 19 ES involving the vulva is exceptionally rare; only 20 cases are reported in the literature and a mere 8 out of these 20 cases have supportive IHC studies. The clinical and pathologic findings of the 8 cases are summarized in Table 1 . The patients ranged in age from 23 to 57 years. Our patient (17 years old) is the youngest patient ever to be reported. The clinical impression varied, with Bartholin cyst being the most common impression, followed by fibroma, dermoid cysts, viral warts, and squamous cell carcinoma. The lesions generally presented as nodular masses ranging in size from 1.5 to 6 cm. ES is considered to be of unknown lineage and is often misdiagnosed as a benign lesion, especially as a benign granulomatous process. In these cases, two were initially misdiagnosed as hidradenoma papilleferum, and granulomatous inflammation with hyperplastic scarring. The interval between initial presentation and recurrence was 1 year for the former and nearly 7 years for the latter. 4 , 7 Morphologically, it is necessary to distinguish ES from other epithelioid-looking tumors such as epithelioid peripheral nerve sheath tumor, epithelioid leiomyosarcoma, epithelioid angiosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, malignant melanoma, and poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. IHC studies are very helpful in making this distinction. ES is positive for vimentin, keratin, EMA, CD34 (50% of cases), and muscles actin (HHF-35) (1/3 of cases). Epithelioid peripheral nerve sheath tumors are usually S-100+ and keratin?, malignant melanoma (S-100+, HMB45+), epithelioid leiomyosarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma (muscle markers with negative keratin), and epithelioid angiosarcoma (keratin+, factor VIII+, CD34+, CD31+) and poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (keratin+ and all endothelial markers?). IHC studies in our case demonstrated immunoreactivity for AE1/3, EMA, vimentin, CD34, CD31, and factor VIII. On account of the positivity of CD31, epithelioid angiosarcoma was present in our differential diagnosis. However, the characteristic morphology was consistent with ES. Positive staining for CD31 is exceptionally rare and may represent the first case reported, leading us to confirm that ES is in fact of unknown lineage and can express a number of immunomarkers. In the past, the electron microscopic study showed a range of ultrastructural features wherein none were specific for ES, such as intercellular cytoplasmic interdigitations, ample cytoplasm with rough endoplasmic reticulum, intermediate-sized cytoplasmic filaments that lack condensation plaques, conspicuous Golgi complexes, and a moderate number of small, elongated mitochondria, lipid droplets, lysosomes, and glycogen. 2 The cytogenetic studies of ES are very limited and have not revealed a specific alteration specific to these tumors. Various chromosomal deletions and gains, none of which were specific, were noted on 7p, 8q, 9p, 9q, 18q11, and 22q11. 9 There are numerous factors that can predict poor prognosis. These include necrosis, vascular invasion, and mitotic index >2/10 HPF. 20 Clinically, locoregional lymph node involvement, a tumor size greater than 2 cm and deep localization are also poor prognostic factors. Metastatic disease of vulvar ES is common, with frequent involvement of the lungs and lymph nodes. Our patient had many poor prognostic factors: she presented with a lesion of 3 cm with necrosis, high mitotic index, and locoregional lymph node involvement. Surgical resection with wide margins (>2 cm) is considered the mainstay of treatment. Adjuvant therapy, especially radiation therapy may be beneficial, but treatment should be considered on an individual basis. In pregnancy, treatment options are very limited, especially in our case in which the patient refused to terminate her pregnancy. Treatment for pregnant women with ES is unexplored, as this is the second reported case of ES occurring during pregnancy. In the earlier case, the patient presented at 36 weeks of gestation and treatment consisted of a radical hemivulvectomy 6 weeks post-partum followed by chemotherapy. In our case, the treatment is limited and local excision with bilateral inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy would be the course of treatment for our patient. In addition, we are confronted with another challenge in that the patient is not compliant and she was lost to follow-up just before any treatment could be given. In conclusion, vulvar ES is a highly aggressive neoplasm with frequent locoregional and distant metastasis. Despite its rarity, both gynecologists and pathologists should be aware of its existence. The primary treatment modality remains extensive surgical resection with inguinal lymphadenectomy as early as possible in the disease course. 