Factor H and Neisserial pathogenesis Both Neisseria gonorrhoeae and N. meningitidis bind to factor H which enhances their ability to evade complement dependent killing. While porin is the ligand for human fH on gonococci, meningococci use a lipoprotein called factor H binding protein (fHbp) to bind to factor H and enhance their ability to evade complement dependent killing. This protein is currently being intensively investigated as a meningococcal vaccine candidate antigen. Consistent with the observation that meningococci cause natural infection only in humans, the organism resists human complement, and are more readily killed by complement from lower animals. This human species-specific complement evasion has important implications for evaluation of vaccine-elicited antibodies using non-human complement sources and development of animal models of disease.  Species specificity of factor H binding to Neisseriae and its implications We have shown previously that serum resistance of N. gonorrhoeae is species-specific. N. gonorrhoeae bind to human complement inhibitory proteins such as C4bp-binding protein (C4BP; classical pathway inhibitor) and factor H in a species-specific manner. PorB.1B-bearing strains that can bind to human C4BP can also bind to chimpanzee C4BP and resist chimpanzee serum [ 52 ]. However, all serum resistant strains of N. gonorrhoeae strains tested so far are susceptible to killing by complement from other primates such as baboons and rhesus, and lower animals such as rabbits, guinea pigs and rats. Adding purified human C4BP or factor H to nonhuman sera restores the ability of N. gonorrhoeae to resist heterologous complement [ 52 ]. These results may in part explain the restriction of natural gonococcal infection to humans. Akin to N. gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis is a human specific pathogen. To investigate the underlying reason, we first compared binding of factor H present in human serum to N. meningitidis with factor H from other primates (chimpanzee, baboon and rhesus macaque). Compared to human factor H, we found weak binding to chimpanzee factor H and barely detectable binding to rhesus macaque and baboon factor H [ 53 ]. Furthermore, several meningococcal strains that express high levels of fHbp and resist killing by human complement are readily killed by infant rat complement. Adding purified human factor H to infant rat serum restores the ability of meningococci to resist complement-dependent killing. Species-specificity of factor H binding has two important implications. First, baby rabbit complement which is often used as a complement source to evaluate the efficacy of killing by antibodies elicited by vaccination of humans yields higher killing titers than human complement [ 54 , 55 ]. These higher titers may result from lack of down-regulatory effects of rabbit factor H, which does not bind to the meningococcal surface. Consistent with this hypothesis, we have shown that adding purified human factor H to baby rabbit complement resulted in a 8- to 60-fold drop in serum bactericidal titers of polysaccharide vaccine recipients to levels that more closely resemble that seen with human complement. Second, any in vivo animal models of meningococcal bacteremia [ 56 – 59 ] are inherently flawed because of the inability of non-human factor H to bind to bacteria and inhibit complement activation on the bacterial surface. Absence of bound factor H will increase serum sensitivity of the bacteria, making the bacteria easier to kill than would be the case in a human system. We have observed that administering purified human factor H concomitantly with bacteria in the infant rat model increased the level of bacteremia. This observation provides the rationale to create transgenic animals that express human factor H in order to have a more biologically relevant in vivo model.  Species specificity of factor H binding to Neisseriae and its implications We have shown previously that serum resistance of N. gonorrhoeae is species-specific. N. gonorrhoeae bind to human complement inhibitory proteins such as C4bp-binding protein (C4BP; classical pathway inhibitor) and factor H in a species-specific manner. PorB.1B-bearing strains that can bind to human C4BP can also bind to chimpanzee C4BP and resist chimpanzee serum [ 52 ]. However, all serum resistant strains of N. gonorrhoeae strains tested so far are susceptible to killing by complement from other primates such as baboons and rhesus, and lower animals such as rabbits, guinea pigs and rats. Adding purified human C4BP or factor H to nonhuman sera restores the ability of N. gonorrhoeae to resist heterologous complement [ 52 ]. These results may in part explain the restriction of natural gonococcal infection to humans. Akin to N. gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis is a human specific pathogen. To investigate the underlying reason, we first compared binding of factor H present in human serum to N. meningitidis with factor H from other primates (chimpanzee, baboon and rhesus macaque). Compared to human factor H, we found weak binding to chimpanzee factor H and barely detectable binding to rhesus macaque and baboon factor H [ 53 ]. Furthermore, several meningococcal strains that express high levels of fHbp and resist killing by human complement are readily killed by infant rat complement. Adding purified human factor H to infant rat serum restores the ability of meningococci to resist complement-dependent killing. Species-specificity of factor H binding has two important implications. First, baby rabbit complement which is often used as a complement source to evaluate the efficacy of killing by antibodies elicited by vaccination of humans yields higher killing titers than human complement [ 54 , 55 ]. These higher titers may result from lack of down-regulatory effects of rabbit factor H, which does not bind to the meningococcal surface. Consistent with this hypothesis, we have shown that adding purified human factor H to baby rabbit complement resulted in a 8- to 60-fold drop in serum bactericidal titers of polysaccharide vaccine recipients to levels that more closely resemble that seen with human complement. Second, any in vivo animal models of meningococcal bacteremia [ 56 – 59 ] are inherently flawed because of the inability of non-human factor H to bind to bacteria and inhibit complement activation on the bacterial surface. Absence of bound factor H will increase serum sensitivity of the bacteria, making the bacteria easier to kill than would be the case in a human system. We have observed that administering purified human factor H concomitantly with bacteria in the infant rat model increased the level of bacteremia. This observation provides the rationale to create transgenic animals that express human factor H in order to have a more biologically relevant in vivo model.  CONCLUSIONS Factor H plays a key role for both N. gonorrhoeae and N. meningitidis to evade complement dependent killing. We have described the different ligands for factor H on the two species. Gonococci lack a capsule and rely on binding of complement inhibitors to survive in the human host. On the other hand, meningococci rely on capsular polysaccharide expression for high-level serum resistance and virulence. The crucial role of fHbp is illustrated by the fact that all invasive isolates express this protein, albeit in varying amounts. High expressers of fHbp are dependent on binding factor H for survival in human blood. Although binding of factor H to strains that are naturally low expressers of fHbp also may increase the ability of the organism to evade human innate host defenses, the low-expressing strains likely also possess additional mechanisms of complement evasion. Studies of fHbp expression in carriage isolates will shed light on the importance of this molecule in causing invasive disease. The species-specific binding of factor H to both N. gonorrhoeae and N. meningitidis provides another reason for the human-specific nature of Neisserial infection. Creation of transgenic animals that express human complement inhibitors will improve existing animal models of gonorrhea and meningococcemia. Finally, detailed structural analysis of factor H-fHbp interactions may aid development vaccines and therapeutic molecules.  Figures Figure 1 Survival of wild-type meningococci and their fHbp deletion mutants in human blood. Meningococcal strains MC58 and H44/76 (high fHbp expressers) and NZ98/254 and 4243 (low fHbp expressers) and their fHbp deletion mutants were examined for their ability to survive in whole blood derived from two individual donors. Survival of the wild-type strains and their respective fHbp mutants are shown by the solid and broken lines, respectively. Loss of fHbp on only the high expressers, but not the low expressers, compromised bacterial survival. The data are from Ref. [ 44 ]. Figure 2 Binding of human C4b to the surface of live encapsulated Neisseria meningitidis cells, as determined by indirect fluorescence flow cytometry. The left column shows results for the group B strain H44/76 (high fHbp expresser), and the right column shows results for the group B strain NZ98/254 (low fHbp expresser). Black areas in histograms indicate bacteria with 5% nonimmune human serum, and white areas indicate bacteria with monoclonal antibodies and 5% nonimmune human serum. Row 1: left, anti-PorA, P1.7, 2 ?g/mL; right, anti-PorA, P1.4, 10 ?g/mL. Row 2: JAR 3, 10 ?g/mL. Row 3: JAR 4, 50 ?g/mL. Row 4: JAR 3 plus JAR 4 (1 ?g/mL for each). The data are adapted from Ref. [ 44 ]. 