Sex Differences in Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics Males and females differ in their response to drug treatment. These differences can be critical in response to drug treatment. It is therefore essential to understand those differences to appropriately conduct risk assessment and to design safe and effective treatments. Even from that modest perspective, how and when we use drugs can result in unwanted and unexpected outcomes. We summarize the sex differences that impact pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and include a general comparison of clinical pharmacology as it applies to men, pregnant and non-pregnant women. Since this is an area rapidly evolving, it is essential for the practitioner to review drug prescribing information and recent literature to understand fully the impact of sex differences in clinical therapeutics.  4. Sex-specific conditions that impact pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (oral contraceptives, pregnancy, menopause) Increased levels of estrogen and progesterone alter hepatic enzyme activity, which can increase drug accumulation or decrease elimination of some drugs. Female steroid hormones and prolactin play a role in autoimmunity. Regulation of immunity by and interactions between the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) and hypothalamic-pituitary-gonodal (HPG) axes contribute to the two- to tenfold incidence and severity of autoimmune/inflammatory diseases in females compared to males. Most autoimmune diseases are detected in females of childbearing age. Metabolic changes can also depend on hormone levels that change during the menstrual cycle, with use of oral contraceptives, throughout pregnancy, or during menopause. For example, some asthmatic women have worsening in symptoms before or during menstruation. An increase in oxidative stress has been described during intensive physical exercise. Gender differences have been recorded in oxidative stress, especially at older age. However, although sex-hormones are thought to play a dominant role in modulating sex-based differences in pharmacokinetics, studies to examine this have yielded conflicting results. Midazolam clearance (reflecting CYP3A4 metabolic activity) failed to show fluctuations during the menstrual cycle [ 32 ]. Similarly, studies of eletriptan (to treat migraine) demonstrated no sex-related or menstrual cycle related differences 33. 4.1. Pregnancy Several physiological changes that occur during gestation are known to affect drug plasma levels. Physiologic changes during pregnancy affect drug PK. These include: a. Volume of distribution: increased plasma volume and increases in extracellular fluid space and total body water; b. Cardiovascular: plasma volume expansion, increase in CO, regional blood flow changes (increased uterine, renal, skin and mammary blood flow, decreased skeletal blood flow), increase in stroke volume (early pregnancy), increase in heart rate (later in pregnancy); c. Respiratory changes: compensated respiratory alkalosis, lowered PaCO2, pH-7.44; d. Binding Proteins - Decreased plasma albumin; e. GI Absorption changes. Prolonged gastric evacuation time, by 30–50%; f. Metabolism – liver CYP450 enzyme changes; e.g. Uridine diphosphate glucoronosyltransferase (UGT) isoenzyme changes; h. Increased renal blood flow; increase in GFR[ 34 , 35 ]. 4.2. Menopause Conflicting data exist on the pharmacokinetic changes in women relating to menopausal status. To examine menopause-related alterations in intestinal or hepatic CYP3A4 activity several studies compared the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, erythomycin and prednisolone clearance in pre- and post-menopausal women and found no significant differences in drug metabolism by menopausal status[ 36 ]. 4.3. Use of Data in Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics Data acquired on sex differences in absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination allows exploration of sex differences in disposition and response to chemicals and drugs. Several examples will be reviewed to illustrate the relevance of the data. Results from clinical trials the focused on HIV-infected female subjects suggest that there are clinically relevant sex-related differences in the efficacy and safety of drug treatment[ 37 ].  4.1. Pregnancy Several physiological changes that occur during gestation are known to affect drug plasma levels. Physiologic changes during pregnancy affect drug PK. These include: a. Volume of distribution: increased plasma volume and increases in extracellular fluid space and total body water; b. Cardiovascular: plasma volume expansion, increase in CO, regional blood flow changes (increased uterine, renal, skin and mammary blood flow, decreased skeletal blood flow), increase in stroke volume (early pregnancy), increase in heart rate (later in pregnancy); c. Respiratory changes: compensated respiratory alkalosis, lowered PaCO2, pH-7.44; d. Binding Proteins - Decreased plasma albumin; e. GI Absorption changes. Prolonged gastric evacuation time, by 30–50%; f. Metabolism – liver CYP450 enzyme changes; e.g. Uridine diphosphate glucoronosyltransferase (UGT) isoenzyme changes; h. Increased renal blood flow; increase in GFR[ 34 , 35 ].  4.2. Menopause Conflicting data exist on the pharmacokinetic changes in women relating to menopausal status. To examine menopause-related alterations in intestinal or hepatic CYP3A4 activity several studies compared the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, erythomycin and prednisolone clearance in pre- and post-menopausal women and found no significant differences in drug metabolism by menopausal status[ 36 ].  4.3. Use of Data in Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics Data acquired on sex differences in absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination allows exploration of sex differences in disposition and response to chemicals and drugs. Several examples will be reviewed to illustrate the relevance of the data. Results from clinical trials the focused on HIV-infected female subjects suggest that there are clinically relevant sex-related differences in the efficacy and safety of drug treatment[ 37 ].  5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS Males and females may differ in specific drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. It is therefore essential to understand those sex differences in drug response as they may affect drug safety and effectiveness. To minimize therapeutic adverse events clinicians must establish clear therapeutic goals for the drugs of choice prior to treatment of women. It must be determined if the treatment should be assessed by clinical signs and symptoms or by laboratory test results -- will drug toxicity be evaluated by clinical or laboratory assessment and what determines the appropriate duration of treatment. Furthermore, one should be aware of and understand the principles of clinical pharmacology as they apply to the drug of choice. In particular, the relationship between drug concentration and desired biological effect at the site action, the mechanism of action of the drug and the impact of the chosen drug on the patient’s signs, symptoms and laboratory tests. In the case of women during pregnancy, special attention should be paid to drugs known to behave differently in pregnancy. Pregnancy-induced changes in drug pharmacokinetics (i.e., in drug absorption, disposition, metabolism, and elimination), when significant, may guide changes in dosage regimen or therapeutic monitoring to increase its effectiveness or reduce potential toxicity. Given those parameters, and our knowledge of sex differences, we can derive essentially all factors necessary for therapeutic optimization. In general, data on sex differences are mostly obtained by posthoc analysis and, therefore, the conclusions that can be drawn are limited. For a better understanding of the basic mechanisms of sex differences, future studies should be designed with a primary focus on this topic. More specific data will help to determine the extent to which these differences will have implications for clinical management. 