Depression and immunity: Inflammation and depressive symptoms in multiple sclerosis An increasing body of evidence suggests that patients with major depressive disorder show alterations in immunological markers including increases in proinflammatory cytokine activity and inflammation. Animal models of a depression-like syndrome called sickness behavior have clearly shown that cytokines are implicated in the development of these symptoms. Inflammation of the CNS is a pathological hallmark of multiple sclerosis (MS). Patients affected by this disease also show a high incidence of depression. In light of accumulating evidence for cytokine-mediated sickness behavior from animal studies, it is possible that some aspects of depression and fatigue in multiple sclerosis may be linked to inflammatory markers. Here, we review the current knowledge in the field and illustrate how the sickness behavior model may be applied to investigate depressive symptoms in inflammatory neurological diseases such as multiple sclerosis.  3. Conclusion There is strong evidence that depression involves alterations in multiple aspects of immunity that may not only contribute to the development or exacerbation of a number of medical disorders but also may play a role in the pathophysiology of depressive symptoms. Accordingly, aggressive management of depressive disorders in medically ill populations or individuals at risk for disease may improve disease outcome or prevent disease development. On the other hand, in light of data suggesting that immune processes may interact with the pathophysiologic pathways known to contribute to depression, novel approaches to the treatment of depression may target relevant aspects of the immune response. Taken together, the data provide compelling evidence that a psychoimmunologic frame of reference may have profound implications regarding the consequences and treatment of depression. In addition, this approach may also be applied to investigate the possibility that peripheral and central production of cytokines may account for neuropsychiatric symptoms in inflammatory diseases. In this paper, we summarized evidence for a cytokine-mediated pathogenesis of depression as well as fatigue in MS. The effects of central inflammatory processes may account for some of the behavioral symptoms seen in MS patients, which cannot be explained by psychosocial factors or the CNS damage hypothesis. This immune mediated hypothesis is supported by indirect evidence from experimental and clinical studies on the effect of cytokines on behavior, in which peripheral as well as central cytokines may cause depressive symptoms. There are emerging clinical data from MS patients to provide support for an association of central inflammation (as measured by MRI) as well as inflammatory markers with depressive symptoms and fatigue. Based on the literature reviewed above, subtypes of MS fatigue and depression may exist that are caused by different pathogenetic mechanisms including inflammation and CNS damage as well as psychosocial factors or predisposition. This could have important clinical implications. For example, an `inflammatory' depression may require different therapeutic approaches than a `reactive' depression in MS. Future research should aim to better characterize these subtypes, which has the potential to optimize treatments. 