A rapid urine test for early detection of kidney injury Kidney injury molecule-1 (Kim-1) has been qualified by the Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency as a highly sensitive and specific urinary biomarker to monitor drug-induced kidney injury in preclinical studies and on a case-by-case basis in clinical trials. Here we report the development and evaluation of a rapid direct immunochromatographic lateral flow 15-min assay for detection of urinary Kim-1 (rat) or KIM-1 (human). The urinary Kim-1 band intensity using the rat Kim-1 dipstick significantly correlated with levels of Kim-1 as measured by a microbead-based assay, histopathological damage, and immunohistochemical assessment of renal Kim-1 in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Kim-1 was detected following kidney injury induced in rats by cadmium, gentamicin, or bilateral renal ischemia/reperfusion. In humans, the urinary KIM-1 band intensity was significantly greater in urine from patients with acute kidney injury than in urine from healthy volunteers. The KIM-1 dipstick also enabled temporal evaluation of kidney injury and recovery in two patients who developed postoperative acute kidney injury following cytoreductive surgery for malignant mesothelioma with intraoperative local cisplatin administration. We hope that future, more extensive studies will confirm the utility of these results, which show that the Kim-1/KIM-1 dipsticks can provide a sensitive and accurate detection of Kim-1/KIM-1, thereby providing a rapid diagnostic assay for kidney damage and facilitating the rapid and early detection of kidney injury in preclinical and clinical studies.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals All animals were maintained in their respective central animal facility over wood chips free of any known chemical contaminants under conditions of 21±1°C and 50–80% relative humidity at all times in an alternating 12 h light-dark cycle. Rats were fed with commercial rodent chow (Teklad rodent diet no. 7012), given water ad lib, and were acclimated for 1-week before use. All animal maintenance and treatment protocols were in compliance with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory animals as adopted and promulgated by the National Institutes of Health and were approved by respective Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC). Experimental design for rat RenaStick evaluation Cadmium-induced kidney toxicity Male Sprague Dawley rats ( n = 4/group) weighing 275–300g were maintained in individual plastic cages. They received varying doses of CdCl2 (Cd dose of 0.6, 1.2, or 2.4 mg/kg for 5 days per week for 4 weeks) subcutaneously as reported earlier. 10 Control group animals ( n = 4) received daily injections of the 0.9% sodium chloride vehicle alone. Gentamicin-induced kidney toxicity Male Sprague Dawley rats (265–316 g) received a daily intraperitoneal injection of either vehicle (0.9% sodium chloride) or 40 or 120 mg/kg/day gentamicin sulfate ( n = 5 rats per dose group) for 9 days and were necropsied on day 10. Renal I/R Fifty-six male Wistar (W) rats weighing approximately 270–300 g were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital sodium (30 mg/kg) and placed on a homeothermic table to maintain core body temperature at 37°C, by means of a rectal probe attached to a temperature regulator which was in turn attached to a homeothermic blanket. A midline laparotomy incision was made, renal pedicles were isolated, and bilateral renal ischemia was induced by clamping the renal pedicles for 0 or 20min as described previously. 7 Occlusion was verified visually by change in the color of the kidneys to a paler shade. Reperfusion commenced when the clips were removed as confirmed by a blush reflective of the return of oxygenated blood to the kidney. The rats were divided into groups of eight rats each after 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h of reperfusion. A group of four rats underwent sham surgery and served as controls. Rats ( n = 4) per group were immediately placed in metabolic cages at 22°C. Individual urine samples were collected at 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h after reperfusion for analysis of Kim-1. Another set of rats ( n = 4) were euthanized by overdose of pentobarbital (200mg/kg, intraperitoneal) at 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h after reperfusion. To confirm the results obtained from RenaStick, urinary Kim-1 was measured using our previously described microbead-based assay. 5 Urine collection Rats were placed in the standard metabolic cages and urine samples were collected from individual animals into containers surrounded by dry ice and were stored at ?80°C until thawing for urinalysis. After the initial thawing at 22°C, samples were placed on wet ice and volume measurement was performed (precipitates were allowed to settle by gravity and were discarded). In some cases, 2.5 ml urine samples were used for routine clinical chemistry urinalysis (Roche Modular Analyzer, Basel, Schweiz, Switzerland): manual specific gravity, pH, protein, glucose, creatinine, occult blood, creatinine, and ketones were measured. For the remaining urine volumes, small aliquots were made and stored at ?80°C until biomarker analysis to avoid repeated freeze-thaw cycles. Blood collection and clinical chemistry Rats were fasted overnight before necropsy and bled from the vena cava with 2 ml collected into a serum separator tube and centrifuged 1500 × g for 10min at 4°C. An additional 2 ml of collected blood was placed into an EDTA collection tube and centrifuged 900 × g for 15 min at 4°C to isolate plasma. Plasma and serum samples were stored at ?80°C until use. BUN (mg per 100 ml) and creatinine were measured using a standard clinical chemistry analyzer (Roche-Modular). Histopathology At necropsy, tissues were collected from Cd- or gentamicin-treated rats for histology soon after the last blood collection and exsanguination. Both kidneys (5 mm section including the papilla, cortex, and medulla) were isolated from each animal and placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin. In the renal I/R study, one kidney was perfused through the left ventricle with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then with 4% paraformaldehyde lysine periodate for 10min for histology. Tissues were fixed for a minimum of 24 h, processed and embedded in paraffin. Embedded tissues were cut into 4–6 µm sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Tissues from control and treated animals were examined with a light microscope. Immunohistochemical or immunofluorescence visualization of Kim-1 For immunohistochemistry paraformaldehyde lysine periodate-fixed tissue sections (in I/R injury study) (5µm) were deparaffinized in xylene, dehydrated with a series of alcohol washes and then incubated for 20 min at 95°C in a citrate buffer solution (Zymed Laboratories, no. 00-5000, South San Francisco, CA, USA). The samples were then processed for visualization of Kim-1 using a monoclonal anti-rat Kim-1 antibody (MARKE-2) using the same labeling protocol for paraffin-embedded tissue samples as described earlier. 7 For immunofluorescence staining of Kim-1 in the Cd study, the sections were thawed, washed with PBS, fixed in ?20°C methanol, and blocked in 1.5% normal goat serum in PBS (blocking solution) for 30 min. The sections were then incubated for 1 h with monoclonal anti-rat Kim-1 antibody (MARKE-2) (5µg/ml) diluted in the blocking solution. The sections were washed with PBS and incubated with anti-mouse fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated (1:75 dilution, Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in PBS for 30 min. At the final step, sections were washed with PBS and mounted with Vector Shield mounting reagent (Vector, Burlingame, CA, USA) containing 12.5 µg/ml 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole to identify nuclei. As a negative control, the same concentration of mouse immunoglobulin G (5 µg/ml) was used for the primary antibody. Selection of participants and urine sample collection Urine samples from patients with and without elevated urinary KIM-1 levels (> 1000 pg/ml) were obtained from our cross-sectional study on urinary biomarkers of AKI. 14 Urine samples had been kept frozen at ?80° C and then thawed for quantitation by RenaStick and microbead measurement of KIM-1 as described earlier. 14 Patients without elevated urinary KIM-1 levels were healthy volunteers ( n = 9) and critically ill patients with no clinical evidence of AKI ( n = 3). Patients with elevated urinary KIM-1 levels had acute tubular necrosis ( n = 7) and recent cardiac catheterization ( n = 3); two patients had tubular injury of unknown etiology. Thresholds were chosen to maximize both sensitivity and specificity. Serial pre- and postoperative urine samples were also obtained from two patients with postoperative AKI from cytoreductive surgery with intraoperative local cisplatin administration for treatment of malignant mesothelioma. Urine samples were obtained preoperatively 6 h postoperatively, and then every day for up to 5 days. The Institutional Review Board approved the protocols for recruitment and sample collection. Urine was collected from spontaneous voids or from indwelling Foley catheters. Urine dipstick analysis was performed (Multistix 8 SG, Bayer Corporation, Tarrytown, NY, USA), followed by centrifugation and microscopic examination of the urine sediment (Olympus microscope). The urine supernatant was aliquoted into 1.8 ml eppendorf tubes and frozen within 2 h of collection at ?80°C. At the time of assay, samples were thawed, vortexed, and centrifuged at 14,000 r.p.m. at 4°C, and the supernatant was pipetted for KIM-1 measurement. Development and evaluation of direct lateral flow immunochromatographic assay for measurement of Kim-1 Coupling of gold nanoparticles to Kim-1 capture antibodies Forty milimicrometer gold nanoparticles obtained from BioAssay Works were coated with mouse monoclonal anti Kim-1 antibody (MARKE-1) 7 or rabbit polyclonal antibody against human KIM-1 14 by adjusting the pH of the gold particles with a bicarbonate buffer to slightly above the isoelectric point of the Kim-1 antibody. Approximately 200 molecules of antibody were coated onto each gold sphere, blocked with bovine serum albumin and sprayed on polyester ribbon. The ribbon was air-dried at 37°C for 2 h and stored in a desiccated chamber. BioAssay Works’ nitrocellulose membrane was striped with 2 mg/ml solution of another epitopically distinct anti-Kim-1 antibody at a rate of 1 µl/cm 2 . A control line of goat anti-mouse Kim-1 antibody, for rat RenaStick, or anti-rabbit KIM-1 antibody, for human RenaStick, was also striped down at the same rate. The striped down membrane and air-dried ribbon were assembled in overlapping manner on a plastic laminate (see Supplementary Figure S1a ). Strips were cut 4 mm wide and placed in plastic immunochromatographic housing. Evaluation of the assay The positive and negative Kim-1 urine samples were diluted twofold in a TRIS-buffered saline solution and 150 µl of the mixture was added to the sample well of the immunochromatographic housing. The results were read within 15 min. Kim-1 antigen detection levels in urine greater than 500 pg/ml (or 800 pg/ml for human KIM-1) were realized with a dose–response relationship covering a three-log range. The interassay variability of less than 10% was determined by adding diseased urine samples containing low (1.3 ng/ml), medium (8.6 ng/ml), and high (19 ng/ml) levels of Kim-1 to nine RenaSticks ( n = 3 each) (data not shown). Quantitation of Kim-1 band intensities The strips were read using a CAMAG Thin Layer Chromatography 3 Scanner, CAMAG Scientific Inc., Wilmington, NC, USA. The CAMAG scanner is designed for densitometric measurement of thin-layer chromatograms and other objects up to 200 × 200 mm in size. The scanner was set to read at a wavelength of 546 in the light absorption-mode at a scanning speed of 5 mm/s. The scanning produces peaks and the peak height correlates with the signal. The band intensity units were represented on Y axis in the respective injury models with respect to either dose or time on X axis using Prism 4 software, GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA. Statistical comparison between control and treated was obtained by two-tailed Student’s t -test and a P -value less than 0.05 was assessed as statistically significant. Comparisons between quantitated Kim-1 band intensity and log-transformed Kim-1 measurements by the microbead assay were assessed by the Pearson’s correlation coefficient. RenaStick was developed at Bioassayworks using epitopically distinct antibodies raised in our laboratory as previously described (reference 7 ). An extensive characterized and evaluation of RenaStick was then performed in our laboratory.  Animals All animals were maintained in their respective central animal facility over wood chips free of any known chemical contaminants under conditions of 21±1°C and 50–80% relative humidity at all times in an alternating 12 h light-dark cycle. Rats were fed with commercial rodent chow (Teklad rodent diet no. 7012), given water ad lib, and were acclimated for 1-week before use. All animal maintenance and treatment protocols were in compliance with the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory animals as adopted and promulgated by the National Institutes of Health and were approved by respective Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC).  Experimental design for rat RenaStick evaluation Cadmium-induced kidney toxicity Male Sprague Dawley rats ( n = 4/group) weighing 275–300g were maintained in individual plastic cages. They received varying doses of CdCl2 (Cd dose of 0.6, 1.2, or 2.4 mg/kg for 5 days per week for 4 weeks) subcutaneously as reported earlier. 10 Control group animals ( n = 4) received daily injections of the 0.9% sodium chloride vehicle alone. Gentamicin-induced kidney toxicity Male Sprague Dawley rats (265–316 g) received a daily intraperitoneal injection of either vehicle (0.9% sodium chloride) or 40 or 120 mg/kg/day gentamicin sulfate ( n = 5 rats per dose group) for 9 days and were necropsied on day 10. Renal I/R Fifty-six male Wistar (W) rats weighing approximately 270–300 g were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital sodium (30 mg/kg) and placed on a homeothermic table to maintain core body temperature at 37°C, by means of a rectal probe attached to a temperature regulator which was in turn attached to a homeothermic blanket. A midline laparotomy incision was made, renal pedicles were isolated, and bilateral renal ischemia was induced by clamping the renal pedicles for 0 or 20min as described previously. 7 Occlusion was verified visually by change in the color of the kidneys to a paler shade. Reperfusion commenced when the clips were removed as confirmed by a blush reflective of the return of oxygenated blood to the kidney. The rats were divided into groups of eight rats each after 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h of reperfusion. A group of four rats underwent sham surgery and served as controls. Rats ( n = 4) per group were immediately placed in metabolic cages at 22°C. Individual urine samples were collected at 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h after reperfusion for analysis of Kim-1. Another set of rats ( n = 4) were euthanized by overdose of pentobarbital (200mg/kg, intraperitoneal) at 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h after reperfusion. To confirm the results obtained from RenaStick, urinary Kim-1 was measured using our previously described microbead-based assay. 5  Cadmium-induced kidney toxicity Male Sprague Dawley rats ( n = 4/group) weighing 275–300g were maintained in individual plastic cages. They received varying doses of CdCl2 (Cd dose of 0.6, 1.2, or 2.4 mg/kg for 5 days per week for 4 weeks) subcutaneously as reported earlier. 10 Control group animals ( n = 4) received daily injections of the 0.9% sodium chloride vehicle alone.  Gentamicin-induced kidney toxicity Male Sprague Dawley rats (265–316 g) received a daily intraperitoneal injection of either vehicle (0.9% sodium chloride) or 40 or 120 mg/kg/day gentamicin sulfate ( n = 5 rats per dose group) for 9 days and were necropsied on day 10.  Renal I/R Fifty-six male Wistar (W) rats weighing approximately 270–300 g were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of pentobarbital sodium (30 mg/kg) and placed on a homeothermic table to maintain core body temperature at 37°C, by means of a rectal probe attached to a temperature regulator which was in turn attached to a homeothermic blanket. A midline laparotomy incision was made, renal pedicles were isolated, and bilateral renal ischemia was induced by clamping the renal pedicles for 0 or 20min as described previously. 7 Occlusion was verified visually by change in the color of the kidneys to a paler shade. Reperfusion commenced when the clips were removed as confirmed by a blush reflective of the return of oxygenated blood to the kidney. The rats were divided into groups of eight rats each after 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h of reperfusion. A group of four rats underwent sham surgery and served as controls. Rats ( n = 4) per group were immediately placed in metabolic cages at 22°C. Individual urine samples were collected at 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h after reperfusion for analysis of Kim-1. Another set of rats ( n = 4) were euthanized by overdose of pentobarbital (200mg/kg, intraperitoneal) at 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h after reperfusion. To confirm the results obtained from RenaStick, urinary Kim-1 was measured using our previously described microbead-based assay. 5  Urine collection Rats were placed in the standard metabolic cages and urine samples were collected from individual animals into containers surrounded by dry ice and were stored at ?80°C until thawing for urinalysis. After the initial thawing at 22°C, samples were placed on wet ice and volume measurement was performed (precipitates were allowed to settle by gravity and were discarded). In some cases, 2.5 ml urine samples were used for routine clinical chemistry urinalysis (Roche Modular Analyzer, Basel, Schweiz, Switzerland): manual specific gravity, pH, protein, glucose, creatinine, occult blood, creatinine, and ketones were measured. For the remaining urine volumes, small aliquots were made and stored at ?80°C until biomarker analysis to avoid repeated freeze-thaw cycles.  Blood collection and clinical chemistry Rats were fasted overnight before necropsy and bled from the vena cava with 2 ml collected into a serum separator tube and centrifuged 1500 × g for 10min at 4°C. An additional 2 ml of collected blood was placed into an EDTA collection tube and centrifuged 900 × g for 15 min at 4°C to isolate plasma. Plasma and serum samples were stored at ?80°C until use. BUN (mg per 100 ml) and creatinine were measured using a standard clinical chemistry analyzer (Roche-Modular).  Histopathology At necropsy, tissues were collected from Cd- or gentamicin-treated rats for histology soon after the last blood collection and exsanguination. Both kidneys (5 mm section including the papilla, cortex, and medulla) were isolated from each animal and placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin. In the renal I/R study, one kidney was perfused through the left ventricle with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then with 4% paraformaldehyde lysine periodate for 10min for histology. Tissues were fixed for a minimum of 24 h, processed and embedded in paraffin. Embedded tissues were cut into 4–6 µm sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Tissues from control and treated animals were examined with a light microscope.  Immunohistochemical or immunofluorescence visualization of Kim-1 For immunohistochemistry paraformaldehyde lysine periodate-fixed tissue sections (in I/R injury study) (5µm) were deparaffinized in xylene, dehydrated with a series of alcohol washes and then incubated for 20 min at 95°C in a citrate buffer solution (Zymed Laboratories, no. 00-5000, South San Francisco, CA, USA). The samples were then processed for visualization of Kim-1 using a monoclonal anti-rat Kim-1 antibody (MARKE-2) using the same labeling protocol for paraffin-embedded tissue samples as described earlier. 7 For immunofluorescence staining of Kim-1 in the Cd study, the sections were thawed, washed with PBS, fixed in ?20°C methanol, and blocked in 1.5% normal goat serum in PBS (blocking solution) for 30 min. The sections were then incubated for 1 h with monoclonal anti-rat Kim-1 antibody (MARKE-2) (5µg/ml) diluted in the blocking solution. The sections were washed with PBS and incubated with anti-mouse fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated (1:75 dilution, Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in PBS for 30 min. At the final step, sections were washed with PBS and mounted with Vector Shield mounting reagent (Vector, Burlingame, CA, USA) containing 12.5 µg/ml 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole to identify nuclei. As a negative control, the same concentration of mouse immunoglobulin G (5 µg/ml) was used for the primary antibody.  Selection of participants and urine sample collection Urine samples from patients with and without elevated urinary KIM-1 levels (> 1000 pg/ml) were obtained from our cross-sectional study on urinary biomarkers of AKI. 14 Urine samples had been kept frozen at ?80° C and then thawed for quantitation by RenaStick and microbead measurement of KIM-1 as described earlier. 14 Patients without elevated urinary KIM-1 levels were healthy volunteers ( n = 9) and critically ill patients with no clinical evidence of AKI ( n = 3). Patients with elevated urinary KIM-1 levels had acute tubular necrosis ( n = 7) and recent cardiac catheterization ( n = 3); two patients had tubular injury of unknown etiology. Thresholds were chosen to maximize both sensitivity and specificity. Serial pre- and postoperative urine samples were also obtained from two patients with postoperative AKI from cytoreductive surgery with intraoperative local cisplatin administration for treatment of malignant mesothelioma. Urine samples were obtained preoperatively 6 h postoperatively, and then every day for up to 5 days. The Institutional Review Board approved the protocols for recruitment and sample collection. Urine was collected from spontaneous voids or from indwelling Foley catheters. Urine dipstick analysis was performed (Multistix 8 SG, Bayer Corporation, Tarrytown, NY, USA), followed by centrifugation and microscopic examination of the urine sediment (Olympus microscope). The urine supernatant was aliquoted into 1.8 ml eppendorf tubes and frozen within 2 h of collection at ?80°C. At the time of assay, samples were thawed, vortexed, and centrifuged at 14,000 r.p.m. at 4°C, and the supernatant was pipetted for KIM-1 measurement.  Development and evaluation of direct lateral flow immunochromatographic assay for measurement of Kim-1 Coupling of gold nanoparticles to Kim-1 capture antibodies Forty milimicrometer gold nanoparticles obtained from BioAssay Works were coated with mouse monoclonal anti Kim-1 antibody (MARKE-1) 7 or rabbit polyclonal antibody against human KIM-1 14 by adjusting the pH of the gold particles with a bicarbonate buffer to slightly above the isoelectric point of the Kim-1 antibody. Approximately 200 molecules of antibody were coated onto each gold sphere, blocked with bovine serum albumin and sprayed on polyester ribbon. The ribbon was air-dried at 37°C for 2 h and stored in a desiccated chamber. BioAssay Works’ nitrocellulose membrane was striped with 2 mg/ml solution of another epitopically distinct anti-Kim-1 antibody at a rate of 1 µl/cm 2 . A control line of goat anti-mouse Kim-1 antibody, for rat RenaStick, or anti-rabbit KIM-1 antibody, for human RenaStick, was also striped down at the same rate. The striped down membrane and air-dried ribbon were assembled in overlapping manner on a plastic laminate (see Supplementary Figure S1a ). Strips were cut 4 mm wide and placed in plastic immunochromatographic housing. Evaluation of the assay The positive and negative Kim-1 urine samples were diluted twofold in a TRIS-buffered saline solution and 150 µl of the mixture was added to the sample well of the immunochromatographic housing. The results were read within 15 min. Kim-1 antigen detection levels in urine greater than 500 pg/ml (or 800 pg/ml for human KIM-1) were realized with a dose–response relationship covering a three-log range. The interassay variability of less than 10% was determined by adding diseased urine samples containing low (1.3 ng/ml), medium (8.6 ng/ml), and high (19 ng/ml) levels of Kim-1 to nine RenaSticks ( n = 3 each) (data not shown).  Coupling of gold nanoparticles to Kim-1 capture antibodies Forty milimicrometer gold nanoparticles obtained from BioAssay Works were coated with mouse monoclonal anti Kim-1 antibody (MARKE-1) 7 or rabbit polyclonal antibody against human KIM-1 14 by adjusting the pH of the gold particles with a bicarbonate buffer to slightly above the isoelectric point of the Kim-1 antibody. Approximately 200 molecules of antibody were coated onto each gold sphere, blocked with bovine serum albumin and sprayed on polyester ribbon. The ribbon was air-dried at 37°C for 2 h and stored in a desiccated chamber. BioAssay Works’ nitrocellulose membrane was striped with 2 mg/ml solution of another epitopically distinct anti-Kim-1 antibody at a rate of 1 µl/cm 2 . A control line of goat anti-mouse Kim-1 antibody, for rat RenaStick, or anti-rabbit KIM-1 antibody, for human RenaStick, was also striped down at the same rate. The striped down membrane and air-dried ribbon were assembled in overlapping manner on a plastic laminate (see Supplementary Figure S1a ). Strips were cut 4 mm wide and placed in plastic immunochromatographic housing.  Evaluation of the assay The positive and negative Kim-1 urine samples were diluted twofold in a TRIS-buffered saline solution and 150 µl of the mixture was added to the sample well of the immunochromatographic housing. The results were read within 15 min. Kim-1 antigen detection levels in urine greater than 500 pg/ml (or 800 pg/ml for human KIM-1) were realized with a dose–response relationship covering a three-log range. The interassay variability of less than 10% was determined by adding diseased urine samples containing low (1.3 ng/ml), medium (8.6 ng/ml), and high (19 ng/ml) levels of Kim-1 to nine RenaSticks ( n = 3 each) (data not shown).  Quantitation of Kim-1 band intensities The strips were read using a CAMAG Thin Layer Chromatography 3 Scanner, CAMAG Scientific Inc., Wilmington, NC, USA. The CAMAG scanner is designed for densitometric measurement of thin-layer chromatograms and other objects up to 200 × 200 mm in size. The scanner was set to read at a wavelength of 546 in the light absorption-mode at a scanning speed of 5 mm/s. The scanning produces peaks and the peak height correlates with the signal. The band intensity units were represented on Y axis in the respective injury models with respect to either dose or time on X axis using Prism 4 software, GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA. Statistical comparison between control and treated was obtained by two-tailed Student’s t -test and a P -value less than 0.05 was assessed as statistically significant. Comparisons between quantitated Kim-1 band intensity and log-transformed Kim-1 measurements by the microbead assay were assessed by the Pearson’s correlation coefficient. RenaStick was developed at Bioassayworks using epitopically distinct antibodies raised in our laboratory as previously described (reference 7 ). An extensive characterized and evaluation of RenaStick was then performed in our laboratory.  Supplementary Material Supplementary Fig 1a SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL Figure S1. Characteristics of rat RenaStick. Supplementary Table 2 Table S2. Urinary KIM-1 values measured by microbead-based xMAP technology in patients with or without acute kidney injury. Supplementary Table 3 Table S3. Urinary KIM-1 values measured by microbead-based xMAP technology in patients with acute kidney injury following cisplatin administration. Supplementary Fig 1b Supplementary Fig 1c Supplementary Fig 1d Supplementary Fig 2a Figure S2. Characteristics of human RenaStick. Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at http://www.nature.com/ki Supplementary Fig 2b Supplementary Fig 2c Supplementary Figure Legends Supplementary Table 1 Table S1. Urinary Kim-1 values measured by microbead-based xMAP technology in three mechanistically different kidney injury models caused by (a) cadmium, (b) gentamicin or (c) 20 min bilateral ischemia/reperfusion injury.  Figures Figure 1 Evaluation of rat RenaStick to detect urinary Kim-1 in cadmium induced nephrotoxicity model Urinary Kim-1 measurements using rat RenaStick ( a–e ), histological damage ( f–i ), and Kim-1 immunostaining ( j–m ) following cadmium-induced kidney injury. Male Sprague Dawley rats ( n = 4/group) were injected subcutaneously with varying doses of CdCl2 (Cd dose of 0.6, 1.2, or 2.4 mg/kg) or saline 5 days per week for 4 weeks. ( a–d ) After 4 weeks, rats were placed in metabolic cages and urine was collected. Seventy microliters of urine sample from each rat was mixed with 70 µl of TRIS-buffered saline solution, added to the RenaStick sample well, and incubated for 15 min. ( e ) Each RenaStick was scanned using a CAMAG Thin Layer Chromatography scanner and the densitometric units obtained were plotted. *Statistically higher than control/sham ( P <0.05). ( f–i ) At necropsy, samples of both kidneys were isolated from each animal and placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (NBF) for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and histology assessment. ( j–m ) In addition, non-fixed cryosections of the kidney tissue were processed for the immunoflourescent visualization of Kim-1. ( f and j ) Control, ( g and k ) 0.6 mg Cd/kg, ( h and l ) 1.2 mg Cd/kg, ( i and m ) 2.4mg Cd/kg. All fields were chosen from the outer renal cortex. Arrows in panels g–i indicate retraction and sloughing of cells, tubular congestion, and necrosis. The fluorescent images in panels k–m indicate Kim-1 staining in the apical membrane of the proximal tubules of rats treated with cadmium in similar fields of the outer renal cortex. Figure 2 Evaluation of rat RenaStick to detect urinary Kim-1 in gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity model Urinary Kim-1 measurements using rat RenaStick ( a–d ), BUN and serum creatinine ( e, f ), and histological damage ( g–i ) following gentamicin-induced kidney toxicity. Male Sprague Dawley rats received gentamicin sulfate at 0, 40, or 120 mg/kg/day ( n = 5 rats per dose group) for 9 days, and urine samples were collected on day 10 by keeping rats in metabolic cages. ( a–c ) Urinary Kim-1 was measured from each rat by mixing 70 µl of urine sample with 70 µl of TRIS-buffered saline solution and adding it to the RenaStick sample well. Results were read in 15 min. ( d ) Each RenaStick was scanned using a CAMAG Thin Layer Chromatography scanner and the densitometric units obtained were plotted. On day 10, blood and kidney tissue were obtained from animals for evaluation of ( e ) blood urea nitrogen (BUN), ( f ) serum creatinine, and ( g–i ) histomorphological evaluation of kidneys (hematoxylin and eosin staining). All fields were chosen from the cortex. Arrows in panels g and i indicate sloughing of cells, tubular dilation, and necrosis. Bar represents 50 µm. *Represents statistically higher than control ( P <0.05). Figure 3 Detection of urinary Kim-1 using rat RenaStick in bilateral renal ischemia/reperfusion model Urinary Kim-1 measurements using rat RenaStick ( a–i ), kidney histopathology ( j–m ), immunohistochemistry for Kim-1 ( n–q ), and BUN and serum creatinine ( r–s ) over time following 20min of bilateral renal ischemia/reperfusion injury. Male Wistar rats were subjected to 0 (sham) or 20 min of bilateral ischemia by clamping the renal pedicles for 20 min and then removing the clamps and confirming reperfusion. ( a–h ) Rats were placed in metabolic cages and urine was collected at 6, 9, 18, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h following reperfusion. Urinary Kim-1 was measured from each rat by mixing 70 µl of urine sample with 70 µl of TRIS-buffered saline solution and adding it to the RenaStick sample well. Results were read in 15 min. ( i ) Each RenaStick was scanned using a CAMAG Thin Layer Chromatography scanner and the densitometric units obtained were plotted. ( j–q ) Rats were killed at various times and blood and kidney tissue were collected. Representative photomicrographs of H&E-stained kidney sections and immunohistochemistry for Kim-1 are presented from the following time points: ( j and n ) 0 h (sham control); ( k and o ) 9 h; ( i and p ) 24 h; ( m and q ) 120 h. All fields were chosen from the outer stripe of outer medulla (OSOM). Arrows in panels from k–m indicate sloughing of cells, tubular dilation, and necrosis. Panels o–q show Kim-1 staining in the apical membrane of the proximal tubules in the OSOM region. Bar represents 50 mm. ( r ) Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and ( s ) serum creatinine were measured over time following reperfusion. *Represents statistically higher than sham-operated animals ( P <0.05). Figure 4 Detection of KIM-1 using human RenaStick in urine from patients with or without kidney injury Urinary KIM-1 measurements using human RenaStick in ( a–c ) a cross-sectional study involving 24 patients with or without acute kidney injury and ( d–f ) prospective study in two patients with cisplatin-induced kidney toxicity over time. 