Early Marker for Alzheimer’s Disease: Hippocampus T1rho (T 1?) Estimation Purpose To evaluate the T1rho (T1?) MRI relaxation time in hippocampus in the brain of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and control, and to determine whether the T1? shows any significant difference between these cohorts. Materials and Methods With informed consent, AD ( n = 49), MCI ( n = 48), and age-matched control ( n = 31) underwent T1? MRI on a Siemens 1.5T Scanner. T1? values were automatically calculated from the left and right hippocampus region using in-house developed software. Bonferroni post-hoc multiple comparisons was performed to compare the T1? value among the different cohorts. Results Significantly higher T1? values were observed both in AD ( P = 0.000) and MCI ( P = 0.037) cohorts compared to control; also, the T1? in AD was significantly high over ( P = 0.032) MCI. Hippocampus T1? was 13% greater in the AD patients than control, while in MCI it was 7% greater than control. Hippocampus T1? in AD patients was 6% greater than MCI. Conclusion Higher hippocampus T1? values in the AD patients might be associated with the increased plaques burden. A follow-up study would help to determine the efficacy of T1? values as a predictor of developing AD in the control and MCI individuals.  Materials and Methods With informed consent, AD ( n = 49), MCI ( n = 48), and age-matched control ( n = 31) underwent T1? MRI on a Siemens 1.5T Scanner. T1? values were automatically calculated from the left and right hippocampus region using in-house developed software. Bonferroni post-hoc multiple comparisons was performed to compare the T1? value among the different cohorts.  Results Significantly higher T1? values were observed both in AD ( P = 0.000) and MCI ( P = 0.037) cohorts compared to control; also, the T1? in AD was significantly high over ( P = 0.032) MCI. Hippocampus T1? was 13% greater in the AD patients than control, while in MCI it was 7% greater than control. Hippocampus T1? in AD patients was 6% greater than MCI.  Conclusion Higher hippocampus T1? values in the AD patients might be associated with the increased plaques burden. A follow-up study would help to determine the efficacy of T1? values as a predictor of developing AD in the control and MCI individuals.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Patient Selection The Institutional Review Board approved the study protocols. In the current study we included 49 AD patients (mean age ± SD = 76.8 ± 9.1 years), 48 MCI patients (mean age ± SD = 71.93 ± 8.7 years), and 31 age-matched controls (mean age ± SD = 70.2 ± 9.4 years). All patients underwent a standardized clinical assessment including medical history, physical and neurological examination, psychometric evaluation, and brain MRI. The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was used as a measure of general cognitive function. The MMSE examination scores were 29.03 ± 1.13 in control, 24.72 ± 2.93 in MCI, and 19.34 ± 6.04 in AD. Diagnoses were made in conference by a team of neurologist, neuropsychologists, a neurophysiologist, and a psychiatrist. Diagnoses of MCI was made according to the Petersen criteria for MCI ( 15 ) and the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Diseases and Stroke/Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria (NINCDS-ADRDA) for probable AD ( 16 ). Patients were excluded if they had a history of irritable bowel syndrome, chronic diarrhea, peptic ulcer, or gastroesophageal reflux disease; a history of cardiac disease; significant electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormalities; hematologic disorders; hepatic or renal disease; active malignancy within 5 years; or clinically important depressive, neuropsychiatric, cerebrovascular, or respiratory disease. The control group consisted of patients who presented to our memory clinic with subjective complaints and underwent exactly the same diagnostic work-up as the MCI and AD patients. MRI Protocol All these patients underwent a standard MRI protocol on a 1.5T Siemens Sonata (Erlangen, Germany) clinical scanner using the vendor-supplied head coil. Written informed consent was obtained from each patient before they underwent MRI. For T1? MRI, a fluid-attenuated T1? pre-encoded Turbo Spin-Echo pulse sequence was used ( 11 ). The imaging parameters were: TE/TR = 12/2000 msec, TSL (duration of spin lock pulse) = 10, 20, 30, 40 msec, with a spin lock frequency of 500 Hz, slice thickness 2 mm, field of view (FOV) = 22 cm, matrix size 256 × 128, bandwidth 130 Hz/pixel, echo train length = 4 for a total imaging time of 6 minutes for four images. The inversion time (TI) was fixed at 860 msec to remove the contribution from CSF to T1? maps. An oblique coronal T1?-weighted image of a slice perpendicular to the anterior/posterior commissure (AC/PC) plane was obtained. The slice was chosen to include the head of the hippocampus. Immediately after T1? MRI, the entire volume of each subject’s brain was imaged in the coronal plane using a T1-weighted 3D volumetric MPRAGE pulse sequence with 124 continuous slices. The parameters were TR/TE = 3.5/3000 msec, slice thickness = 1.2 mm, FOV of 24 cm and 192 phase encode steps, and flip angle 8° for a total imaging time of 10 minutes. Data Processing The signal expression for the T1?-weighted MRI is given by: [1] M ( TSL ) = M 0 e ? TSL / T 1 ? where M0 is the thermal equilibrium magnetization. The T1? relaxation time constant is dependent on the amplitude of the SL field, which is reported as a frequency of the SL field, and typically ranges from zero to a few kilohertz. The equation was linearized and then used to generate T1? maps by fitting all pixel intensity data as a function of TSL time using linear regression. T1? was calculated as ?1/slope of the straight-line fit ( 11 ). Pixels whose intensities correlated poorly (R2 < 0.95) with the fitting equation were set to zero. Pixels outside of the brain were also set to zero. The images were transformed to a G4 PowerBook computer (Apple, Cupertino, CA) and images were processed in the IDL programming language (RSI, Boulder, CO). For brain segmentation a previously developed method was used to partition the volumetric MPRAGE scans into 92 ROIs incorporating all major cortical and subcortical regions ( 17 ). This method deforms MRI scans of different brains into anatomical coregistration with each other, and into coregistration with a standardized template. The template’s labels are then transformed to individual scans by applying the elastic transformation that was found to coregister the respective images. For quantitative analysis the two regions of interest (ROIs) were defined on T1? images, ie, left and right hippocampus. A program written in IDL was used to automatically report T1? values from both ROIs. The coregistration of the data and the hippocampus segmentation was performed in the presence of an experienced neuroradiologist. Statistical Analyses For statistical analysis the T1? value from the left and right sides were averaged for hippocampus. Descriptive statistics were performed to calculate the mean value of hippocampus T1? for different cohorts (control, MCI, and AD). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Bonferroni post-hoc multiple comparisons was performed to compare the T1? value among the different cohorts. Pearson correlations between T1? values versus age and between T1? versus MMSE score were performed separately for each cohort. A P -value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All the statistical computations were performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) v. 16.0 (Chicago, IL).  Patient Selection The Institutional Review Board approved the study protocols. In the current study we included 49 AD patients (mean age ± SD = 76.8 ± 9.1 years), 48 MCI patients (mean age ± SD = 71.93 ± 8.7 years), and 31 age-matched controls (mean age ± SD = 70.2 ± 9.4 years). All patients underwent a standardized clinical assessment including medical history, physical and neurological examination, psychometric evaluation, and brain MRI. The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was used as a measure of general cognitive function. The MMSE examination scores were 29.03 ± 1.13 in control, 24.72 ± 2.93 in MCI, and 19.34 ± 6.04 in AD. Diagnoses were made in conference by a team of neurologist, neuropsychologists, a neurophysiologist, and a psychiatrist. Diagnoses of MCI was made according to the Petersen criteria for MCI ( 15 ) and the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Diseases and Stroke/Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria (NINCDS-ADRDA) for probable AD ( 16 ). Patients were excluded if they had a history of irritable bowel syndrome, chronic diarrhea, peptic ulcer, or gastroesophageal reflux disease; a history of cardiac disease; significant electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormalities; hematologic disorders; hepatic or renal disease; active malignancy within 5 years; or clinically important depressive, neuropsychiatric, cerebrovascular, or respiratory disease. The control group consisted of patients who presented to our memory clinic with subjective complaints and underwent exactly the same diagnostic work-up as the MCI and AD patients.  MRI Protocol All these patients underwent a standard MRI protocol on a 1.5T Siemens Sonata (Erlangen, Germany) clinical scanner using the vendor-supplied head coil. Written informed consent was obtained from each patient before they underwent MRI. For T1? MRI, a fluid-attenuated T1? pre-encoded Turbo Spin-Echo pulse sequence was used ( 11 ). The imaging parameters were: TE/TR = 12/2000 msec, TSL (duration of spin lock pulse) = 10, 20, 30, 40 msec, with a spin lock frequency of 500 Hz, slice thickness 2 mm, field of view (FOV) = 22 cm, matrix size 256 × 128, bandwidth 130 Hz/pixel, echo train length = 4 for a total imaging time of 6 minutes for four images. The inversion time (TI) was fixed at 860 msec to remove the contribution from CSF to T1? maps. An oblique coronal T1?-weighted image of a slice perpendicular to the anterior/posterior commissure (AC/PC) plane was obtained. The slice was chosen to include the head of the hippocampus. Immediately after T1? MRI, the entire volume of each subject’s brain was imaged in the coronal plane using a T1-weighted 3D volumetric MPRAGE pulse sequence with 124 continuous slices. The parameters were TR/TE = 3.5/3000 msec, slice thickness = 1.2 mm, FOV of 24 cm and 192 phase encode steps, and flip angle 8° for a total imaging time of 10 minutes.  Data Processing The signal expression for the T1?-weighted MRI is given by: [1] M ( TSL ) = M 0 e ? TSL / T 1 ? where M0 is the thermal equilibrium magnetization. The T1? relaxation time constant is dependent on the amplitude of the SL field, which is reported as a frequency of the SL field, and typically ranges from zero to a few kilohertz. The equation was linearized and then used to generate T1? maps by fitting all pixel intensity data as a function of TSL time using linear regression. T1? was calculated as ?1/slope of the straight-line fit ( 11 ). Pixels whose intensities correlated poorly (R2 < 0.95) with the fitting equation were set to zero. Pixels outside of the brain were also set to zero. The images were transformed to a G4 PowerBook computer (Apple, Cupertino, CA) and images were processed in the IDL programming language (RSI, Boulder, CO). For brain segmentation a previously developed method was used to partition the volumetric MPRAGE scans into 92 ROIs incorporating all major cortical and subcortical regions ( 17 ). This method deforms MRI scans of different brains into anatomical coregistration with each other, and into coregistration with a standardized template. The template’s labels are then transformed to individual scans by applying the elastic transformation that was found to coregister the respective images. For quantitative analysis the two regions of interest (ROIs) were defined on T1? images, ie, left and right hippocampus. A program written in IDL was used to automatically report T1? values from both ROIs. The coregistration of the data and the hippocampus segmentation was performed in the presence of an experienced neuroradiologist.  Statistical Analyses For statistical analysis the T1? value from the left and right sides were averaged for hippocampus. Descriptive statistics were performed to calculate the mean value of hippocampus T1? for different cohorts (control, MCI, and AD). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Bonferroni post-hoc multiple comparisons was performed to compare the T1? value among the different cohorts. Pearson correlations between T1? values versus age and between T1? versus MMSE score were performed separately for each cohort. A P -value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All the statistical computations were performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) v. 16.0 (Chicago, IL).  RESULTS Figure 1 shows the T1? maps of the control, MCI, and AD. Higher T1? values are observed in the hippocampus of an AD individual compared to control and MCI individuals. The mean hippocampus T1? values of control, MCI, and AD cohorts are reported in Table 1 and are shown in Fig. 2 . One-way ANOVA showed that the T1? was significantly different ( P = 0.000) between the groups ( Table 1 ). Bonferroni multiple comparisons showed that the T1? was significantly increased both in the AD ( P = 0.000) and MCI ( P = 0.037) cohorts compared to control ( Table 2 ). A significant increase in T1? was observed in AD ( P = 0.032) compared to MCI ( Table 2 ). Hippocampus T1? was 13% greater in the AD patients than controls, while in MCI it was 7% greater than controls. Hippocampus T1? in AD patients was 6% greater than MCI. Even after a significant difference in the T1? value between the three cohorts (controls, MCI, and AD), a consistent overlap in individual hippocampus T1? value was observed ( Fig. 2 ). The T1? relaxation time may be changed during the normal aging process due to relative change in the volume fractions of water and other macromolecules in the brain tissue. Therefore, we examined the age-related changes in T1? values. None of the cohort showed the age-related changes in T1? [control ( r = ?0.098, P = 0.606), MCI ( r = ?0.002, P = 0.988), and AD ( r = 0.151, P = 0.306)]. On correlating the MMSE score with T1? we did not find any significant correlation in any of the cohort [control ( r = ?0.154, P = 0.417), MCI ( r = ?0.092, P = 0.534), and AD ( r = ?0.069, P = 0.641)].  RESULTS Figure 1 shows the T1? maps of the control, MCI, and AD. Higher T1? values are observed in the hippocampus of an AD individual compared to control and MCI individuals. The mean hippocampus T1? values of control, MCI, and AD cohorts are reported in Table 1 and are shown in Fig. 2 . One-way ANOVA showed that the T1? was significantly different ( P = 0.000) between the groups ( Table 1 ). Bonferroni multiple comparisons showed that the T1? was significantly increased both in the AD ( P = 0.000) and MCI ( P = 0.037) cohorts compared to control ( Table 2 ). A significant increase in T1? was observed in AD ( P = 0.032) compared to MCI ( Table 2 ). Hippocampus T1? was 13% greater in the AD patients than controls, while in MCI it was 7% greater than controls. Hippocampus T1? in AD patients was 6% greater than MCI. Even after a significant difference in the T1? value between the three cohorts (controls, MCI, and AD), a consistent overlap in individual hippocampus T1? value was observed ( Fig. 2 ). The T1? relaxation time may be changed during the normal aging process due to relative change in the volume fractions of water and other macromolecules in the brain tissue. Therefore, we examined the age-related changes in T1? values. None of the cohort showed the age-related changes in T1? [control ( r = ?0.098, P = 0.606), MCI ( r = ?0.002, P = 0.988), and AD ( r = 0.151, P = 0.306)]. On correlating the MMSE score with T1? we did not find any significant correlation in any of the cohort [control ( r = ?0.154, P = 0.417), MCI ( r = ?0.092, P = 0.534), and AD ( r = ?0.069, P = 0.641)].  DISCUSSION Discovering sensitive and specific markers of early AD would be a major breakthrough, as it would facilitate testing of novel therapeutic interventions that could slow or perhaps even arrest the degenerative process before dementia develops. In the current study we describe the relevance of T1? estimation in the early diagnosis of AD pathology. Significant increased T1? in hippocampus of MCI and AD patients was found compared to control. Also, in AD the hippocampus T1? was significantly increased over MCI. In the current study the hippocampus T1? in AD patients was increased by 13% over control and by 6% over MCI. It has been shown that increased T1? signal in AD patients is associated with the plaque burdens ( 18 ). Even after significant differences in T1? between three cohorts, some of the MCI and control individuals showed high T1? values in the range of AD pathology. We believe that this overlap is probably due to the large variation in T1? values in the MCI and control individuals. Delacourte et al ( 19 ) proposed that the neurofibrillary degeneration in AD may be hierarchized into 10 stages, ie, starting from involvement of perirhinal cortex (Stage 1) and subsequently entorhinal cortex and hippocampus (Stage 2), and then the rest of temporal cortex (Stages 4–6) followed by association area (Stage 7) and finally the entire cortex (Stage 10). It has been found that some subjects showed no cognitive alteration until Stage 6; most exhibited slight cognitive deficits even when most of the temporal cortex was involved ( 19 ). An increase in the MRI relaxation time in the AD brain is certainly due to a change in the molecular environment of water in the brain parenchyma resulting from AD pathology. Since no correlation between MMSE and T1? was observed, this suggests that the cognitive score is not sensitive to tissue pathology. However, whether there is specificity of T1? to plaque burden or to other AD pathology remains to be determined. Another important issue regarding the early diagnosis of AD concerns is the selection of appropriate controls. The appearance of the neuropathological hallmarks of AD, senile plaque and neurofibrillary tangles, probably occur many years before the clinical symptoms of AD. As a consequence, within the aging population, subjects with no history of cognitive problems might show a sign of AD neuropathology at autopsy. It is clear that including normal with episodic memory within the normal range does not protect against the risk of some of these subjects progressing to MCI, and ultimately to AD, during follow-up. We will follow these patients for the next 3 years with the aim to see the role of T1? values in predicting the probability to develop AD in the future in the cognitive normal and MCI cohorts. Hippocampus atrophy has been used to differentiate AD pathology from age-matched controls but any age-related atrophy can confound attempts at distinguishing AD from normal control on the basis of T1?. In the current study, however, there was no correlation between age and T1? values, suggesting that the change in T1? is due to an underlying pathology. It remains to be seen, perhaps by a longitudinal study, whether hippocampus T1? in subjects with isolated memory impairment predicts a higher risk of developing AD, or, conversely, is only related to the presence of memory deficit. Longitudinal MR studies would require highly reproducible measurements of the T1?. In an earlier work, we measured the reproducibility of the T1? estimation in normal volunteers and the intrasubject covariance was less than 6%, but this has to be repeated on patients as well. In the current study, measurement of T1? was done using the two-dimensional T1?-weighted MRI pulse sequence, which is limited to a single-slice acquisition. Recently, a three-dimensional T1?-weighted pulse sequence has been developed by Witschey et al ( 21 ). It was found that using this sequence the average difference was less than 5% in T1? maps of the same brain. In general, three-dimensional sequences provide higher resolution in less time than that required for corresponding two-dimensional counterparts to acquire the same volume. Additionally, a low SAR version of T1? mapping has been developed by Wheaton et al ( 22 ). It was found that using this approach the SAR could be reduced by 40% along with only 2% change in the T1? measurement in human brain. The limitation of the current study should be emphasized, ie, any error associated with the registration between MPRAGE and T1? image will lead inaccuracy in hippocampus segmentation, which may indirectly affect the T1? measurement. We conclude that higher hippocampus T1? values in AD patients might be associated with the increased plaques burden. A follow-up study would help to determine the efficacy of T1? values as a predictor of developing AD in the control and MCI individuals investigated in this study. T1? MRI shows promise as a diagnostic method for AD in its early stage, and can potentially be a useful biomarker for the development of putative therapeutic agents for the treatment of AD.  DISCUSSION Discovering sensitive and specific markers of early AD would be a major breakthrough, as it would facilitate testing of novel therapeutic interventions that could slow or perhaps even arrest the degenerative process before dementia develops. In the current study we describe the relevance of T1? estimation in the early diagnosis of AD pathology. Significant increased T1? in hippocampus of MCI and AD patients was found compared to control. Also, in AD the hippocampus T1? was significantly increased over MCI. In the current study the hippocampus T1? in AD patients was increased by 13% over control and by 6% over MCI. It has been shown that increased T1? signal in AD patients is associated with the plaque burdens ( 18 ). Even after significant differences in T1? between three cohorts, some of the MCI and control individuals showed high T1? values in the range of AD pathology. We believe that this overlap is probably due to the large variation in T1? values in the MCI and control individuals. Delacourte et al ( 19 ) proposed that the neurofibrillary degeneration in AD may be hierarchized into 10 stages, ie, starting from involvement of perirhinal cortex (Stage 1) and subsequently entorhinal cortex and hippocampus (Stage 2), and then the rest of temporal cortex (Stages 4–6) followed by association area (Stage 7) and finally the entire cortex (Stage 10). It has been found that some subjects showed no cognitive alteration until Stage 6; most exhibited slight cognitive deficits even when most of the temporal cortex was involved ( 19 ). An increase in the MRI relaxation time in the AD brain is certainly due to a change in the molecular environment of water in the brain parenchyma resulting from AD pathology. Since no correlation between MMSE and T1? was observed, this suggests that the cognitive score is not sensitive to tissue pathology. However, whether there is specificity of T1? to plaque burden or to other AD pathology remains to be determined. Another important issue regarding the early diagnosis of AD concerns is the selection of appropriate controls. The appearance of the neuropathological hallmarks of AD, senile plaque and neurofibrillary tangles, probably occur many years before the clinical symptoms of AD. As a consequence, within the aging population, subjects with no history of cognitive problems might show a sign of AD neuropathology at autopsy. It is clear that including normal with episodic memory within the normal range does not protect against the risk of some of these subjects progressing to MCI, and ultimately to AD, during follow-up. We will follow these patients for the next 3 years with the aim to see the role of T1? values in predicting the probability to develop AD in the future in the cognitive normal and MCI cohorts. Hippocampus atrophy has been used to differentiate AD pathology from age-matched controls but any age-related atrophy can confound attempts at distinguishing AD from normal control on the basis of T1?. In the current study, however, there was no correlation between age and T1? values, suggesting that the change in T1? is due to an underlying pathology. It remains to be seen, perhaps by a longitudinal study, whether hippocampus T1? in subjects with isolated memory impairment predicts a higher risk of developing AD, or, conversely, is only related to the presence of memory deficit. Longitudinal MR studies would require highly reproducible measurements of the T1?. In an earlier work, we measured the reproducibility of the T1? estimation in normal volunteers and the intrasubject covariance was less than 6%, but this has to be repeated on patients as well. In the current study, measurement of T1? was done using the two-dimensional T1?-weighted MRI pulse sequence, which is limited to a single-slice acquisition. Recently, a three-dimensional T1?-weighted pulse sequence has been developed by Witschey et al ( 21 ). It was found that using this sequence the average difference was less than 5% in T1? maps of the same brain. In general, three-dimensional sequences provide higher resolution in less time than that required for corresponding two-dimensional counterparts to acquire the same volume. Additionally, a low SAR version of T1? mapping has been developed by Wheaton et al ( 22 ). It was found that using this approach the SAR could be reduced by 40% along with only 2% change in the T1? measurement in human brain. The limitation of the current study should be emphasized, ie, any error associated with the registration between MPRAGE and T1? image will lead inaccuracy in hippocampus segmentation, which may indirectly affect the T1? measurement. We conclude that higher hippocampus T1? values in AD patients might be associated with the increased plaques burden. A follow-up study would help to determine the efficacy of T1? values as a predictor of developing AD in the control and MCI individuals investigated in this study. T1? MRI shows promise as a diagnostic method for AD in its early stage, and can potentially be a useful biomarker for the development of putative therapeutic agents for the treatment of AD.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 T1? maps of the hippocampus region in the brain (in color) overlaid on fluid-attenuated T1? MRI of control (72 Y female, a ), MCI (76 Y male, b ), and AD patient (75 Y female, c ). Pixels with higher T1? (red) are more prominent in the hippocampus of an AD patient. A lack of signal from CSF implies that the higher T1? values are not due to fluid. Figure 2 The graph shows T1? values in the hippocampus of control, MCI, and AD cohorts. A 13% increased T1? over control and 6% increased over MCI was present in AD, while in MCI it was increased by 7% over control. Table 1 T1? Values From the Three Groups Diagnosis Number Hipp T1? (mean ± SE) Controls 31 88.5 ± 1.9 MCI 48 95.1 ± 2.1 AD 49 101.8 ± 1.6 ANOVA ( P ) 0.000 MCI, mild cognitive impairment; AD, Alzheimer disease; ANOVA, analysis of variance. * P -value at significant level. Table 2 Bonferroni Multiple Comparisons Among Different Groups Group Group Mean difference P -value 95 % CI LB UB Control vs. MCI ?6.7 0.037 * ?13.73 0.29 AD ?13.3 0.000 * ?20.33 ?6.36 MCI vs. AD ?6.6 0.032 * ?12.80 ?0.44 MCI, mild cognitive impairment; AD, Alzheimer disease; CI, confidence interval; LB. lower bound; UB. upper bound. * P -value at significant level.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 T1? maps of the hippocampus region in the brain (in color) overlaid on fluid-attenuated T1? MRI of control (72 Y female, a ), MCI (76 Y male, b ), and AD patient (75 Y female, c ). Pixels with higher T1? (red) are more prominent in the hippocampus of an AD patient. A lack of signal from CSF implies that the higher T1? values are not due to fluid. Figure 2 The graph shows T1? values in the hippocampus of control, MCI, and AD cohorts. A 13% increased T1? over control and 6% increased over MCI was present in AD, while in MCI it was increased by 7% over control. Table 1 T1? Values From the Three Groups Diagnosis Number Hipp T1? (mean ± SE) Controls 31 88.5 ± 1.9 MCI 48 95.1 ± 2.1 AD 49 101.8 ± 1.6 ANOVA ( P ) 0.000 MCI, mild cognitive impairment; AD, Alzheimer disease; ANOVA, analysis of variance. * P -value at significant level. Table 2 Bonferroni Multiple Comparisons Among Different Groups Group Group Mean difference P -value 95 % CI LB UB Control vs. MCI ?6.7 0.037 * ?13.73 0.29 AD ?13.3 0.000 * ?20.33 ?6.36 MCI vs. AD ?6.6 0.032 * ?12.80 ?0.44 MCI, mild cognitive impairment; AD, Alzheimer disease; CI, confidence interval; LB. lower bound; UB. upper bound. * P -value at significant level. 