Language networks in children: Evidence from functional MRI studies We review functional MRI and other neuroimaging studies of language skills in children from infancy to adulthood. These studies show developmental changes in the networks of brain regions supporting language, which can be affected by brain injuries or neurological disorders. Particular aspects of language rely on networks that lateralize to the dominant hemisphere; others rely on bilateral or non-dominant mechanisms. Multiple fMRI tasks for pediatric patients characterize functional brain reorganization that may accompany language deficits.  Discussion For studies of language lateralization using fMRI in children, a combination of language tasks is advantageous. Use of a single language paradigm with fMRI may not adequately reveal hemispheric and regional organization of language, particularly in the developing brain. The fMRI tasks described above are designed to activate left-dominant, bilateral, and right-dominant language processing networks, making it possible to examine functional reorganization that may accompany language deficits in patients with brain injury or chronic seizures. This data may have clinical utility in surgical planning. Semantic decision, story listening, and prosody discrimination are tasks suitable for children and can be completed in a single scan session, producing activation patterns that span both hemispheres. Some drawbacks to the fMRI technique for language localization are that it has relatively poor sensitivity for single subject studies. While overall patterns such as lateralization have proven repeatable in individuals, a high level of variability is present, both within and between participants, and this may make interpretation of individual subject data difficult. Use of fMRI data in combination with another imaging technique, such as magnetoencephalography, may offer the most precise localization. Also, the multiple-task approach discussed above assumes that children will be able to be compliant in the MRI scanner for the duration of 3 tasks. This may be difficult for younger children. Byars et al. [ 75 ] discuss this issue of compliance based on experience scanning children across a range of ages, and address some practical considerations in scanning children. As discussed above, the story listening task elicits activation even in sedated or sleeping children and may be useful in many cases. Transcranial doppler ultrasound or optical tomography may not require the level of participant compliance that fMRI involves but reliability of these techniques is not documented, and localization methods are poor at this stage [ 15 , 76 - 78 ]. fMRI offers a non-invasive, relatively child-friendly method for visualizing the impact of ictal or anatomical lesions on the functional distribution of language in the brain , and developmental changes in typically-developing children have been characterized [ 79 ], offering an age- adjusted context in which to view neuropathology. When pediatric participants are able to complete multiple language tasks, left, right, and bilaterally distributed language networks can be most accurately assessed.  Discussion For studies of language lateralization using fMRI in children, a combination of language tasks is advantageous. Use of a single language paradigm with fMRI may not adequately reveal hemispheric and regional organization of language, particularly in the developing brain. The fMRI tasks described above are designed to activate left-dominant, bilateral, and right-dominant language processing networks, making it possible to examine functional reorganization that may accompany language deficits in patients with brain injury or chronic seizures. This data may have clinical utility in surgical planning. Semantic decision, story listening, and prosody discrimination are tasks suitable for children and can be completed in a single scan session, producing activation patterns that span both hemispheres. Some drawbacks to the fMRI technique for language localization are that it has relatively poor sensitivity for single subject studies. While overall patterns such as lateralization have proven repeatable in individuals, a high level of variability is present, both within and between participants, and this may make interpretation of individual subject data difficult. Use of fMRI data in combination with another imaging technique, such as magnetoencephalography, may offer the most precise localization. Also, the multiple-task approach discussed above assumes that children will be able to be compliant in the MRI scanner for the duration of 3 tasks. This may be difficult for younger children. Byars et al. [ 75 ] discuss this issue of compliance based on experience scanning children across a range of ages, and address some practical considerations in scanning children. As discussed above, the story listening task elicits activation even in sedated or sleeping children and may be useful in many cases. Transcranial doppler ultrasound or optical tomography may not require the level of participant compliance that fMRI involves but reliability of these techniques is not documented, and localization methods are poor at this stage [ 15 , 76 - 78 ]. fMRI offers a non-invasive, relatively child-friendly method for visualizing the impact of ictal or anatomical lesions on the functional distribution of language in the brain , and developmental changes in typically-developing children have been characterized [ 79 ], offering an age- adjusted context in which to view neuropathology. When pediatric participants are able to complete multiple language tasks, left, right, and bilaterally distributed language networks can be most accurately assessed.  Figures Figure 1 Group activation map for 16 healthy children and young adults performing the semantic decision task, thresholded at z=1.96, cluster size 30 (p<.05 corrected via Monte Carlo simulation). Images are in radiological orientation (the left hemisphere appears on the right side of the image.) Figure 2 Group activation map for 14 healthy children and young adults performing the story processing task. Images are thresholded at z=1.96, cluster size 30 (p<.05 corrected via Monte Carlo simulation) Images are in radiological orientation (the left hemisphere appears on the right side of the image.) Figure 3 Group activation maps for 15 healthy children and young adults performing the prosody discrimination task, thresholded at z>1.96, cluster size 30 (p<.05 corrected via Monte Carlo simulation) Images are in radiological orientation (the left hemisphere appears on the right side of the image.)  Figures Figure 1 Group activation map for 16 healthy children and young adults performing the semantic decision task, thresholded at z=1.96, cluster size 30 (p<.05 corrected via Monte Carlo simulation). Images are in radiological orientation (the left hemisphere appears on the right side of the image.) Figure 2 Group activation map for 14 healthy children and young adults performing the story processing task. Images are thresholded at z=1.96, cluster size 30 (p<.05 corrected via Monte Carlo simulation) Images are in radiological orientation (the left hemisphere appears on the right side of the image.) Figure 3 Group activation maps for 15 healthy children and young adults performing the prosody discrimination task, thresholded at z>1.96, cluster size 30 (p<.05 corrected via Monte Carlo simulation) Images are in radiological orientation (the left hemisphere appears on the right side of the image.) 