GABA increases Ca 2+ in cerebellar granule cell precursors via depolarization: implications for proliferation Summary The amino acids glutamate and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) have primarily been characterized as the most prevalent excitatory and inhibitory, respectively, neurotransmitters in the vertebrate central nervous system. However, the role of these signaling molecules extends far beyond the synapse. GABA, glutamate, and their complement of receptors are essential signaling molecules that regulate developmental processes in both embryonic and young adult mammals. In this review, we describe the current knowledge on the role of GABA and glutamate in development, focusing on the perinatal cerebellum. We will then present novel data suggesting that GABA depolarizes granule cell precursors via GABAA receptors, which leads to calcium increases in these cells. Finally, we will consider the role of GABA and glutamate signaling on cell proliferation and perhaps neural cancers. From our review of the literature and these data, we hypothesize that GABAA receptors and metabotropic glutamate receptors may be a novel target for the pharmacological regulation of the cerebellar tumors, medulloblastomas.  NOVEL DATA: GCPS IN THE EGL EXPRESS FUNCTIONAL GABA<sub>A</sub>RS GABA depolarizes granule cell precursors in the EGL To determine whether GCPs express functional GABAARs in the EGL, we obtained gramicidin-perforated patch clamp recordings from GCPs in acutely dissected parasagittal cerebellar slices from postnatal (P) 8 mice at near-physiological temperature (32–35°C). Experiments were performed in CD1 mice (Charles River, USA) in accordance with the Yale Animal Careand Use Committee guidelines. Gramicidin is an antibiotic that perforates the cell membrane, creating cation-selective pores, without disturbing the chloride gradient ( 56 ; 57 ). Considering that the chloride gradient across the cell membrane is the main force underlying the reversal potential of GABAA responses, we can determine whether GABAA is depolarizing or hyperpolarizing. Recorded cells were identified as GCPs based on their biophysical and morphological properties. GCPs have a small cell body (~8 ?m, Fig. 2D ), a high input resistance (>1.5 G?), no synaptic currents, and no voltage-gated sodium currents (data not shown). GCPs had a mean input resistance of 3.5 ± 0.7 G? (n=6), which resemble that of SVZ neuroblasts ( 58 ; 59 ). Pressure application of GABA (100 ?M, 2 s) induced inward currents in all recorded GCPs in the EGL held at a membrane potential of ?60 mV (n=6/6, Fig. 2A ). Using a ramp protocol at the peak of the response, the reversal potential of GABAARs was found to be ?30.9 ± 1.5 mV (n=6). Pressure application of GABA (100 ?M, 2 s) during current clamp recordings depolarized GCPs located in the EGL by 20–30 mV (n=4, Figure 2C ). Based on the Nernst equation (see equation below) and knowing that GABAARs are also permeable to HCO3 with a HCO3?:Cl? permeability ratio of 0.2 ( 60 ), we can calculate the internal chloride concentration in GCPs. Using the following equation: E rev = RT / zF ln ( ( [ Cl ? ] e + 0.2 [ HCO 3 ? ] e ) / ( [ Cl ? ] i + 0.2 [ HCO 3 ? ] i ) ) with [Cl?]e of 134.1 mM, [HCO3?]e of 24 mM, and assuming [HCO3?]i of 16 mM ( 61 ), the internal chloride concentration in GCPs is 39.4 ± 2.1 mM (n=6). This value is comparable to the mean internal chloride concentration calculated for SVZ neuroblasts ( 62 ). GABA<sub>A</sub>R activation leads to calcium transients in GCPs The depolarizing action of GABA on immature neurons has been shown to cause intracellular calcium transients in these cells ( 5 ; 10 ). Therefore, we next determined whether application of muscimol, a specific GABAAR agonist, increased intracellular Ca2+ levels in GCPs of the EGL. Parasagittal cerebellar slices were pressure-loaded with Oregon green BAPTA-1-AM (20 ?M, 3–4 times each of 2 min). After a 20 min wait period, images were acquired every 1.1 s using an Olympus Fluoview confocal microscope (laser 488 nm). Pressure application of muscimol (25 ?M, 5 s) induced reproducible, transient increases in intracellular Ca2+ levels in 93% of the fluo-4-loaded GCPs in the EGL (12–15 cells analyzed per slice, n=2 slices, Figure 3 ). These data support the patch clamp data in suggesting that GCPs in the EGL express functional GABAARs, whose activation increases intracellular Ca2+ presumably via cell depolarization and opening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels as shown in SVZ neuroblasts ( 63 ).  GABA depolarizes granule cell precursors in the EGL To determine whether GCPs express functional GABAARs in the EGL, we obtained gramicidin-perforated patch clamp recordings from GCPs in acutely dissected parasagittal cerebellar slices from postnatal (P) 8 mice at near-physiological temperature (32–35°C). Experiments were performed in CD1 mice (Charles River, USA) in accordance with the Yale Animal Careand Use Committee guidelines. Gramicidin is an antibiotic that perforates the cell membrane, creating cation-selective pores, without disturbing the chloride gradient ( 56 ; 57 ). Considering that the chloride gradient across the cell membrane is the main force underlying the reversal potential of GABAA responses, we can determine whether GABAA is depolarizing or hyperpolarizing. Recorded cells were identified as GCPs based on their biophysical and morphological properties. GCPs have a small cell body (~8 ?m, Fig. 2D ), a high input resistance (>1.5 G?), no synaptic currents, and no voltage-gated sodium currents (data not shown). GCPs had a mean input resistance of 3.5 ± 0.7 G? (n=6), which resemble that of SVZ neuroblasts ( 58 ; 59 ). Pressure application of GABA (100 ?M, 2 s) induced inward currents in all recorded GCPs in the EGL held at a membrane potential of ?60 mV (n=6/6, Fig. 2A ). Using a ramp protocol at the peak of the response, the reversal potential of GABAARs was found to be ?30.9 ± 1.5 mV (n=6). Pressure application of GABA (100 ?M, 2 s) during current clamp recordings depolarized GCPs located in the EGL by 20–30 mV (n=4, Figure 2C ). Based on the Nernst equation (see equation below) and knowing that GABAARs are also permeable to HCO3 with a HCO3?:Cl? permeability ratio of 0.2 ( 60 ), we can calculate the internal chloride concentration in GCPs. Using the following equation: E rev = RT / zF ln ( ( [ Cl ? ] e + 0.2 [ HCO 3 ? ] e ) / ( [ Cl ? ] i + 0.2 [ HCO 3 ? ] i ) ) with [Cl?]e of 134.1 mM, [HCO3?]e of 24 mM, and assuming [HCO3?]i of 16 mM ( 61 ), the internal chloride concentration in GCPs is 39.4 ± 2.1 mM (n=6). This value is comparable to the mean internal chloride concentration calculated for SVZ neuroblasts ( 62 ).  GABA<sub>A</sub>R activation leads to calcium transients in GCPs The depolarizing action of GABA on immature neurons has been shown to cause intracellular calcium transients in these cells ( 5 ; 10 ). Therefore, we next determined whether application of muscimol, a specific GABAAR agonist, increased intracellular Ca2+ levels in GCPs of the EGL. Parasagittal cerebellar slices were pressure-loaded with Oregon green BAPTA-1-AM (20 ?M, 3–4 times each of 2 min). After a 20 min wait period, images were acquired every 1.1 s using an Olympus Fluoview confocal microscope (laser 488 nm). Pressure application of muscimol (25 ?M, 5 s) induced reproducible, transient increases in intracellular Ca2+ levels in 93% of the fluo-4-loaded GCPs in the EGL (12–15 cells analyzed per slice, n=2 slices, Figure 3 ). These data support the patch clamp data in suggesting that GCPs in the EGL express functional GABAARs, whose activation increases intracellular Ca2+ presumably via cell depolarization and opening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels as shown in SVZ neuroblasts ( 63 ).  POSSIBLE MECHANISMS FOR GABA’S DEPOLARIZATION AND SOURCES OF GABA Finding that GABAA is depolarizing in GCPs add to its well know depolarizing function in embryonic and immature postnatal neurons via GABAARs ( 62 ; 64 – 66 ). The depolarizing action of GABA is thought to result from a higher intracellular chloride concentration in immature neurons than in mature neurons, created by expression of a different pattern of chloride transporters ( 67 ). Two families of transporters have been studied: the Na+–K+–2Cl? co-transporters (NKCCs) and the K+–Cl? co-transporters (KCCs). NKCCs are chloride importer and, therefore, typically raise [Cl?]i ( 68 ) while KCCs, in particular KCC2, whose expression is delayed during development, extrude chloride. In the cerebellum, expression of KCC2 in GCPs does not occur until cells reach the IGL ( 69 ). This delayed expression of KCC2 presumably explains the high intercellular chloride content and GABAA depolarizing effect. The GABAAR activation in GCP depends on the existence of an endogenous source of GABA, or another GABAAR agonist, proximal to the cerebellar EGL. GCPs are fairly isolated in the EGL. Similar to the arrangement in the rostral migratory stream (RMS, a migratory pathway from the SVZ to the olfactory bulb), the GCPs are in intimate contact with their migratory scaffold, Bergmann glia ( 70 ). In general, GABA release from glia has not been reported. However, Bergmann glia have been shown to synthesize and release taurine ( 71 ; 72 ). Taurine is one of the most abundant free amino acids in the brain and has been shown to be an agonist for GABAARs ( 73 – 76 ). Therefore, Bergmann glia are a potential source for GABAAR activation in GCPs. However, it now remains to be examined whether GABAARs are tonically activated in GCPs under physiological conditions.  FUNCTIONS OF GABA AND GLUTAMATE SIGNALING ON THE PROLIFERATION OF GCPs GABA and glutamate exert profound effects on cell development including on adult neurogenesis in the SVZ and SGZ. The functions of GABA and glutamate has been extensively reviewed by others ( 5 ; 7 – 10 ; 77 – 79 ). Here, we will essentially focus on their effects on cell proliferation in vivo or in organotypic slices to extrapolate on their hypothetical proliferative function in the neonatal cerebellum. GCPs undergo clonal expansion in the outer EGL before exiting the cell cycle and tangentially migrating in the inner EGL ( 80 ). All types of glutamate receptors AMPA/kainate receptors, NMDARs and mGluRs have been shown to regulate cell proliferation with differential effects depending on the region studied and the age of the mice. In vivo acute administration of NMDAR and AMPA/kainate receptor blockers reduced the number of proliferative cells (marked by incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine, BrdU) in the striatal and cortical ventricular zone (VZ) of embryos (E), respectively ( 81 ; 82 ). These data suggested that activation of NMDAR and AMPA/kainate receptor by ambient glutamate promotes cell proliferation in the striatal and cortical VZ, respectively. However, chronic blockade of NMDARs in organotypic E17 slices increased the number of proliferative cells in the neocortical VZ, suggesting that NMDAR activation limits cell proliferation in this region ( 83 ). Blockade of NMDARs or AMPA/kainate receptors in vivo increased BrdU or thymidine-labelled cells in the SGZ of neonatal mice and adult gerbils ( 84 ; 85 ). Some of the discrepancies in the effects of receptor blockade on cell proliferation could be due to a decrease in neuronal activity impinging on progenitor cells and thus indirectly affecting their proliferation. mGlu5 receptors (group I) activation promotes cell proliferation in some embryonic neurogenic zones of the forebrain ( 86 ) as well as adult neurogenic zones ( 87 ). Chronic administration of a group II mGluR antagonist enhanced the number of BrdU-labelled cells in the SGZ ( 88 ). In the cerebellar EGL, proliferating GCPs do not express NMDARs and AMPA receptors, but they express kainate receptors (see section above). It is thus conceivable that kainate receptors control the rate of GCP proliferation or the exit from the cell cycle. Regarding mGluRs, treatment with a mGlu4 receptor enhancer reduces GCP proliferation ( 89 ). However, this effect may have been indirect, as it remains unknown whether GCPs express mGlu4 receptors. If mGlu5 receptors were present in GCPs, their activation may promote GCP proliferation as shown in the adult neurogenic zones. GABAAR activation has essentially been shown to limit cell proliferation in embryonic and adult neurogenic zones ( 63 ; 65 ; 90 ; 91 ). The function of GABABRs on cell proliferation is less clear. In the neonatal cerebellum, it is conceivable that GABA acting at GABAARs contributes to cell cycle exit of GCPs, but this needs to be thoroughly examined.  FUNCTIONS OF GABA AND GLUTAMATE SIGNALING IN DISEASES OF THE GCPs The balance between proliferation and programmed withdrawal from the cell cycle is critical to the differentiation of GCPs. Persistent proliferation may lead to the presence of undifferentiated cells as seen in tumors. If GABAergic and glutamatergic signaling play a role in the regulation of physiological neural proliferation, it follows that aberrations in GABA and glutamate signaling pathways may lead to neuro-pathophysiology or alternatively could be used to control cell proliferation in diseased tissue. Tumorigenesis is one such neuro-pathophysiology. Medulloblastomas are cerebellar tumors that are among the most common tumors in children (20–30% of all pediatric brain tumors in 5–10 years old children). They are highly malignant and are associated with substantial mortality (only 50% of patients survive 5 years after diagnosis). Moreover, irradiation results in severe neurological impairment. New approaches to the diagnosis and treatment of medulloblastoma are necessary and will likely come from a deeper understanding of the cellular and molecular basis of cerebellar development, and the biology of this tumor. The ontogeny of this tumor remains controversial since its original description in 1925 ( 92 ). These tumors have been postulated to arise from two sources: the neuroepithelial cells at the surface of the 4th ventricle (i.e. the first germinal zone) ( 93 ) and the GCPs of the EGL generating the so-called classic and desmoplastic medulloblastoma ( 94 ; 95 ), respectively. A recent study raised the possibility that white-matter cerebellar stem cells constitute an alternative cell of origin for medulloblastoma ( 96 ). Desmoplastic medullablastoma cells have been shown to share electrophysiological properties with GCPs, displaying a variety of potassium and calcium currents, and most notably, currents in response to GABA application ( 97 ). Of the mGluRs, activation of mGluR4 in vivo inhibits the growth of medulloblastoma cell lines grafted in mice ( 98 ). In addition medulloblastoma tissue expresses high levels of mGluR4s. mGluR4 ligands may thus be good candidates to control medulloblastoma growth. The expression of ionotropic glutamate receptors by medulloblastoma is less clear. Whereas some molecular studies have shown that several medulloblastoma cell lines express the protein subunits of these receptors, whether they are assembled into functional receptors is unclear ( 99 ). In addition, as we have shown here that GCPs express functional GABAARs, GABAAR ligands may provide additional therapeutic targets assuming that they either directly or indirectly through mGluR regulation alter GCP proliferation and medulloblastoma growth. Evidence from the postnatal forebrain and more recent evidence from embryonic stem cells shows GABA’s influence on cell proliferation to be largely inhibitory ( 91 ). While no broad generalizations can be made about the pathophysiology of cancer cells, several lines of evidence have supported the idea that GABA and activation of GABAARs may regulate proliferation in some cancers (for review see ( 100 )). Further, recent studies suggest that GABABRs may also play a prominent role. Bacoflen, an agonist of metabotropic GABABRs has recently been shown to inhibit human hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth ( 101 ) and activation of GABABRs, with GABA, decreased proliferation in an immortalized pulmonary adenocarcinoma line ( 102 ). However, in certain cases, stimulation with GABA induces matrix metalloproteinases that serve to enhance cancer’s invasive potential ( 103 ; 104 ). Therefore, despite their long, established history as neurotransmitters, we still have much to learn about the potential of GABA and glutamate as regulators of proliferation, both in physiological and pathological contexts.  Figures Figure 1 Diagram summarizing the developmental stages of GCPs in neonates GCPs undergo clonal expansion (proliferation) in the outer part of the EGL. Once they exit the cell cycle, they move to the inner part of the EGL where they tangentially migrate and extend their processes. They then turn 90° angle, grab onto a Bergmann glial process and radially migrate throughout the molecular layer (ML) to the Purkinje cell layer (PC). In the outer EGL and other layers, GCPs express functional kainate receptors (kainateRs). It is unclear whether they express mGluRs. We show in this review article that GCPs also express functional GABAARs. In the inner EGL, they start expressing NMDA and AMPA receptors (NMDAR and AMPARs, respectively). Figure 2 GABA depolarizes GCPs (A) GABA-induced currents recorded at different holding potentials ranging from ?60 to +10 mV (marked to the left of the perforated patch-clamp records). (B) Current-voltage curve of GABA-induced currents for the traces shown in (B). (C) A representative current clamp record of a GCP depolarized by exogenous GABA application (100 ?M, 2 s at arrow) in the EGL. Gramicidin perforated patch clamp was used. (D) DIC photograph of a patched cerebellar GCP in the EGL. Figure 3 GABA<sub>A</sub>R activation leads to calcium transients in GCPs (A) Confocal photographs of a live sagittal slice containing the EGL. (Aa) DIC image of the Oregon Green BAPTA-1 AM-loaded slice before and during a GABAAR agonist (muscimol, 25 ?M, 5 s) application. Images were acquired every 1.1 s. Scale bar: 20 ?m. (B) Representative calcium activity graphs as a function of time for the three cells whose ROI are shown in the (A). 