Breast cancer diagnosis during pregnancy Breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy is a challenging situation for the patient and her medical team. As women are delaying childbirth, the incidence is expected to increase. Most of the data surrounding the diagnosis and treatment of cancer during pregnancy is in case reports and small cohort studies. However, the data continues to expand regarding the safety of systemic treatments during the second and third trimesters for both the mother and the fetus. In this article, the use of diagnostic imaging, procedures, surgery and chemotherapy are reviewed as well as prognosis and future pregnancies after the treatment for breast cancer.  Conclusion & future perspective The treatment of breast cancer during pregnancy is multidisciplinary and necessitates active communication among the patient, obstetrician, medical, surgical and radiation oncologists. Appropriate diagnosis, biopsy and imaging is required for proper surgical and medical management of the breast tumor. Fertility options and future pregnancy plans should be discussed with the patient prior to starting systemic therapies. As more women may present with breast cancer during pregnancy and as women delay childbirth, the medical community will need to continue to add to this growing body of literature. Other therapies, such as taxanes and new biologics, may need to be considered, although their usage now is not currently recommended owing to the paucity of safety data. In addition, evaluating and following the children who were exposed to chemotherapy in utero will be paramount to providing women with better informed consent as well as providing pediatricians who care for these children with better guidelines for any changes in their healthcare, if needed. Executive summary Epidemiology Women are delaying childbirth and we expect the rate of breast cancer during pregnancy to increase. Currently, it is estimated that approximately one in every 3000 births occur during breast cancer. Diagnosis & imaging Women should have breast masses properly evaluated during pregnancy. Mammography with fetal shielding, ultrasonography and MRIs should be considered. Fine needle aspiration, core biopsies and breast surgeries appear to have no significant increase in risk and should be performed in a timely fashion for a breast lump diagnosed during pregnancy. Treatment Chemotherapy should be considered after the first trimester in coordination with a multidisciplinary approach with monitoring by an obstetrician. Anthracycline-based chemotherapy has the most published safety data during pregnancy and should be considered in the first line. Several other agents have also been reported. Radiation should be completed after delivery of the child. Future pregnancies Epidemiologic data do not appear to support an increased risk of recurrence for women who have a subsequent pregnancy after a diagnosis of breast cancer. Long-term follow-up of the children exposed to chemotherapy during pregnancy is warranted.  Epidemiology Women are delaying childbirth and we expect the rate of breast cancer during pregnancy to increase. Currently, it is estimated that approximately one in every 3000 births occur during breast cancer.  Diagnosis & imaging Women should have breast masses properly evaluated during pregnancy. Mammography with fetal shielding, ultrasonography and MRIs should be considered. Fine needle aspiration, core biopsies and breast surgeries appear to have no significant increase in risk and should be performed in a timely fashion for a breast lump diagnosed during pregnancy.  Treatment Chemotherapy should be considered after the first trimester in coordination with a multidisciplinary approach with monitoring by an obstetrician. Anthracycline-based chemotherapy has the most published safety data during pregnancy and should be considered in the first line. Several other agents have also been reported. Radiation should be completed after delivery of the child.  Future pregnancies Epidemiologic data do not appear to support an increased risk of recurrence for women who have a subsequent pregnancy after a diagnosis of breast cancer. Long-term follow-up of the children exposed to chemotherapy during pregnancy is warranted. 