NOVEL ONCOGENIC ACTIONS OF TR? MUTANTS IN TUMORIGENESIS The thyroid hormone, T3, plays important roles in metabolism, growth, and differentiation. Germline mutations in thyroid hormone receptor beta (TR?) have been identified in many individuals with resistance to thyroid hormone, a syndrome of reduced sensitivity to T3. A close association of somatic mutations of TR? with several human cancers has become increasingly apparent, but how TR? mutants could be involved in the carcinogenesis in vivo has not been addressed. The creation of a mouse model ( TR ? PV/PV mouse) that harbors a knockin mutation of TR? (denoted TR?PV) has facilitated the study of the molecular actions of TR? mutants in vivo . The striking phenotype of thyroid cancer and the development of pituitary tumors exhibited by TR ? PV/PV mice have uncovered novel functions of a TR? mutant in tumorigenesis. It led to the important findings that the oncogenic action of TR?PV is mediated by both genomic and non-genomic actions to alter gene expression and signaling pathways activity.  INTRODUCTION Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) belong to the superfamily of ligand-dependent transcription factors. Two TR genes, THRA and THRB , located on two different chromosomes encode four T3-binding receptors: TR?1, TR?1, TR?2, and TR?3. They bind the thyroid hormone (T3) that plays critical roles in differentiation, growth, and metabolism ( 1 ). Although abnormal expression and aberrant activity of sex steroid nuclear receptors are well known to be involved in the development and progression of cancers, much less is known about the possible involvement of TRs in tumorigenesis. However, increasing evidence suggests that TRs could also play a role in tumor progression. Indeed, studies using cancer cell lines show that wild-type TRs can regulate cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and cell migration ( 2 - 9 ). Besides, abnormal expression and somatic mutations of TRs have been described in human cancers, such as those of the liver ( 10 ), kidney ( 11 , 12 ), pituitary ( 13 - 15 ), breast ( 16 , 17 ), colon ( 18 ), and thyroid ( 19 - 21 ). The precise contribution of TR mutants to tumorigenesis is not fully understood, but their high frequency in human cancers suggests that they have a contributory role. The first evidence to support this hypothesis was the observation that a TR?1 mutant, initially identified as the v-erbA oncogene in an avian retrovirus, could cause hepatocellular carcinomas when expressed in transgenic mice ( 22 ). Altogether, these observations suggest that partial loss of normal TR function due to reduced expression, or complete loss or alteration of TR activity, provides an opportunity for cells to proliferate, invade, and metastasize. In this context, TR could act as a tumor suppressor. Although a correlation between TR abnormalities and the development of cancers has been established, the target genes and signaling pathways affected by TR mutants are not well known. In addition, there is still limited knowledge about the molecular mechanisms by which the TR mutants alter the activity of the affected genes and signaling pathways to mediate carcinogenesis. The creation of a knockin mouse harboring a C-terminal 14 amino acid frameshift mutation in TR? ( TR ? PV/PV mice) provides a valuable tool to explore in vivo the molecular mechanisms that are altered by a TR mutant to drive tumorigenesis ( 23 ). The TR?PV mutation was initially identified in a patient (called PV) who has the syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH). RTH is characterized by a reduced sensitivity of tissues to the action of thyroid hormones, and it is frequently associated with the mutation of one copy of THRB . Studies using reporters in cultured cells have shown that the TR?PV mutation has completely lost T3 binding capacity and displays dominant negative activity ( 24 , 25 ). Consistent with the phenotype of RTH patients, TR ? PV/+ and TR ? PV/PV mice faithfully reproduce human RTH. Strikingly, as TR ? PV/PV mice but not TR ? PV/+ age, they spontaneously develop follicular thyroid carcinoma with tumor progression similar to human cancer ( 26 ). In addition, TR ? PV/PV mice spontaneously develop thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-secreting tumors (TSHomas) ( 27 ). Thus, the phenotype of the TR ? PV/PV mice indicates that mutations of the TR? gene extend beyond RTH and that TR? mutants could act as oncogenes. Extensive molecular studies were performed to understand the mechanisms behind the development and progression of tumors mediated by TR?PV. Comprehensive cDNA micro-array analysis of gene expression in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice show a dramatic alteration in the expression of genes involved in different signaling pathways, including TSH, Wnt-?-catenin, transforming growth factor ?, tumor necrosis factor ?, and nuclear factor ?B peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor ? (PPAR?) pathways ( 28 ). These results suggest that complex alterations of multiple signaling pathways induced by TR?PV contribute to thyroid carcinogenesis. However, the mechanisms by which TR?PV alters gene profiles to mediate thyroid carcinogenesis in TR ? PV/PV mice were unknown. Our initial studies showed that TR?PV exerts dominant-negative actions and thereby alters gene transcription to mediate thyroid cancer and pituitary tumor in TR ? PV/PV mice ( 27 , 29 - 31 ). Most recent studies further indicate that TR?PV mediates its oncogenic actions in the thyroid via non-genomic mechanisms ( 32 - 34 ). This review will highlight the currently known mechanisms mediating the oncogenic actions of TR? mutants in TR ? PV/PV mice.  GENOMIC ACTIONS OF MUTATED TRs IN CARCINOGENESIS Although significant progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms by which wild-type TRs act in regulating gene transcription, how TR mutants affect transcription activity to drive tumorigenesis is far less understood. Typically, wild-type TRs bind to specific DNA sequences on specific DNA recognition motifs usually located in the promoters of T3-target genes (denoted thyroid hormone response elements, or TREs) as monomers, homodimers, or, more frequently, heterodimers with RXR ( 1 ). Binding of TRs to their DNA recognition motif is ligand-independent. The regulation of TR transcriptional activity is complex, and it depends not only on the presence of T3 but also on the type of TREs on the promoter of T3-target genes. Classically, unliganded TRs recruit co-repressors such as NCoR and mediate basal transcriptional repression of target genes. Conversely, the binding of T3 induces conformational changes of TRs and results in the release of co-repressors, the recruitment of co-activators such as those from the p160/SRC1 family, and transcriptional activation. TRs can also regulate target genes indirectly through protein-protein interaction with other transcription factors. Several studies showed that TR mutations identified in cancer cell lines frequently lead to the loss of T3 binding, confer TR dominant negative activity, and impair the binding to DNA recognition motifs, thereby leading to abnormal transcriptional activity ( 12 , 14 , 15 , 21 , 35 ). In addition, some TR mutations lead to alterations in TR affinity for co-repressors, even in the absence of T3 ( 35 ). Although these studies provided further insights into the mode of actions of TR mutants in cancer cells, the TR ? PV/PV mouse offers the unique opportunity to study in vivo the mechanisms underlying the molecular action of a TR? mutant that spontaneously leads to thyroid and pituitary tumors. 1. Decreased activity of PPAR? signaling pathway mediated by TR?PV in thyroid cancer We made the interesting finding that the thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice display a significant decrease in PPAR ? mRNA levels ( 29 ). Our in vivo studies using TR ? PV/PV PPAR ?+/- mice further show that thyroid carcinogenesis progresses significantly faster from increased cell proliferation and reduced apoptosis ( 30 ). In addition, biochemical and cell-based studies show that TR?PV acts to abolish the ligand (troglitazone)-mediated transcriptional activity of PPAR? ( 29 ). Identification of the repressed PPAR? signaling pathway during thyroid carcinogenesis in TR ? PV/PV mice is particularly relevant in view of the work of Kroll et al. ( 36 ) that reported the identification of a chromosomal rearrangement yielding a PAX8 - PPAR ? 1 fusion gene in human follicular carcinomas. When fused to PAX8 , PPAR ? 1 not only loses its capability to stimulate PPAR ?-ligand (thiazolidinedione)-induced transcription but also acts to inhibit PPAR ? 1 transcriptional activity ( 36 ), raising the possibility that PPAR? could act as a tumor suppressor in thyroid carcinoma. Our studies aimed at deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying the inhibition of PPAR? ligand-mediated activity transcriptional activity by TR?PV provided further insights into how the TR?PV mutation could interfere with the PPAR? signaling pathway ( 31 ). Similar to TR?1, TR?PV competes with PPAR? for binding to the peroxisome proliferator responsive element (PPRE) as homodimers or heterodimers with PPAR? or RXR, thereby competing with PPAR? for PPRE binding and for sequestering RXR ( 29 , 31 ) ( Figure 1 ). Unliganded TR?1 and TR?PV recruit the nuclear co-repressor NCoR to the promoter of PPAR?-target genes in vivo . However, although T3 can relieve the repression effect of unliganded TR?1/PPAR? on troglitazone-dependent transcriptional activity of PPAR? by releasing NCoR, it cannot relieve the repression effect of TR?PV/PPAR? because TR?PV cannot bind T3. Further analyses indicate that the constitutive association of TR?PV with co-repressors prevents the recruitment of the steroid hormone coactivator -1 (SRC-1) to the PPAR?/TR?PV complexes in the presence of troglitazone. In the TR ? PV/PV thyroid, reduced PPAR ? expression and decreased PPAR? transcriptional activity could lead to a reduction in the expression of PPAR?-downstream tumor suppressor genes and/or an increase in the expression of tumor promoter genes, thereby promoting the progression and development of thyroid cancer. Importantly, these findings highlight a dominant negative action of TR?PV that can mediate thyroid carcinogenesis by altering PPAR? signaling. 2. Up-regulation of cyclin D1 mRNA levels by TR?PV in pituitary tumors Somatic mutations of THRB were identified in several patients with TSHomas ( 13 , 15 ). This disease represents about 2% of all pituitary adenomas in humans. Patients with TSHomas have high serum TSH despite elevated thyroid hormone levels, indicating that TSHomas exhibit a defect in the negative regulation of TSH by thyroid hormone. The TR? mutants identified in TSHomas show impaired T3 binding and exhibit dominant negative activity ( 13 , 15 , 37 ). Some TR? mutants were found to interfere with the normal regulation of the glycoprotein hormone ?-subunit and TSH? genes, which encode the subunits of TSH ( 14 , 15 ). The TR ? PV/PV mice spontaneously develop TSHomas, indicating that the mutation of TR? is one of the genetic events that can mediate the development of this tumor. We therefore explored the mechanisms underlying the development of TSHomas using the TR ? PV/PV mouse as a model. Similar to the patients with TSHomas, TR ? PV/PV mice exhibit severe dysregulation of the pituitary-thyroid axis with highly elevated TSH associated with increased T3 ( 23 , 27 ). Mice deficient in both TR? and TR? ( TR ?-/- TR ?-/- mice) have similarly elevated serum TSH and thyroid hormone levels as those of TR ? PV/PV mice. However, TR ?-/- TR ?-/- mice do not develop TSHomas. These findings indicate that the dysregulation of the pituitary-thyroid axis alone is not sufficient to mediate the pathogenesis of TSHomas ( 27 ). That these two mutant mice have a similar degree of resistance to thyroid hormone in the pituitary, but have contrasting phenotypes in displaying TSHomas has facilitated the comparison of gene expression profiles. cDNA microarray studies show the up-regulation of growth and proliferation-related genes in the pituitary of TR ? PV/PV mice but not in that of TR ?-/- TR ?-/- mice ( 27 ). Among the proliferation-related genes, Ccdn1 encoding cyclin D1 is up-regulated in the pituitary of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 27 ). Additional studies confirmed the up-regulation of Ccdn1 at the mRNA levels and further showed that cyclin D1 protein is overexpressed. The over-expression is accompanied by concurrent activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)/retinoblastoma (Rb) protein/E2F pathway and increased cellular proliferation in the pituitary ( 27 , 38 ). The molecular mechanism by which TR?PV activates the expression of Ccdn1 was studied. Multiple factors are known to regulate the activity of the cyclin D1 promoter, including cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) ( 38 , 39 ). We found that liganded TR? represses Ccdn1 expression via tethering to the Ccdn1 promoter through binding to CREB. This repression effect is lost in TR?PV, thereby resulting in constitutive activation of Ccdn1 in TR ? PV/PV mice ( 27 ) ( Figure 1 ). Thus the TR?PV mutation, by altering Ccdn1 expression, induces aberrant cellular proliferation in the pituitary that contributes to TSHomas.  1. Decreased activity of PPAR? signaling pathway mediated by TR?PV in thyroid cancer We made the interesting finding that the thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice display a significant decrease in PPAR ? mRNA levels ( 29 ). Our in vivo studies using TR ? PV/PV PPAR ?+/- mice further show that thyroid carcinogenesis progresses significantly faster from increased cell proliferation and reduced apoptosis ( 30 ). In addition, biochemical and cell-based studies show that TR?PV acts to abolish the ligand (troglitazone)-mediated transcriptional activity of PPAR? ( 29 ). Identification of the repressed PPAR? signaling pathway during thyroid carcinogenesis in TR ? PV/PV mice is particularly relevant in view of the work of Kroll et al. ( 36 ) that reported the identification of a chromosomal rearrangement yielding a PAX8 - PPAR ? 1 fusion gene in human follicular carcinomas. When fused to PAX8 , PPAR ? 1 not only loses its capability to stimulate PPAR ?-ligand (thiazolidinedione)-induced transcription but also acts to inhibit PPAR ? 1 transcriptional activity ( 36 ), raising the possibility that PPAR? could act as a tumor suppressor in thyroid carcinoma. Our studies aimed at deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying the inhibition of PPAR? ligand-mediated activity transcriptional activity by TR?PV provided further insights into how the TR?PV mutation could interfere with the PPAR? signaling pathway ( 31 ). Similar to TR?1, TR?PV competes with PPAR? for binding to the peroxisome proliferator responsive element (PPRE) as homodimers or heterodimers with PPAR? or RXR, thereby competing with PPAR? for PPRE binding and for sequestering RXR ( 29 , 31 ) ( Figure 1 ). Unliganded TR?1 and TR?PV recruit the nuclear co-repressor NCoR to the promoter of PPAR?-target genes in vivo . However, although T3 can relieve the repression effect of unliganded TR?1/PPAR? on troglitazone-dependent transcriptional activity of PPAR? by releasing NCoR, it cannot relieve the repression effect of TR?PV/PPAR? because TR?PV cannot bind T3. Further analyses indicate that the constitutive association of TR?PV with co-repressors prevents the recruitment of the steroid hormone coactivator -1 (SRC-1) to the PPAR?/TR?PV complexes in the presence of troglitazone. In the TR ? PV/PV thyroid, reduced PPAR ? expression and decreased PPAR? transcriptional activity could lead to a reduction in the expression of PPAR?-downstream tumor suppressor genes and/or an increase in the expression of tumor promoter genes, thereby promoting the progression and development of thyroid cancer. Importantly, these findings highlight a dominant negative action of TR?PV that can mediate thyroid carcinogenesis by altering PPAR? signaling.  2. Up-regulation of cyclin D1 mRNA levels by TR?PV in pituitary tumors Somatic mutations of THRB were identified in several patients with TSHomas ( 13 , 15 ). This disease represents about 2% of all pituitary adenomas in humans. Patients with TSHomas have high serum TSH despite elevated thyroid hormone levels, indicating that TSHomas exhibit a defect in the negative regulation of TSH by thyroid hormone. The TR? mutants identified in TSHomas show impaired T3 binding and exhibit dominant negative activity ( 13 , 15 , 37 ). Some TR? mutants were found to interfere with the normal regulation of the glycoprotein hormone ?-subunit and TSH? genes, which encode the subunits of TSH ( 14 , 15 ). The TR ? PV/PV mice spontaneously develop TSHomas, indicating that the mutation of TR? is one of the genetic events that can mediate the development of this tumor. We therefore explored the mechanisms underlying the development of TSHomas using the TR ? PV/PV mouse as a model. Similar to the patients with TSHomas, TR ? PV/PV mice exhibit severe dysregulation of the pituitary-thyroid axis with highly elevated TSH associated with increased T3 ( 23 , 27 ). Mice deficient in both TR? and TR? ( TR ?-/- TR ?-/- mice) have similarly elevated serum TSH and thyroid hormone levels as those of TR ? PV/PV mice. However, TR ?-/- TR ?-/- mice do not develop TSHomas. These findings indicate that the dysregulation of the pituitary-thyroid axis alone is not sufficient to mediate the pathogenesis of TSHomas ( 27 ). That these two mutant mice have a similar degree of resistance to thyroid hormone in the pituitary, but have contrasting phenotypes in displaying TSHomas has facilitated the comparison of gene expression profiles. cDNA microarray studies show the up-regulation of growth and proliferation-related genes in the pituitary of TR ? PV/PV mice but not in that of TR ?-/- TR ?-/- mice ( 27 ). Among the proliferation-related genes, Ccdn1 encoding cyclin D1 is up-regulated in the pituitary of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 27 ). Additional studies confirmed the up-regulation of Ccdn1 at the mRNA levels and further showed that cyclin D1 protein is overexpressed. The over-expression is accompanied by concurrent activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)/retinoblastoma (Rb) protein/E2F pathway and increased cellular proliferation in the pituitary ( 27 , 38 ). The molecular mechanism by which TR?PV activates the expression of Ccdn1 was studied. Multiple factors are known to regulate the activity of the cyclin D1 promoter, including cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) ( 38 , 39 ). We found that liganded TR? represses Ccdn1 expression via tethering to the Ccdn1 promoter through binding to CREB. This repression effect is lost in TR?PV, thereby resulting in constitutive activation of Ccdn1 in TR ? PV/PV mice ( 27 ) ( Figure 1 ). Thus the TR?PV mutation, by altering Ccdn1 expression, induces aberrant cellular proliferation in the pituitary that contributes to TSHomas.  NON-GENOMIC ACTIONS OF TRs IN CARCINOGENESIS More recently, several reports showed that thyroid hormones exert rapid actions on cell functions through non-genomic mechanisms. The non-genomic effects may occur through signal transduction mechanisms initiated by binding of hormones to TRs located in the plasma membrane, in the cytoplasm, or in the mitochondria (for review, ref. 40 ). These non-genomic actions were reported to regulate ion channels, glucose transporters, protein kinase (PI3K, PKC, PKA, ERK/MAPK), and phospholipid metabolism by activation of phospholipase C and D ( 41 ). Whether TR mutations could impair cell signaling via non-genomic mechanisms was not known. We therefore took advantage of the TR ? PV/PV mouse model to study the possibility that a TR? mutation could mediate thyroid carcinogenesis via non-genomic mechanisms. We made the remarkable discovery that the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT pathway, the ?-catenin signaling pathway, and PTTG activity are altered by TR?PV in thyroid cancer through novel mechanisms involving protein-protein interaction ( 32 - 34 , 42 ). 1. Overactivation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT signaling by TR?PV in thyroid cancer PI3Ks consist of a catalytic subunit of about 110 kD (p110) and a regulatory subunit (p85?, p85? or p55?) that is encoded by at least three mammalian genes. PI3K phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol-4,5 biphosphate [PIP2] to produce phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5- triphosphate [PIP3]. The major effector of PI3K is the AKT kinase, which is activated upon PIP3-mediated membrane recruitment and in turn phosphorylates target proteins regulating cell proliferation, cell survival, cell size, and mRNA translation. The abnormal activation of PI3K-AKT signaling contributes to abnormal cell growth and cellular transformation in a variety of neoplasms, including thyroid cancer ( 43 , 44 ). As in human thyroid cancer, the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway is overactivated in the thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 32 ). Consistent with a major role of PI3K signaling in thyroid cancer, the treatment of TR ? PV/PV mice with the potent PI3K inhibitorLY294002 significantly delays thyroid tumor progression and metastatic spread ( 42 , 45 ). We investigated the mechanisms by which TR?PV alters the PI3K signaling pathway to mediate thyroid carcinogenesis in TR ? PV/PV mice. Previous reports showed the interaction of wild-type TRs with p85? to activate PI3K signaling pathway in human fibroblasts and vascular endothelial cells ( 46 , 47 ). We found that TR?1 and the TR?PV mutant can physically interact with the C-terminal SH2 (Src homology 2) domain of p85? in vitro and in thyroid extracts ( 32 ) ( Figure 1 ). Importantly, the binding of p85? with TR?PV is two to three times stronger than that with TR?1, resulting in a greater increase of PI3K activity. Consistent with a higher activity of AKT, the downstream phosphorylation cascade of effectors, mTOR and p70S6k, is also concurrently increased. Interestingly, the interaction of TR?PV with p85? occurs in both the nuclear and the cytoplasmic compartments of thyroid extracts to activate AKT and downstream signaling pathways in both compartments ( 32 ). That the regulation of PI3K signaling by TR?PV also occurs in the nuclear compartment is consistent with previous studies showing the presence of components of the PI3K signaling pathway in the nucleus ( 48 , 49 ). Further insights into the mechanism underlying the activation of PI3K in the thyroid of TR ? PV/PV mice led to the remarkable finding that the nuclear co-repressor NCoR is involved in the modulation of TR?PV-induced PI3K activation ( 42 ). In addition to its action in regulating the genomic actions of unliganded TRs ( 50 ), NCoR has been reported to be involved in transcription-independent mechanisms; NCoR is found not only in the nucleus, but also in the cytoplasm ( 51 , 52 ). Notably, we found that NCoR physically interacts with p85? and that NCoR and TR? or TR?PV interact with the same region in the C-terminal SH2 domain of p85?, thereby competing with each other for binding to p85?. Additional in vitro studies showed that TR?PV interacts with p85? with a relatively higher affinity than does TR? or NCoR ( 42 ). That led us to test the possibility that alterations in NCoR protein abundance could modulate the activation of PI3K by TR?PV. Indeed, overexpression of cellular NCoR protein levels leads to a consistent reduction in PI3K signaling. Conversely, knocking down cellular NCoR with small interfering RNA (siRNA) increases PI3K activity. In thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice, NCoR protein abundance is markedly decreased as compared with wild-type thyroids. Altogether, our results indicate that the reduction in NCoR protein abundance in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice favors the interaction between p85? and TR?PV to activate PI3K signaling ( 42 ). Therefore, NCoR, via protein-protein interaction, is a novel regulator of PI3K signaling that could modulate thyroid tumor progression. 2. Increased activity of pituitary tumor-transforming gene (PTTG) by TR?PV in thyroid cancer The search for genes underlying the chromosomal aberrations in TR ? PV/PV mice using cDNA microarray led to the finding that Pttg mRNA levels are significantly increased in thyroid cancer of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 28 ). In addition, cellular PTTG protein levels are markedly increased in the primary lesions of thyroid as well as lung metastases of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 33 ). PTTG functions as a securin during cell cycle progression and inhibits premature sister chromatid separation. PTTG is involved in multiple cellular pathways, including cell proliferation, DNA repair, cell transformation, angiogenesis induction, invasion, and the induction of genetic instability. Consistent with its functions, aberrant PTTG overexpression is found in a wide variety of endocrine and non-endocrine tumors [for review, ( 53 )]. The finding that PTTG abundance is increased in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice prompted us to test whether it could play a role in the thyroid carcinogenesis mediated by TR?PV. Indeed, our cell-based studies showed that aberrant accumulation of PTTG induced by TR?PV inhibits mitotic progression ( 33 ). Besides, although PTTG loss does not prevent the initiation of thyroid cancer in TR ? PV/PVPttg -/- mice, their thyroid glands are smaller with decreased thyrocyte proliferation and reduced thyroid cancer aggressiveness as compared with TR ? PV/PVPttg +/+ mice ( 54 ). The mechanism involved in the increased abundance of PTTG in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice was not known. It might reflect, at least partially, the increased Pttg mRNA levels. However, TRs and PTTG are known to be involved in proteasome-mediated degradation pathways, and therefore we tested the possibility that TR? and TR?PV could regulate PTTG protein levels through such mechanisms ( 33 ). A series of cell-based and molecular studies showed that the DNA binding domain of TR?1 or TR?PV interacts with the amino-terminal region (amino acid 1-119) of PTTG ( 33 ). Moreover, T3 induces the degradation of TR?1 concomitantly with that of PTTG via a mechanism involving the proteasomal machinery ( 33 ). T3 does not, however, induce TR?PV degradation, a finding consistent with the fact that this TR? mutant has lost T3 binding capacity. In TR?PV-expressing cells, PTTG protein levels are not altered by T3 treatment and remain high ( 33 ). Our results thus support the idea that TR?1 regulates PTTG degradation through T3 binding. This regulatory function is completely lost by TR?PV that fails to bind T3. We next sought to understand how TR?PV fails to regulate the stability of PTTG as the liganded TR?1 does. We considered the possibility that the protein complexes TR?1/PTTG and TR?PV/PTTG recruit proteasome activators differently. Steroid receptor co-activator-3 (SRC-3) is degraded via 19S proteasome through its physical interaction with proteasome activator 28? (PA28?), an activator of the trypsin-like activity of the proteasome ( 55 ). Similar to other steroid receptors ( 56 ), the liganded TR?1 recruits SRC-3, but the unliganded TR?1 does not ( 33 ). In contrast, TR?PV does not bind SRC-3 whether T3 is present or not. We therefore tested the possibility of the existence of a differential recruitment of TR?/PTTG and TR?PV/PTTG complexes by SRC-3/PA28?. We found that the liganded TR?1/PTTG complex recruits SRC-3/PA28? through the direct interaction of TR?1 with SRC-3, whereas the unliganded TR?1 and TR?PV fail to recruit SRC-3/PA28? ( 33 ). This study indicates that the regulation of PTTG degradation by the proteasome pathway is impaired by TR?PV via protein-protein interaction and thereby results in mitotic abnormalities, contributing to thyroid carcinogenesis ( Figure 1 ). 3. Stabilization of ?-catenin by TR?PV in thyroid cancer The aberrant cellular abundance of ?-catenin in thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice provided us with the opportunity to understand how TR? and the TR?PV mutant regulate the cellular levels of ?-catena in vivo ( 34 ). ?-catenin is the central mediator of the Wnt signaling pathway, which is critical for various cellular processes, including oncogenesis ( 57 ). Stabilized ?-catenin protein accumulates in the nucleus and complexes with the T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) family of DNA-binding transcription factors to enhance the expression of a variety of genes, including critical regulators of cell cycle progression (cyclin D1, c-myc) and invasion (matrix metalloprotease-1, MT1-MMP). Aberrant accumulation of ?-catenin has been reported in a number of human cancers, including thyroid ( 58 ). We sought to determine the molecular mechanisms involved in the increased stability of ?-catenin as well as the consequences of such an accumulation on thyroid cancer development and progression in TR ? PV/PV mice. The cellular levels of ?-catenin are controlled by two distinct adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)-dependent proteasomal pathways. One includes the glycogen synthase kinase 3? (GSK3?)-regulated pathway involving the APC-axin complex ( 59 ) and the other is a p53-inducible pathway involving APC-Siah-1 ( 60 ). An additional mode of ?-catenin cellular level regulation is mediated by nuclear receptors, namely the retinoid X receptor ? (RXR?) and peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor ? (PPAR?) that belong to the same nuclear receptor superfamily as TRs. RXR and PPAR? regulate ?-catenin protein abundance via APC/GSK3?/p53-independent mechanisms ( 61 , 62 ). We found that, similar to RXR? and PPAR?2, TR? and TR?PV physically interact with ?-catenin in vitro and in cells. The regulation of the ?-catenin protein level by TR? and TR?PV also occurs via APC/GSK3?/p53-independent mechanisms. The complexing of TR? with ?-catenin is weakened, however, by the binding of T3 to TR?, thereby allowing more uncomplexed ?-catenin to be degraded by the proteasomal pathway. In contrast, since TR?PV does not bind T3, the association of TR?PV with ?-catenin is independent of T3. Our results indicate that the constitutive association of TR?PV with ?-catenin prevents the degradation of ?-catenin, and hence leads to its accumulation in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice ( Figure 1 ). The consequence of the aberrant stabilization of ?-catenin in the development and progression of thyroid cancer was investigated in TR ? PV/PV mice. We first studied the cellular abundance of ?-catenin phosphorylated on serine 552 (P552-?-catenin), as it reflects ?-catenin nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity ( 63 ). We found that the increased ?-catenin cellular levels in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice are associated with an increased cellular abundance of P552-?-catenin. Consistently, the ?-catenin transcriptional downstream targets (c-myc, cyclin D1, and MT1-MMP) display elevated mRNA and/or protein levels. Our data indicate that TR?PV prevents ?-catenin degradation by physical interaction with ?-catenin, thereby leading to constitutive ?-catenin signaling in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice.  1. Overactivation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT signaling by TR?PV in thyroid cancer PI3Ks consist of a catalytic subunit of about 110 kD (p110) and a regulatory subunit (p85?, p85? or p55?) that is encoded by at least three mammalian genes. PI3K phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol-4,5 biphosphate [PIP2] to produce phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5- triphosphate [PIP3]. The major effector of PI3K is the AKT kinase, which is activated upon PIP3-mediated membrane recruitment and in turn phosphorylates target proteins regulating cell proliferation, cell survival, cell size, and mRNA translation. The abnormal activation of PI3K-AKT signaling contributes to abnormal cell growth and cellular transformation in a variety of neoplasms, including thyroid cancer ( 43 , 44 ). As in human thyroid cancer, the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway is overactivated in the thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 32 ). Consistent with a major role of PI3K signaling in thyroid cancer, the treatment of TR ? PV/PV mice with the potent PI3K inhibitorLY294002 significantly delays thyroid tumor progression and metastatic spread ( 42 , 45 ). We investigated the mechanisms by which TR?PV alters the PI3K signaling pathway to mediate thyroid carcinogenesis in TR ? PV/PV mice. Previous reports showed the interaction of wild-type TRs with p85? to activate PI3K signaling pathway in human fibroblasts and vascular endothelial cells ( 46 , 47 ). We found that TR?1 and the TR?PV mutant can physically interact with the C-terminal SH2 (Src homology 2) domain of p85? in vitro and in thyroid extracts ( 32 ) ( Figure 1 ). Importantly, the binding of p85? with TR?PV is two to three times stronger than that with TR?1, resulting in a greater increase of PI3K activity. Consistent with a higher activity of AKT, the downstream phosphorylation cascade of effectors, mTOR and p70S6k, is also concurrently increased. Interestingly, the interaction of TR?PV with p85? occurs in both the nuclear and the cytoplasmic compartments of thyroid extracts to activate AKT and downstream signaling pathways in both compartments ( 32 ). That the regulation of PI3K signaling by TR?PV also occurs in the nuclear compartment is consistent with previous studies showing the presence of components of the PI3K signaling pathway in the nucleus ( 48 , 49 ). Further insights into the mechanism underlying the activation of PI3K in the thyroid of TR ? PV/PV mice led to the remarkable finding that the nuclear co-repressor NCoR is involved in the modulation of TR?PV-induced PI3K activation ( 42 ). In addition to its action in regulating the genomic actions of unliganded TRs ( 50 ), NCoR has been reported to be involved in transcription-independent mechanisms; NCoR is found not only in the nucleus, but also in the cytoplasm ( 51 , 52 ). Notably, we found that NCoR physically interacts with p85? and that NCoR and TR? or TR?PV interact with the same region in the C-terminal SH2 domain of p85?, thereby competing with each other for binding to p85?. Additional in vitro studies showed that TR?PV interacts with p85? with a relatively higher affinity than does TR? or NCoR ( 42 ). That led us to test the possibility that alterations in NCoR protein abundance could modulate the activation of PI3K by TR?PV. Indeed, overexpression of cellular NCoR protein levels leads to a consistent reduction in PI3K signaling. Conversely, knocking down cellular NCoR with small interfering RNA (siRNA) increases PI3K activity. In thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice, NCoR protein abundance is markedly decreased as compared with wild-type thyroids. Altogether, our results indicate that the reduction in NCoR protein abundance in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice favors the interaction between p85? and TR?PV to activate PI3K signaling ( 42 ). Therefore, NCoR, via protein-protein interaction, is a novel regulator of PI3K signaling that could modulate thyroid tumor progression.  2. Increased activity of pituitary tumor-transforming gene (PTTG) by TR?PV in thyroid cancer The search for genes underlying the chromosomal aberrations in TR ? PV/PV mice using cDNA microarray led to the finding that Pttg mRNA levels are significantly increased in thyroid cancer of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 28 ). In addition, cellular PTTG protein levels are markedly increased in the primary lesions of thyroid as well as lung metastases of TR ? PV/PV mice ( 33 ). PTTG functions as a securin during cell cycle progression and inhibits premature sister chromatid separation. PTTG is involved in multiple cellular pathways, including cell proliferation, DNA repair, cell transformation, angiogenesis induction, invasion, and the induction of genetic instability. Consistent with its functions, aberrant PTTG overexpression is found in a wide variety of endocrine and non-endocrine tumors [for review, ( 53 )]. The finding that PTTG abundance is increased in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice prompted us to test whether it could play a role in the thyroid carcinogenesis mediated by TR?PV. Indeed, our cell-based studies showed that aberrant accumulation of PTTG induced by TR?PV inhibits mitotic progression ( 33 ). Besides, although PTTG loss does not prevent the initiation of thyroid cancer in TR ? PV/PVPttg -/- mice, their thyroid glands are smaller with decreased thyrocyte proliferation and reduced thyroid cancer aggressiveness as compared with TR ? PV/PVPttg +/+ mice ( 54 ). The mechanism involved in the increased abundance of PTTG in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice was not known. It might reflect, at least partially, the increased Pttg mRNA levels. However, TRs and PTTG are known to be involved in proteasome-mediated degradation pathways, and therefore we tested the possibility that TR? and TR?PV could regulate PTTG protein levels through such mechanisms ( 33 ). A series of cell-based and molecular studies showed that the DNA binding domain of TR?1 or TR?PV interacts with the amino-terminal region (amino acid 1-119) of PTTG ( 33 ). Moreover, T3 induces the degradation of TR?1 concomitantly with that of PTTG via a mechanism involving the proteasomal machinery ( 33 ). T3 does not, however, induce TR?PV degradation, a finding consistent with the fact that this TR? mutant has lost T3 binding capacity. In TR?PV-expressing cells, PTTG protein levels are not altered by T3 treatment and remain high ( 33 ). Our results thus support the idea that TR?1 regulates PTTG degradation through T3 binding. This regulatory function is completely lost by TR?PV that fails to bind T3. We next sought to understand how TR?PV fails to regulate the stability of PTTG as the liganded TR?1 does. We considered the possibility that the protein complexes TR?1/PTTG and TR?PV/PTTG recruit proteasome activators differently. Steroid receptor co-activator-3 (SRC-3) is degraded via 19S proteasome through its physical interaction with proteasome activator 28? (PA28?), an activator of the trypsin-like activity of the proteasome ( 55 ). Similar to other steroid receptors ( 56 ), the liganded TR?1 recruits SRC-3, but the unliganded TR?1 does not ( 33 ). In contrast, TR?PV does not bind SRC-3 whether T3 is present or not. We therefore tested the possibility of the existence of a differential recruitment of TR?/PTTG and TR?PV/PTTG complexes by SRC-3/PA28?. We found that the liganded TR?1/PTTG complex recruits SRC-3/PA28? through the direct interaction of TR?1 with SRC-3, whereas the unliganded TR?1 and TR?PV fail to recruit SRC-3/PA28? ( 33 ). This study indicates that the regulation of PTTG degradation by the proteasome pathway is impaired by TR?PV via protein-protein interaction and thereby results in mitotic abnormalities, contributing to thyroid carcinogenesis ( Figure 1 ).  3. Stabilization of ?-catenin by TR?PV in thyroid cancer The aberrant cellular abundance of ?-catenin in thyroid tumors of TR ? PV/PV mice provided us with the opportunity to understand how TR? and the TR?PV mutant regulate the cellular levels of ?-catena in vivo ( 34 ). ?-catenin is the central mediator of the Wnt signaling pathway, which is critical for various cellular processes, including oncogenesis ( 57 ). Stabilized ?-catenin protein accumulates in the nucleus and complexes with the T cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor (TCF/LEF) family of DNA-binding transcription factors to enhance the expression of a variety of genes, including critical regulators of cell cycle progression (cyclin D1, c-myc) and invasion (matrix metalloprotease-1, MT1-MMP). Aberrant accumulation of ?-catenin has been reported in a number of human cancers, including thyroid ( 58 ). We sought to determine the molecular mechanisms involved in the increased stability of ?-catenin as well as the consequences of such an accumulation on thyroid cancer development and progression in TR ? PV/PV mice. The cellular levels of ?-catenin are controlled by two distinct adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)-dependent proteasomal pathways. One includes the glycogen synthase kinase 3? (GSK3?)-regulated pathway involving the APC-axin complex ( 59 ) and the other is a p53-inducible pathway involving APC-Siah-1 ( 60 ). An additional mode of ?-catenin cellular level regulation is mediated by nuclear receptors, namely the retinoid X receptor ? (RXR?) and peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor ? (PPAR?) that belong to the same nuclear receptor superfamily as TRs. RXR and PPAR? regulate ?-catenin protein abundance via APC/GSK3?/p53-independent mechanisms ( 61 , 62 ). We found that, similar to RXR? and PPAR?2, TR? and TR?PV physically interact with ?-catenin in vitro and in cells. The regulation of the ?-catenin protein level by TR? and TR?PV also occurs via APC/GSK3?/p53-independent mechanisms. The complexing of TR? with ?-catenin is weakened, however, by the binding of T3 to TR?, thereby allowing more uncomplexed ?-catenin to be degraded by the proteasomal pathway. In contrast, since TR?PV does not bind T3, the association of TR?PV with ?-catenin is independent of T3. Our results indicate that the constitutive association of TR?PV with ?-catenin prevents the degradation of ?-catenin, and hence leads to its accumulation in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice ( Figure 1 ). The consequence of the aberrant stabilization of ?-catenin in the development and progression of thyroid cancer was investigated in TR ? PV/PV mice. We first studied the cellular abundance of ?-catenin phosphorylated on serine 552 (P552-?-catenin), as it reflects ?-catenin nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity ( 63 ). We found that the increased ?-catenin cellular levels in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice are associated with an increased cellular abundance of P552-?-catenin. Consistently, the ?-catenin transcriptional downstream targets (c-myc, cyclin D1, and MT1-MMP) display elevated mRNA and/or protein levels. Our data indicate that TR?PV prevents ?-catenin degradation by physical interaction with ?-catenin, thereby leading to constitutive ?-catenin signaling in the thyroids of TR ? PV/PV mice.  SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS The creation of a knockin mutant mouse harboring a mutated TR? has revealed new insights into the molecular mechanisms by which TR mutants contribute to tumorigenesis. We found that the deleterious effects of TR? mutants in causing thyroid cancer and pituitary tumor are mediated, at least in part, by interfering with the transcriptional activity of wild-type TRs ( Figure 2 ) ( 27 , 29 , 31 , 63 ). TR?PV interferes with the normal regulation of transcription activity, thereby leading to abnormal repression of tumor suppressors (PPAR?) in thyroid cancers and to the constitutive activation of tumor promoters (cyclin D1) in pituitary tumors ( Figure 2 ). The striking phenotype of thyroid cancer manifested by TR ? PV/PV mice led to the recent identification of new modes of action of TR? mutants that are beyond nucleus-initiated transcription ( Figure 1B and Figure 2 ). TR?PV interacts with the PI3K regulatory subunit p85?, leading to the overactivation of PI3K-AKT signaling and increased PI3K-AKT downstream signaling to affect cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and metastasis ( 32 ). The direct protein-protein interaction of TR?PV with PTTG or ?-catenin affects their degradation by the proteasomal pathways, thus leading to PTTG and ?-catenin aberrant accumulation ( 33 , 34 ). Increased PTTG abundance contributes to chromosomal aberration and genomic instability. Constitutively active ?-catenin signaling, by altering downstream gene expression, affects cell proliferation and migration. Therefore, the development and progression of thyroid tumors in TR ? PV/PV mice not only involve aberrant transcriptional activity but also derailed post-transcriptional mechanisms. As suggested by our earlier studies ( 28 ), these findings support the hypothesis that tumorigenesis mediated by TR?PV in TR ? PV/PV mice involves the complex alterations of multiple signaling pathways. While much has been learned about the oncogenic actions of a TR? mutant by using TR ? PV/PV mice, the question remains as to whether the oncogenic actions of TR? mutants are limited only to TR?PV or could be extended to other TR? mutants with different mutation sites. Studies in several human cancers have identified somatic mutations at various sites in the TR ? gene ( 10 - 12 ), suggesting that the oncogenic actions of TR? mutants most likely are not limited to the C-terminal frameshifted mutation as in TR?PV. At present, there is another reported TR? knockin mouse that harbors a ?337T dominantly negative mutation ( 64 ). However, whether the TR??337T homozygous knockin mouse develops cancer is currently unknown. To address the question of whether other TR? mutations are also oncogenic, it would be necessary to develop other knockin mutant mice harboring different mutation sites. Developing these knockin mutant mice would certainly advance our understanding of the role of TR? mutations in human cancers. It has long been established that nuclear receptors play a significant role in the development and progression of endocrine tumors. For instance, aberrant activation of estrogen receptor (ER) and androgen receptor (AR) signaling has been reported to favor the development and progression of breast and prostate tumors, respectively [for review, ( 65 , 66 )]. The finding that both nuclear receptors act as tumor promoters in their target tissues led to the development and use of anti-estrogen and anti-androgen strategies for breast and prostate cancer prevention and treatment. Although our studies as well as several others provide lines of evidence to indicate that wild-type TRs act as tumor suppressors in the thyroid and pituitary, several studies reported that thyroid hormone stimulates breast and prostate cancer cell proliferation, suggesting that TRs could act as tumor promoters ( 2 - 6 ). These contrasting findings suggest that TRs may have opposite effects on cell functions depending on the target tissues. On the other hand, it is also possible that exposure of cells to supraphysiological doses of thyroid hormones favors induction of proliferation, as is the case with androgens and estrogens. In this regard, a future challenge would be to clarify the role of TRs on tumor development and progression in target tissues by development of pertinent in vivo models. These efforts will provide opportunities to develop better strategies for prevention and treatment of endocrine cancers.  Figures Figure 1 Proposed molecular mechanisms by which TR?PV mediates its oncogenic actions A- Genomic actions of TR?PV contributing to thyroid (a) and pituitary tumors (b) in TR ?PV/PV mice. (a) TR?PV competes with PPAR? for the binding to PPAR? responsive elements (PPRE) as homodimers or heterodimers with PPAR? or RXR, thereby decreasing PPAR? transcriptional activity to increase cell proliferation and to decrease cell apoptosis in the thyroid of TR ? PV/PV mice. (b) TR?PV interacts with CREB in the promoter of the Cyclin D1 gene ( Ccdn1 ), leading to the constitutive activation of Cyclin D1 and increased cell proliferation in the pituitary of TR ? PV/PV mice. B- Non genomic actions of TR?PV contributing to thyroid tumor in TR ? PV/PV mice. TR?PV physically interacts with other cellular proteins , thereby altering their activity or abundance. (a) TR?PV physically interacts with the regulatory subunit of PI3K, p85?, to activate PI3K signaling, thereby affecting cell proliferation, motility, migration, and apoptosis. TR?PV competes with NCoR to interact with p85?, but NCoR protein abundance is lower in thyroid cancer of TR ? PV/PV mice than in normal thyroid, thus favoring the physical interaction of TR?PV with p85?, resulting in overactivation of PI3K signaling. (b) TR?PV physically interacts with PTTG and inhibits PTTG degradation by protesome pathways, leading to increased PTTG abundance and inhibition of mitotic progression. (c) TR?PV strongly interacts with ?-catenin, and thereby prevents its degradation by protesome pathways. That leads to ?-catenin accumulation and to increased cell proliferation, cell motility and migration (see text for detailed explanations). Figure 2 Scheme summarizing the genomic and non-genomic actions of a TR? mutant in tumorigenesis The TR?PV mutant interferes with the transcriptional activity of wild-type TRs, thereby altering the transcriptional activity of the tumor suppressor PPAR? in the thyroid ( 29 , 31 ) and activating cyclin D1 expression in the pituitary ( 27 ). TR?PV also exerts its oncogenic actions in the thyroid by acting through non-genomic mechanisms involving protein-protein interaction, thereby leading to PI3K-AKT overactivation ( 32 ) and accumulation of PTTG ( 33 ) and ?-catenin proteins ( 34 ) (see text for detailed explanations). 