Aberrant ERG expression cooperates with loss of PTEN to promote cancer progression in the prostate Chromosomal translocations involving the ERG locus are frequent events observed in human prostate cancer pathogenesis, however the biologic role of ERG aberrant expression is controversial. 1 Here we demonstrate that the aberrant expression of ERG is a progression event in prostate tumorigenesis. We find that prostate cancer specimens containing the TMPRSS2:ERG genetic rearrangement are significantly enriched for loss of the tumor suppressor PTEN. In concordance with these findings, over-expression of ERG in the transgenic mouse prostate promotes a marked acceleration and progression of HGPIN to prostatic adenocarcinoma in a Pten heterozygous background. In vitro over-expression of ERG promotes cell migration, a property necessary for tumorigenesis, without affecting proliferation. ADAMTS1 and CXCR4 , two candidate genes strongly associated with cell migration are found up-regulated in the presence of ERG over-expression. Thus, ERG plays a distinct role in prostate cancer progression and cooperates with PTEN haploinsufficiency to promote progression of HGPIN to invasive adenocarcinoma.  Methods Tumor Tissue Microarray Tumor tissue microarrays were generated for 40 prostate cancer specimens in triplicate and consecutive sections were obtained. FISH was carried out on tissue microarrays constructed from cases of prostatic carcinoma with matched high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Approval was obtained from the institutional review board (IRB) and the Human Tissue Utilization Committee (HTUC) prior to study of human specimens. Break apart FISH probes consisted of 2 BAC clones each at 5?ERG ( RP11-55G21 and RP11-110N12), 3?ERG (RP11-315E22 and RP11-720N21) with approximately a 123.35 kb genomic gap between the two sets; and 2 BAC clones each at 5? TMPRSS2 (RP11-35C4 and RP-891L10) and 3? TMPRSS2 (RP11-825A8 and RP11-120C17), with an approximately 346.9 kb gap between the two sets. DNA was labeled by nick translation using SpectrumOrange-dUTP (3? clones) or SpectrumGreen-dUTP (5? clones) (Vysis, Abbott Molecular Inc., Des Plaines, IL) Tissue hybridization, washing and fluorescence detection were performed as previously described (Leversha, 2001, Methods Mol Biol v.175) and according to standard procedures. Samples were analyzed using an automated imaging system with an Axioplan2 fluorescence microscope and scanning stage (Marzhauser) controlled by Metafer 4.0 and Isis 5.0 scanning and imaging software (MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany). PTEN (PTEN Rabbit mAB 9559, Cell Signaling) immunohistochemical staining was performed by our molecular cytology core facility. Generation of plasmid vectors and transgenic construct Human ERG cDNA sequence (transcript variant 1, REFSEQ NM_182918.2) was obtained from the NCBI database and primers ( Supplementary Table 1 ) were designed to amplify the entire coding sequence. RNA obtained from 293HEK cells was utilized to amplify the human ERG coding sequence, which was subsequently cloned into a TOPO vector (Invitrogen). Sequence analysis was performed to verify appropriate coding sequence and reading frame. This was then subcloned into a Flag-tag vector (CMV-Tg2B) using restriction enzyme digest with Pst1 and Xho1 in a standard fashion. We further subcloned our construct into the MSCV-PIG with the puromycin resistance gene (Xho1) plasmid and the PB-SV40 (Xho1) plasmid using Xho1 restriction digest in a standard fashion. The MSCV- AKT (constitutively active mutant) with the hygromycin resistance gene was obtained from Charles Sawyers. These constructs were amplified according to standard mini prep and maxi prep protocols. All constructs generated were screened by sequence analysis to verify appropriate coding sequence and reading frame. Establishment of probasin-<italic>ERG</italic> mouse colony, genotyping, phenotyping, and tissue analysis To determine the in vivo causal significance of ERG over-expression in prostate tumorigenesis, we generated a mouse model expressing ERG in a prostate specific manner. To accomplish this, the human ERG cDNA sequence was cloned into a Flag-tag vector, sub-cloned into a probasin (ARR2PB) - SV40 expression vector, ( Supplementary Figure 1A ) and transgenic mice (Bl6 background) were established with assistance from our genetically engineered mouse core facility. Mice were subsequently analyzed for construct integration by Southern blot analysis ( Supplementary Figure 1B ). A total of 8 founders, positive for the ERG transgene by Southern blot analysis were identified, and F1 offspring were established. To ensure similar passage of the transgene to future progeny, Southern blot analysis was performed on our F1 offspring, revealing similar patterns and intensity for 7 of the 8 founder lines ( Supplementary Figure 1B ). The founding line with dissimilar transgene passage was euthanized and excluded from the study. Additionally, a PCR genotyping assay was established and validated for analysis of future progeny. Briefly, primers ( Supplementary Table 1 ) were designed to amplify the 3? region of probasin and the 5? region of ERG and protocol was followed using HOT Star Taq Master Mix Kit (Qiagen) ( Supplementary Figure 1C ). Our PCR genotyping correlated with our Southern blot analysis in all cases. Prostate specific expression of human ERG was evaluated at the mRNA and protein levels by quantitative RT-PCR and flag immunohistochemistry, respectively. Overall, 5 of the 7 original founding lines demonstrated mRNA and 3 lines showed protein expression of human ERG in all lobes of the prostate with highest expression in the ventral prostate lobe, dorsal lateral lobe, and lowest levels of expression in the anterior lobe. ( Supplementary Figure 1D, 1E ). We did not observe any detectable transgene levels in the liver, spleen, lung, or tail of these mice. There was no difference in murine Erg expression among our founders and controls ( Supplementary Figure 1D ). Founding lines labeled A and B were subsequently expanded for phenotypic analysis and crossed into our Pten heterozygous mice to generate F2 offspring with the genotypes Pten +/+, Pten +/?, Pten +/+ PB- ERG , and Pten +/? PB- ERG . 12 All mouse work was performed in accordance with our IACUC protocol. Mice were euthanized using carbon-dioxide asphyxiation, and prostate tissues were procured for formalin fixation, paraffin embedding, and frozen storage for future molecular analyses. All tissue processing, paraffin embedding, section, and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed by Histoserv Inc. Protein from the prostate specimens was extracted by homogenizing the tissue in RIPA buffer. RNA from the prostate specimens was extracted by homogenizing the tissue in TRIzol (Invitrogen). F2 offspring were generated for 2 independent transgenic lines (Lines A and B) and analyzed for prostate phenotype, with tissue procurement for evaluation as previously described. Results were similar between the two transgenic lines and all data is reported for transgenic line A. Murine immunohistochemistry protocols and antibodies All immunohistochemistry procedures were performed through our molecular cytology core facility with previous established protocols for Flag antibody (Santa Cruz), Ki67 antibody (Novocastra), PTEN antibody (Ab-2; NeoMarkers), and phospho serine-473 AKT antibody (Cell Signaling). Microarray analysis Microarray analysis was performed by our genomics core lab microarray facility. Briefly, MSCV- ERG and vector control were transiently expressed in 293 HEK cells for 2 independent experiments. RNA was harvested and subsequently quantified and labeled by our core department. Microarray analysis was performed on the U133A Affymetrix chip. Results were analyzed using GeneSpring software for 2 fold differences in gene expression across the 2 independent experiments. Results were validated with quantitative RT-PCR. Our complete microarray expression data set is uploaded on GEO-NCBI accession number GSE14595. Quantitative RT-PCR protocol and primer sets Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using the SYBR Green PCR light cycler protocol (Qiagen). Subsequently, cDNA was generated from the RNA using the Super Script III First-Strand Synthesis system for RT-PCR (Invitrogen). See Supplementary Table 1 for primer sequences. Analysis was performed accordingly throughout our experiments and results were normalized to the house keeping genes ACTIN and Hprt for human and mouse specimens respectively. Western blotting protocol and antibodies Protein lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The following antibodies were used for western blotting: Flag antibody (Santa Cruz), Actin (AC-74; Sigma), ERG (H-95; Santa Cruz), phospho serine-473 AKT antibody (Cell Signaling), and phospho 240/244 S6 (Cell Signaling). In vitro analysis of cell phenotype Cell lines were established from primary Mef with our MSCV- ERG and MSCV puromycin selection vectors through initial infection and selection with puromycin. Stable clones were established from PC3 and 293 cells with our MSCV- ERG and MSCV puromycin selection vectors through initial transfection and selection with puromycin. BPH-1 cell lines were obtained from Simon Hayward and infected with MSCV- ERG , MSCV, MSCV- AKT (constitutively active AKT-1 ), and MSCV- AKT MSCV- ERG and selected with puromycin and hygromycin. These cells were then used for a variety of cellular assays and all assays were performed in triplicate. Protein and RNA were harvested using standard protocols for molecular analyses. For cell proliferation, 1×104 cells were plated in 12 well dishes, and cells were trypsinized and counted using a hemocytometer on days 2, 4, 6, and 8. Cell migration assay was performed by incubating 1×104 cells on a 8.0 um 24 well plate chamber insert (Falcon) with 0.9% FCS cell media above the insert and cell media containing 10% FCS below the insert to establish a gradient. Cells were incubated for 24 hours and subsequently fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and washed with PBS. Cells adherent to the top of the insert were scraped free with a cotton swab, washed with PBS and cells adherent to the bottom of the insert were stained with crystal violet blue. Positive staining cells were counted across 3 high-powered fields (100X). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) protocol Our protocol was adapted from Strahl-Bolsinger et al as previously described. 25 Briefly, PC3 cells were transfected with Tg2b- ERG and harvested after 48 hours. The cells were fixed using 1% formaldehyde and subsequently washed with PBS. Cells were suspended in ChIP lysis buffer and sonicated at level 2 for 30 seconds. Immunoprecipitation was performed with the Flag antibody (Santa Cruz) or control IgG, and beads were washed with 4x ChIP lysis buffer, 2x ChIP wash buffer, and 2x Tris buffer, with pelleting of the beads. Immunoprecipitants were eluted in 150 ul of ChIP elution buffer, incubated, and DNA was eluted using the Qiagen PCR purification protocol. Primers ( Supplementary Table 1 ) were designed to amplify regions of the CXCR4 and ADAMTS1 promoter spanning the putative ETS binding sites. CXCR4 knock-down Pooled siRNA against CXCR4 and GFP control was obtained from Dharmacon and knock-down evaluation was performed by qRT-PCR for CXCR4 . PC3 cells over-expressing ERG were transfected with CXCR4 siRNA and control and a cell migration assay was performed as previously described.  Tumor Tissue Microarray Tumor tissue microarrays were generated for 40 prostate cancer specimens in triplicate and consecutive sections were obtained. FISH was carried out on tissue microarrays constructed from cases of prostatic carcinoma with matched high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Approval was obtained from the institutional review board (IRB) and the Human Tissue Utilization Committee (HTUC) prior to study of human specimens. Break apart FISH probes consisted of 2 BAC clones each at 5?ERG ( RP11-55G21 and RP11-110N12), 3?ERG (RP11-315E22 and RP11-720N21) with approximately a 123.35 kb genomic gap between the two sets; and 2 BAC clones each at 5? TMPRSS2 (RP11-35C4 and RP-891L10) and 3? TMPRSS2 (RP11-825A8 and RP11-120C17), with an approximately 346.9 kb gap between the two sets. DNA was labeled by nick translation using SpectrumOrange-dUTP (3? clones) or SpectrumGreen-dUTP (5? clones) (Vysis, Abbott Molecular Inc., Des Plaines, IL) Tissue hybridization, washing and fluorescence detection were performed as previously described (Leversha, 2001, Methods Mol Biol v.175) and according to standard procedures. Samples were analyzed using an automated imaging system with an Axioplan2 fluorescence microscope and scanning stage (Marzhauser) controlled by Metafer 4.0 and Isis 5.0 scanning and imaging software (MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany). PTEN (PTEN Rabbit mAB 9559, Cell Signaling) immunohistochemical staining was performed by our molecular cytology core facility.  Generation of plasmid vectors and transgenic construct Human ERG cDNA sequence (transcript variant 1, REFSEQ NM_182918.2) was obtained from the NCBI database and primers ( Supplementary Table 1 ) were designed to amplify the entire coding sequence. RNA obtained from 293HEK cells was utilized to amplify the human ERG coding sequence, which was subsequently cloned into a TOPO vector (Invitrogen). Sequence analysis was performed to verify appropriate coding sequence and reading frame. This was then subcloned into a Flag-tag vector (CMV-Tg2B) using restriction enzyme digest with Pst1 and Xho1 in a standard fashion. We further subcloned our construct into the MSCV-PIG with the puromycin resistance gene (Xho1) plasmid and the PB-SV40 (Xho1) plasmid using Xho1 restriction digest in a standard fashion. The MSCV- AKT (constitutively active mutant) with the hygromycin resistance gene was obtained from Charles Sawyers. These constructs were amplified according to standard mini prep and maxi prep protocols. All constructs generated were screened by sequence analysis to verify appropriate coding sequence and reading frame.  Establishment of probasin-<italic>ERG</italic> mouse colony, genotyping, phenotyping, and tissue analysis To determine the in vivo causal significance of ERG over-expression in prostate tumorigenesis, we generated a mouse model expressing ERG in a prostate specific manner. To accomplish this, the human ERG cDNA sequence was cloned into a Flag-tag vector, sub-cloned into a probasin (ARR2PB) - SV40 expression vector, ( Supplementary Figure 1A ) and transgenic mice (Bl6 background) were established with assistance from our genetically engineered mouse core facility. Mice were subsequently analyzed for construct integration by Southern blot analysis ( Supplementary Figure 1B ). A total of 8 founders, positive for the ERG transgene by Southern blot analysis were identified, and F1 offspring were established. To ensure similar passage of the transgene to future progeny, Southern blot analysis was performed on our F1 offspring, revealing similar patterns and intensity for 7 of the 8 founder lines ( Supplementary Figure 1B ). The founding line with dissimilar transgene passage was euthanized and excluded from the study. Additionally, a PCR genotyping assay was established and validated for analysis of future progeny. Briefly, primers ( Supplementary Table 1 ) were designed to amplify the 3? region of probasin and the 5? region of ERG and protocol was followed using HOT Star Taq Master Mix Kit (Qiagen) ( Supplementary Figure 1C ). Our PCR genotyping correlated with our Southern blot analysis in all cases. Prostate specific expression of human ERG was evaluated at the mRNA and protein levels by quantitative RT-PCR and flag immunohistochemistry, respectively. Overall, 5 of the 7 original founding lines demonstrated mRNA and 3 lines showed protein expression of human ERG in all lobes of the prostate with highest expression in the ventral prostate lobe, dorsal lateral lobe, and lowest levels of expression in the anterior lobe. ( Supplementary Figure 1D, 1E ). We did not observe any detectable transgene levels in the liver, spleen, lung, or tail of these mice. There was no difference in murine Erg expression among our founders and controls ( Supplementary Figure 1D ). Founding lines labeled A and B were subsequently expanded for phenotypic analysis and crossed into our Pten heterozygous mice to generate F2 offspring with the genotypes Pten +/+, Pten +/?, Pten +/+ PB- ERG , and Pten +/? PB- ERG . 12 All mouse work was performed in accordance with our IACUC protocol. Mice were euthanized using carbon-dioxide asphyxiation, and prostate tissues were procured for formalin fixation, paraffin embedding, and frozen storage for future molecular analyses. All tissue processing, paraffin embedding, section, and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed by Histoserv Inc. Protein from the prostate specimens was extracted by homogenizing the tissue in RIPA buffer. RNA from the prostate specimens was extracted by homogenizing the tissue in TRIzol (Invitrogen). F2 offspring were generated for 2 independent transgenic lines (Lines A and B) and analyzed for prostate phenotype, with tissue procurement for evaluation as previously described. Results were similar between the two transgenic lines and all data is reported for transgenic line A.  Murine immunohistochemistry protocols and antibodies All immunohistochemistry procedures were performed through our molecular cytology core facility with previous established protocols for Flag antibody (Santa Cruz), Ki67 antibody (Novocastra), PTEN antibody (Ab-2; NeoMarkers), and phospho serine-473 AKT antibody (Cell Signaling).  Microarray analysis Microarray analysis was performed by our genomics core lab microarray facility. Briefly, MSCV- ERG and vector control were transiently expressed in 293 HEK cells for 2 independent experiments. RNA was harvested and subsequently quantified and labeled by our core department. Microarray analysis was performed on the U133A Affymetrix chip. Results were analyzed using GeneSpring software for 2 fold differences in gene expression across the 2 independent experiments. Results were validated with quantitative RT-PCR. Our complete microarray expression data set is uploaded on GEO-NCBI accession number GSE14595.  Quantitative RT-PCR protocol and primer sets Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using the SYBR Green PCR light cycler protocol (Qiagen). Subsequently, cDNA was generated from the RNA using the Super Script III First-Strand Synthesis system for RT-PCR (Invitrogen). See Supplementary Table 1 for primer sequences. Analysis was performed accordingly throughout our experiments and results were normalized to the house keeping genes ACTIN and Hprt for human and mouse specimens respectively.  Western blotting protocol and antibodies Protein lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The following antibodies were used for western blotting: Flag antibody (Santa Cruz), Actin (AC-74; Sigma), ERG (H-95; Santa Cruz), phospho serine-473 AKT antibody (Cell Signaling), and phospho 240/244 S6 (Cell Signaling).  In vitro analysis of cell phenotype Cell lines were established from primary Mef with our MSCV- ERG and MSCV puromycin selection vectors through initial infection and selection with puromycin. Stable clones were established from PC3 and 293 cells with our MSCV- ERG and MSCV puromycin selection vectors through initial transfection and selection with puromycin. BPH-1 cell lines were obtained from Simon Hayward and infected with MSCV- ERG , MSCV, MSCV- AKT (constitutively active AKT-1 ), and MSCV- AKT MSCV- ERG and selected with puromycin and hygromycin. These cells were then used for a variety of cellular assays and all assays were performed in triplicate. Protein and RNA were harvested using standard protocols for molecular analyses. For cell proliferation, 1×104 cells were plated in 12 well dishes, and cells were trypsinized and counted using a hemocytometer on days 2, 4, 6, and 8. Cell migration assay was performed by incubating 1×104 cells on a 8.0 um 24 well plate chamber insert (Falcon) with 0.9% FCS cell media above the insert and cell media containing 10% FCS below the insert to establish a gradient. Cells were incubated for 24 hours and subsequently fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and washed with PBS. Cells adherent to the top of the insert were scraped free with a cotton swab, washed with PBS and cells adherent to the bottom of the insert were stained with crystal violet blue. Positive staining cells were counted across 3 high-powered fields (100X).  Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) protocol Our protocol was adapted from Strahl-Bolsinger et al as previously described. 25 Briefly, PC3 cells were transfected with Tg2b- ERG and harvested after 48 hours. The cells were fixed using 1% formaldehyde and subsequently washed with PBS. Cells were suspended in ChIP lysis buffer and sonicated at level 2 for 30 seconds. Immunoprecipitation was performed with the Flag antibody (Santa Cruz) or control IgG, and beads were washed with 4x ChIP lysis buffer, 2x ChIP wash buffer, and 2x Tris buffer, with pelleting of the beads. Immunoprecipitants were eluted in 150 ul of ChIP elution buffer, incubated, and DNA was eluted using the Qiagen PCR purification protocol. Primers ( Supplementary Table 1 ) were designed to amplify regions of the CXCR4 and ADAMTS1 promoter spanning the putative ETS binding sites.  CXCR4 knock-down Pooled siRNA against CXCR4 and GFP control was obtained from Dharmacon and knock-down evaluation was performed by qRT-PCR for CXCR4 . PC3 cells over-expressing ERG were transfected with CXCR4 siRNA and control and a cell migration assay was performed as previously described.  Supplementary Material 1  Figures and Table Figure 1 Genetic and molecular alterations ERG and PTEN are frequent and concomitant events in human prostate cancer FISH break apart probes to 3? (red) and 5? (green) ends of both ERG and TMPRSS2 were used. Microscopy (200X), showing hematoxylin and eosin staining of HGPIN (arrowhead) and prostate carcinoma juxtaposed, high grade PIN (arrowhead) with deletion of the 3? TMPRSS2 region, and prostatic adenocarcinoma (insert) with deletion of the 3? TMPRSS2 region, as seen by loss of the red signal in at least one of the red-green pairs (A). Bar graph shows the proportion of HGPIN cases by ERG status (A). Tumor tissue microarray demonstrating prostate cancer with normal PTEN staining and prostate cancer with weak/absent PTEN staining (B). FISH staining from consecutive sections of the same specimen demonstrating the ERG genetic rearrangement is shown. The table reports the frequency of PTEN status by ERG rearrangement status (B). Figure 2 Prostate specific over-expression of ERG cooperates with Pten haploinsufficiency to promote prostate tumorigenesis Locally advanced mouse ( Pten ?/? p53 ?/?) prostate cancer demonstrated increased expression of murine Erg at the transcript level (normalized to Hprt) compared to controls (A). A total of 12 Pten +/?, 12 ERG transgenic mice, and 12 Pten +/? ERG mice were phenotypically characterized. High (200X) power histologic demonstration of prostatic adenocarcinoma in Pten +/? ERG mice compared to controls in mice 6 months of age (B). Immunohistochemistry for smooth muscle actin is performed demonstrating invasion (B). Phenotypic characterization of Pten +/? ERG mice at 2 and 6 months of age (200X). The incidence of prostatic adenocarcinoma is reported for transgenic mice at mice 2, 4, and 6 months of age (B). A bar graph is shown demonstrating the percentage of mice at each time point with the histologic finding of prostatic adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry for Ki67 staining in pre-neoplastic prostate glands (mice 4 months of age) demonstrated no increase in proliferation for transgenic ERG mice while Pten haploinsufficiency provides a proliferative advantage (C). A bar graph is shown demonstrating the percentage of ki67 positive staining cells per gland with mean and standard deviation reported for 3 representative prostate glands with p-value calculated based on Chi-square statistic (C). Immunohistochemistry of Pten revealed no differences in staining for pre-neoplastic prostate glands at 4 months of age and prostate in vivo transcript levels for Pten and AKT were similar for both genotypes (D). Figure 3 ERG regulates cell migration Western blot analysis determined expression of Flag-ERG construct and activation of P-AKT in stable BPH-1 cell lines infected with MSCV, MSCV- ERG , MSCV- AKT ( AKT-1 ), and MSCV- AKT MSCV- ERG (A). While over-expression of a constitutively active AKT (AKT-1) promoted cell growth, no proliferative advantage was observed with ERG over-expression (B). A line graph is utilized to demonstrate cell proliferation with the mean and standard deviation represented from 3 experiments (B). A striking increase was observed in cell migration with over-expression of ERG compared to vector control in BPH-1 cells which was not augmented with over-expression of a constitutively active AKT (AKT-1) (C). Bar graphs demonstrate the fold change in the number of migrated cells per high powered field normalized to vector control, and the mean and standard deviation from 3 experiments were calculated with p-value calculated based on total number of cells migrating (C). Figure 4 ERG directly regulates CXCR4 and ADAMTS1 Putative ETS binding sites were identified in the promoter regions of both human CXCR4 and ADAMTS1 genes (A). ChIP assays were performed demonstrating direct ERG binding to the promoter regions for both CXCR4 and ADAMTS1 (A). Repeat ChIP experiment for CXCR4 in PC3 cells over-expressing ERG (B). CXCR4 siRNA knock-down demonstrates a significant reduction in cell migration in PC3 cells over-expressing ERG (C). Further evaluation revealed that the mRNA expression of murine Cxcr4 was up-regulated in the prostate specimens of ERG transgenic mice (D) and Pten loss models of prostate tumorigenesis with up-regulation of ERG compared to controls (E). The bar graphs demonstrate the fold change in mRNA level following normalization to Hprt and our lowest value, and the mean and standard deviations from 3 experiments are shown. Table 1 Genes associated with tumorigenesis found to be up-regulated in 293 HEK cells by microarray expression analysis. Gene Fold Change ATF5 3.004 V-maf 2.335 ADAMTS1 2.102 Jun B 2.036 CXCR4 2.029 