A Case of Congenital Orbital Malignant Rhabdoid Tumor: Systemic Metastasis following Exenteration A newborn girl presented with massive proptosis of the right eye. Physical and radiologic examination disclosed that the primary orbital mass was confined to the site. A diagnosis of malignant rhabdoid tumor was made by histopathologic examination of an incisional biopsy specimen. Exenteration was performed, and the resection margins were free from tumor cells. However, distant metastasis developed in the liver 1 month after surgery. Despite chemotherapy, the patient died 2 months later due to tumor invasion into the central nervous system, which was confirmed by autopsy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of congenital orbital malignant rhabdoid tumor showing systemic metastasis after exenteration, which suggests the need for aggressive systemic treatment rather than exenteration, even in a case of locally confined tumor.  Discussion MRT was initially thought to be a variant of Wilms tumor [ 8 ], but it is now known that rhabdoid tumors of the central nervous system (atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor), soft tissue (extrarenal MRT), and kidney (rhabdoid tumor of the kidney) have a genetic origin distinct from nephroblastoma [ 9 ]. The histopathologic diagnosis of extrarenal rhabdoid tumor is based on the presence of characteristic features similar to those found in kidney MRT. These include large oval to polygonal cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, large vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli, and conspicuous cytoplasmic inclusions. Ultrastructurally, cytoplasmic inclusions are composed of concentric arrays of parallel intermediate filaments, 6–9 nm in diameter. The filamentous cytoplasmic inclusions are not membrane bound and occasionally incorporate lipid droplets or mitochondria [ 10 ]. The differential diagnosis includes round-cell tumors such as rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor, and malignant melanoma. Immunohistochemistry is helpful in establishing the diagnosis of rhabdoid tumor, which characteristically shows a pattern of positive immunoreactivity for vimentin, cytokeratin, and epithelial membrane antigen. Vimentin is usually positive in rhabdoid tumor, but immunoreactivity for cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen is more variable. Negative staining for muscle markers, histiocytic markers, HMB-45, and S100 protein serves to exclude myogenic and histiocytic neoplasms, as well as malignant melanoma [ 11 ]. The treatment modality for orbital MRT is not yet established, and the role of exenteration is not clear. Interestingly, two previous reports of congenital MRT confined to the orbit showed good prognosis after combined treatment: chemotherapy followed by surgical resection of residual tumor, or Gamma Knife radiosurgery after tumor burden reduction with chemotherapy [ 6 , 7 ]. Briefly, the former case was treated with three cycles of the ICE (ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide) regimen following monthly intrathecal injections of methotrexate and cytarabine and high-dose chemotherapy in advance of surgical resection of the tumor, and completed by three additional cycles of chemotherapy with the same regimen [ 6 ]. The latter case was first treated with a cycle of cisplatin, etoposide, and vincristine. However, because of tumor progression, two cycles of ifosfamide and doxorubicin were included to reduce the tumor burden. After performing Gamma Knife radiosurgery, treatment was completed with three additional cycles of chemotherapy with the same regimen, followed by high-dose chemotherapy with melphalan and cyclophosphamide, and ifosfamide and thiotepa [ 7 ]. Exenteration was performed in our patient as a result of the finding that the tumor appeared to be confined to the orbit, with no sign of systemic metastasis. Unfortunately, distant metastasis was found in the liver 1 month after surgery. Although the chemotherapy regimen that we used was not exactly the same as those in the previous cases, despite the chemotherapy, multiple systemic metastases progressed to the lung and liver. The patient died 4 months after initial diagnosis from distant metastasis in the pons and lung, which was confirmed by autopsy. Although extremely rare, congenital MRT of the orbit should be considered in the setting of rapidly expanding orbital lesions appearing in the neonatal period, and we believe this case suggests the restricted role of exenteration for congenital orbital MRT.  Discussion MRT was initially thought to be a variant of Wilms tumor [ 8 ], but it is now known that rhabdoid tumors of the central nervous system (atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor), soft tissue (extrarenal MRT), and kidney (rhabdoid tumor of the kidney) have a genetic origin distinct from nephroblastoma [ 9 ]. The histopathologic diagnosis of extrarenal rhabdoid tumor is based on the presence of characteristic features similar to those found in kidney MRT. These include large oval to polygonal cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, large vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli, and conspicuous cytoplasmic inclusions. Ultrastructurally, cytoplasmic inclusions are composed of concentric arrays of parallel intermediate filaments, 6–9 nm in diameter. The filamentous cytoplasmic inclusions are not membrane bound and occasionally incorporate lipid droplets or mitochondria [ 10 ]. The differential diagnosis includes round-cell tumors such as rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor, and malignant melanoma. Immunohistochemistry is helpful in establishing the diagnosis of rhabdoid tumor, which characteristically shows a pattern of positive immunoreactivity for vimentin, cytokeratin, and epithelial membrane antigen. Vimentin is usually positive in rhabdoid tumor, but immunoreactivity for cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen is more variable. Negative staining for muscle markers, histiocytic markers, HMB-45, and S100 protein serves to exclude myogenic and histiocytic neoplasms, as well as malignant melanoma [ 11 ]. The treatment modality for orbital MRT is not yet established, and the role of exenteration is not clear. Interestingly, two previous reports of congenital MRT confined to the orbit showed good prognosis after combined treatment: chemotherapy followed by surgical resection of residual tumor, or Gamma Knife radiosurgery after tumor burden reduction with chemotherapy [ 6 , 7 ]. Briefly, the former case was treated with three cycles of the ICE (ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide) regimen following monthly intrathecal injections of methotrexate and cytarabine and high-dose chemotherapy in advance of surgical resection of the tumor, and completed by three additional cycles of chemotherapy with the same regimen [ 6 ]. The latter case was first treated with a cycle of cisplatin, etoposide, and vincristine. However, because of tumor progression, two cycles of ifosfamide and doxorubicin were included to reduce the tumor burden. After performing Gamma Knife radiosurgery, treatment was completed with three additional cycles of chemotherapy with the same regimen, followed by high-dose chemotherapy with melphalan and cyclophosphamide, and ifosfamide and thiotepa [ 7 ]. Exenteration was performed in our patient as a result of the finding that the tumor appeared to be confined to the orbit, with no sign of systemic metastasis. Unfortunately, distant metastasis was found in the liver 1 month after surgery. Although the chemotherapy regimen that we used was not exactly the same as those in the previous cases, despite the chemotherapy, multiple systemic metastases progressed to the lung and liver. The patient died 4 months after initial diagnosis from distant metastasis in the pons and lung, which was confirmed by autopsy. Although extremely rare, congenital MRT of the orbit should be considered in the setting of rapidly expanding orbital lesions appearing in the neonatal period, and we believe this case suggests the restricted role of exenteration for congenital orbital MRT.  Figures Fig. 1 a Ultrasonography at 35 weeks' gestation, showing orbital mass (arrowhead) and displaced eyeball (arrow). b Clinical photograph taken on day 1 of life, showing a huge mass in the right orbit and proptosis. Axial T1 ( c ), axial T2 ( d ), and sagittal T1 ( e ) magnetic resonance imaging of the orbit after gadolinium injection; well-enhanced and marginated heterogeneous tumor without intracranial extension is seen. Fig. 2 a Light microscopy image of the orbital tumor, showing sheets of polygonal and spindle cells with vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions. H.E. Original magnification, ×400. b Immunohistochemical analysis showing tumor cells positive for MIC-2 (CD99). Original magnification, ×400. Fig. 3 Autopsy findings of tumor recurrence at exenterated site (top left), pons (top right), posterior aspect of the lung (bottom left), liver (bottom center), and retroperitoneum (bottom right).  Figures Fig. 1 a Ultrasonography at 35 weeks' gestation, showing orbital mass (arrowhead) and displaced eyeball (arrow). b Clinical photograph taken on day 1 of life, showing a huge mass in the right orbit and proptosis. Axial T1 ( c ), axial T2 ( d ), and sagittal T1 ( e ) magnetic resonance imaging of the orbit after gadolinium injection; well-enhanced and marginated heterogeneous tumor without intracranial extension is seen. Fig. 2 a Light microscopy image of the orbital tumor, showing sheets of polygonal and spindle cells with vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions. H.E. Original magnification, ×400. b Immunohistochemical analysis showing tumor cells positive for MIC-2 (CD99). Original magnification, ×400. Fig. 3 Autopsy findings of tumor recurrence at exenterated site (top left), pons (top right), posterior aspect of the lung (bottom left), liver (bottom center), and retroperitoneum (bottom right). 