Syndromes of Telomere Shortening Telomeres and telomerase were initially discovered in pursuit of questions about how the ends of chromosomes are maintained. The implications of these discoveries to age-related disease have emerged in recent years with the recognition of a group of telomere-mediated syndromes. Telomere-mediated disease was initially identified in the context of dyskeratosis congenita, a rare syndrome of premature aging. More recently, mutations in telomerase components were identified in adults with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. These findings have revealed that the spectrum of telomere-mediated disease is broad and includes clinical presentations in both children and adults. We have previously proposed that these disorders be collectively considered as syndromes of telomere shortening. Here, the spectrum of these disorders and the unique telomere genetics that underlies them are reviewed. I also propose broader clinical criteria for defining telomere-mediated syndromes outside of dyskeratosis congenita, with the goal of facilitating their diagnosis and highlighting their pathophysiology.  SHORT TELOMERES CAN BE ACQUIRED: IMPLICATIONS FOR UNDERSTANDING COMMON DISEASE Short telomeres can also be acquired. Telomere length is a mosaic trait and reflects the replicative history of cells. Mosaicism has been best documented in mature leukocyte subsets (see Reference 8 for a review). For example, within a given individual, granulocytes usually have longer telomeres than total lymphocytes ( 8 ). Mosaicism also explains the pronounced penetrance of telomere phenotypes in tissues of high turnover where progenitors rely on telomere reserves. Chronic injury-repair disease states are also associated with telomere shortening in several conditions. For example, chronic exposure to cigarette smoke in the lung and acid reflux in Barrett’s esophagus are associated with telomere shortening ( 44 , 67 , 68 ). Chronic inflammatory processes such as in ulcerative colitis are also associated with regional telomere shortening ( 51 , 56 ). Additionally, telomere shortening can be observed as a consequence of infection in the mouse hematopoietic system ( 36 ). In preneoplastic lesions, short telomeres are also acquired somatically ( 44 , 45 ). Chronic injury states will likely have more pronounced consequences in individuals who inherit short telomeres. For example, in families with pulmonary fibrosis, smokers have an earlier onset of lung disease than nonsmokers ( 65 , 66 ). Since telomere length has a broad distribution across populations and since short telomeres can also be acquired, telomere length likely plays an underappreciated role in the epidemiology of chronic disease associated with irreparable organ failure.  SHORT TELOMERES CAN BE ACQUIRED: IMPLICATIONS FOR UNDERSTANDING COMMON DISEASE Short telomeres can also be acquired. Telomere length is a mosaic trait and reflects the replicative history of cells. Mosaicism has been best documented in mature leukocyte subsets (see Reference 8 for a review). For example, within a given individual, granulocytes usually have longer telomeres than total lymphocytes ( 8 ). Mosaicism also explains the pronounced penetrance of telomere phenotypes in tissues of high turnover where progenitors rely on telomere reserves. Chronic injury-repair disease states are also associated with telomere shortening in several conditions. For example, chronic exposure to cigarette smoke in the lung and acid reflux in Barrett’s esophagus are associated with telomere shortening ( 44 , 67 , 68 ). Chronic inflammatory processes such as in ulcerative colitis are also associated with regional telomere shortening ( 51 , 56 ). Additionally, telomere shortening can be observed as a consequence of infection in the mouse hematopoietic system ( 36 ). In preneoplastic lesions, short telomeres are also acquired somatically ( 44 , 45 ). Chronic injury states will likely have more pronounced consequences in individuals who inherit short telomeres. For example, in families with pulmonary fibrosis, smokers have an earlier onset of lung disease than nonsmokers ( 65 , 66 ). Since telomere length has a broad distribution across populations and since short telomeres can also be acquired, telomere length likely plays an underappreciated role in the epidemiology of chronic disease associated with irreparable organ failure.  SHORT TELOMERES LIMIT THE REPLICATIVE CAPACITY OF HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELLS Evidence from animal studies indicates that the decrease in regenerative capacity with age may be a result of cumulative DNA damage in stem cells ( 58 , 62 , 63 ). Syndromes of telomere shortening provide a clinical context for understanding the consequences of telomere shortening on stem cell function. Aplastic anemia is the prototype of stem cell failure disorders where progressive aplasia occurs as a result of limited replicative capacity of the hematopoietic stem cell ( Figure 5 ). Impaired hematopoietic stem cell function has been documented in late-generation mTR?/? mice ( 3 , 14 , 30 ). And although hematopoietic stem cells may be enriched for telomerase activity, short telomeres may be sufficient to limit their replicative capacity even when telomerase is present. Although the pathophysiology of scarring in IPF is poorly understood, we have proposed that, at least in a subset, the progressive fibrosis may be a result of regional stem cell failure due to telomere shortening in the lung ( 5 , 6 ). The study of syndromes of telomere shortening thus has important implications for understanding the biology of stem cell failure in age-related disease within and outside of the hematopoietic system.  SHORT TELOMERES LIMIT THE REPLICATIVE CAPACITY OF HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELLS Evidence from animal studies indicates that the decrease in regenerative capacity with age may be a result of cumulative DNA damage in stem cells ( 58 , 62 , 63 ). Syndromes of telomere shortening provide a clinical context for understanding the consequences of telomere shortening on stem cell function. Aplastic anemia is the prototype of stem cell failure disorders where progressive aplasia occurs as a result of limited replicative capacity of the hematopoietic stem cell ( Figure 5 ). Impaired hematopoietic stem cell function has been documented in late-generation mTR?/? mice ( 3 , 14 , 30 ). And although hematopoietic stem cells may be enriched for telomerase activity, short telomeres may be sufficient to limit their replicative capacity even when telomerase is present. Although the pathophysiology of scarring in IPF is poorly understood, we have proposed that, at least in a subset, the progressive fibrosis may be a result of regional stem cell failure due to telomere shortening in the lung ( 5 , 6 ). The study of syndromes of telomere shortening thus has important implications for understanding the biology of stem cell failure in age-related disease within and outside of the hematopoietic system.  SUMMARY In summary, syndromes of short telomeres may be the archetype of premature aging syndromes because short telomeres accumulate universally with aging. Distinct from other progeroid syndromes (e.g., Hutchinson-Gilford), they epitomize a process that occurs in humans as they age, and affected individuals have many features of age-related disease ( Table 3 ). Age-related disease is marked by vascular and degenerative components as well as by cancer predisposition. In at least DC, the latter two aspects are captured. The study of syndromes of telomere shortening thus provides a disease-specific context for understanding the consequences of cumulative telomere attrition and stem cell failure with aging. The spectrum of syndromes of telomere shortening is broad and encompasses common age-related disorders previously thought to be idiopathic, such as IPF. Recent developments in understanding the genetics of syndromes of telomere shortening allows the recognition of a distinct clinical entity that appears as a clustering of aplastic anemia and fibrosis in the lung and liver. This telomere syndrome often appears in adults and falls on the same spectrum as DC. Recognizing syndromes of telomere shortening as a single entity due to a common pathophysiology will, it is hoped, allow for improved genetic, diagnostic, and therapeutic approaches for affected individuals and families. The study of telomere and telomerase biology and genetics has provided a platform for elucidating the pathophysiology of a group of disorders that have heretofore been poorly understood. Future insights may also provide a basis for rational therapeutic approaches that can attenuate their course.  SUMMARY POINTS Mutations in telomerase and telomere components lead to a broad spectrum of disease that has presentations in children and adults. The extent of telomere shortening determines the onset and severity of these disorders. The study of families with mutations in telomerase components allows the identification of a distinct disease entity marked by organ failure in the bone marrow and a clustering of pulmonary and liver fibrosis. This syndrome frequently appears in adulthood and is distinct from DC, though it falls on the same spectrum. IPF is the most common manifestation of a syndrome of telomere shortening. The causal role implicating short telomeres in IPF provides evidence that short telomeres are sufficient to cause common, age-related disease with manifestations in the lung. Syndromes of telomere shortening are unique among progeroid disorders in that they embody a process that occurs in humans as they age.  FUTURE ISSUES Will the future study of familial IPF and DC implicate other components of telomeres and telomerase in the pathogenesis of this group of disorders? Will the presence of mutations in telomerase components affect prognosis and treatment of patients with IPF and related disorders? What is the true incidence of syndromes of telomere shortening? Can the natural history of syndromes of telomere shortening be attenuated by telomere- and telomerase-based approaches?  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Short telomeres activate a DNA-damage response that leads to apoptosis and senescence. As cells divide, short telomere accumulate because of the end-replication problem. Critically, short telomeres recruit DNA damage proteins that activate cellular programs of apoptosis or senescence. This cellular response manifests as organ failure in clinically recognizable syndromes of telomere shortening. Figure 2 Mutations in telomerase and telomere components lead to syndromes of telomere shortening. ( a ) The essential telomerase components. hTERT utilizes the template provided by hTR to add new telomeres onto the ends of chromosomes. hTR is a 451 nucleotide RNA which contains a box H/ACA motif at its 3? end. The box H/ACA motif is essential for hTR stability and for its assembly with hTERT. These functions are mediated by the presence of the box H/ACA-binding dyskerin complex, which is composed of four proteins: dyskerin, NOP10, NHP2 and GAR1. Loss-of-function mutations in hTR , hTERT , DKC1 , and likely NOP10 and NHP2 lead to a decrease in available telomerase dose and accelerated telomere shortening. ( b ) The shelterin complex is composed of six specialized proteins that bind telomeric DNA. Mutations in the shelterin component TINF2 explain a subset of severe cases of dyskeratosis congenita. The mechanism by which TINF2 heterozygous mutations lead to telomere shortening is not known. Figure 3 Telomere length is a unique heritable trait. In autosomal dominant syndromes of telomere shortening, in addition to a mutant hTERT or hTR allele, short telomeres are inherited across generations. The progressive telomere shortening leads to anticipation of phenotypes, as indicated by the darker shades of black in affected successive generations. Short telomeres can also be inherited in wild-type individuals; however, no telomere-associated phenotypes have been described in these individuals. Wild-type mice who inherit short telomeres have degenerative phenotypes similar to mTR +/? mice ( 30 ). Figure 4 Syndromes of telomere shortening lead to organ failure in the bone marrow, lung, and liver and define a distinct telomere-mediated entity in the absence of the classic features of DC. Bone marrow biopsy with normal cellularity shown in ( a ) is contrasted with marrow from patient with aplastic anemia in ( b ) where hematopoiesis is absent, and the marrow is replaced with fat. ( c ) Normal CAT scan of the chest with clear lung parenchyma is contrasted with ( d ) showing a CAT scan from a patient with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a disorder classically marked by honeycombing in the peripheral and basilar portions of the lung as shown. ( e ) Normal CAT of the abdomen revealing a healthy liver size and structure. ( f ) CAT scan from a patient with cryptogenic liver cirrhosis due to telomere shortening. The liver is small and atrophic with nodular edges and secondary splenomegaly due to portal hypertension. This patient received a liver transplant after developing progressive symptoms of cirrhosis. Bone marrow micrographs were kindly provided by Dr. Kathleen Burns, Johns Hopkins Department of Pathology. Figure 5 Short telomeres lead to stem cell failure in the bone marrow. ( a ) Normal hematopoiesis is hierarchical and relies on the intact capacity of a pleuripotent stem cell to self-renew and differentiate. When telomeres are short ( b ), stem cell function is impaired and the impairment leads to a progressive decline in the production of mature blood lineages in aplastic anemia. Table 1 Mutations in telomerase and telomere genes lead to a broad clinical spectrum of syndromes of telomere shortening. Gene Name Diagnosis Typical age of onset in years hTR hTERT Sporadic IPF 1–3% Familial IPF a 8–15% Sporadic and familial aplastic anemia ~3–5% Autosomal dominant DC b Broad range 5–77 DKC1 X-linked DC Hoyeraal-Hreiderasson Less than 30 Less than 5 TINF2 Sporadic DC Autosomal dominant DC Hoyeraal-Hreiderasson Less than 10 - Less than 5 NOP10 Autosomal Recessive DC - NHP2 Autosomal Recessive DC - a IPF refers to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. b DC refers to dyskeratosis congenita. Table 2 Spectrum of bone marrow, lung, and liver disease seen in individuals with syndromes of telomere shortening Hematologic features ?Macrocytosis ?Elevated hemoglobin F ?Isolated cytopenias (most commonly thrombocytopenia) ?Aplastic anemia ?Myelodysplasia ?Acute myeloid leukemia Pulmonary fibrosis ?Asymptomatic restrictive defects on pulmonary function studies ?Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis/usual interstitial pneumonia ?Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia ?Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia nonclassifiable on biopsy Liver disease ?Normal or mildly elevated transaminases ?Atrophic nodular liver on imaging studies ?Splenomegaly Cryptogenic liver fibrosis/cirrhosis Table 3 Age-related processes that affect individuals with syndromes of telomere shortening Premature hair graying/loss Nail ridging Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis Liver fibrosis Decreasing bone marrow cellularity and function Thrombocytopenia Immune dysfunction Increased cancer risk Chemotherapy intolerance Radiation therapy intolerance 