Pain catastrophizing: a critical review Pain catastrophizing is conceptualized as a negative cognitive–affective response to anticipated or actual pain and has been associated with a number of important pain-related outcomes. In the present review, we first focus our efforts on the conceptualization of pain catastrophizing, highlighting its conceptual history and potential problem areas. We then focus our discussion on a number of theoretical mechanisms of action: appraisal theory, attention bias/information processing, communal coping, CNS pain processing mechanisms, psychophysiological pathways and neural pathways. We then offer evidence to suggest that pain catastrophizing represents an important process factor in pain treatment. We conclude by offering what we believe represents an integrated heuristic model for use by researchers over the next 5 years; a model we believe will advance the field most expediently.  Expert commentary The catastrophizing literature to date provides rather demonstrative evidence for the influence of catastrophizing in shaping emotional, functional and physiological responses to pain. At this point, in our view, enough evidence has accumulated to suggest that high levels of catastrophizing about pain should be considered a ‘risk marker’ for adverse immediate and long-term pain-related outcomes. Moreover, the apparent role of catastrophizing in contributing to the effectiveness of a variety of pain treatments, from multidisciplinary interventions to cognitive–behavioral therapy to exercise treatments (e.g., [ 99 , 100 ]), suggests that it may become a key target of many chronic pain management programs. In order to advance the field of catastrophizing research, increasing the focus on several key areas will be important. First, assessment issues represent a barrier to furthering our understanding of this construct; catastrophizing has been assessed using global, retrospective self-report (e.g., the PCS), using situation-specific recall of catastrophizing cognitions during a recently-experienced, standardized pain episode and using diary assessment of moment-to-moment cognitions in daily life. In general, the associations between these measures of catastrophizing are modest, and it will be crucial to characterize the determinants and consequences of catastrophizing in particular contexts. Moreover, it is important to bear in mind that each of these assessment methods tells little, if anything, about the process of catastrophizing. The utilization of these self-report methods merely speaks to a cognitive product. Using paradigms that manipulate intensity of pain and concomitantly assess pain catastrophizing (i.e., product) and attentional bias (i.e., process) may shed additional light on the processes that characterize the catastrophizing construct. Second, few studies comprehensively assess other negative emotional and cognitive processes that overlap (often substantially) with the construct of catastrophizing. It will be critical to place catastrophizing within the context of such other processes as fear of pain, pain-related anxiety, pain self-efficacy and somatization. Perhaps even more critical will be the determination of the uniqueness of the catastrophizing construct; that is, whether it accounts for clinically meaningful variance in a variety of pain-related and interpersonal outcomes above and beyond other purported pain-related cognitive, behavioral and affective process variables. Third, a handful of mechanisms have been proposed to account for the effects of catastrophizing on outcomes, ranging in scope from the neurophysiological to interpersonal. Mechanistic studies of catastrophizing have predominantly focused on a unitary potential mechanism; however, the hypothesized pathways are not mutually exclusive, and future catastrophizing research would benefit from a more comprehensive consideration of multiple processes. Finally, we recommend that researchers in the field of pain-related catastrophizing regain sight of the historical roots of catastrophizing. More specifically, the construct stems from a broader notion of catastrophizing in the context of psychiatric disorders such as major depression and generalized anxiety disorder. Although some have utilized methodologies and theoretical models advanced by basic psychopathology researchers to better understand the pain catastrophizing construct [ 48 , 49 , 51 , 52 , 105 ], such an application is perhaps occurring at too deliberate a rate. For instance, there is only one published study that attempted a manipulation of pain catastrophizing to determine the construct’s causal influence on pain experience [ 106 ]. These authors instructed participants to recite catastrophizing items taken directly from the PCS during a painful cold pressor task, and then reassessed catastrophizing following the cold pressor task. Although this method led to modest increases in pain catastrophizing, such changes were not associated with pain. Although this method is certainly face valid, it bears little on the processes purported to underlie pain catastrophizing and it is not possible to rule out the possibility that any changes in catastrophizing were because of experimental demand. Drawing from the psychopathology literature, there are more subtle manipulations available that bear more directly on purported catastrophizing processes and are much less susceptible to response bias and/or experimental demand. For instance, attentional training paradigms are being utilized to induce an anxiety-like information processing bias [ 107 ] and, conversely, to eliminate pre-existing information processing biases corresponding to high levels of anxiety [ 108 , 109 ]. If catastrophizing is in part characterized by attentional bias directed toward threatening aspects of pain [ 46 – 49 ], then induction of such an attentional bias should lead to catastrophizing processes that in turn enhance subjective pain experience and, perhaps, underlying neurophysiological function. Conversely, investigators might consider training high catastrophizers to attend to less threatening information in the context of pain, in turn exerting salutary effects on responses to acute and clinical pain. In short, we strongly believe that continued application of well-founded paradigms from other literatures will further enhance our ability to characterize the pain catastrophizing construct and the processes by which it impinges upon pain and suffering.  Five-year view Speculation regarding the direction of future catastrophizing research could potentially fill an entire review, but we anticipate some critical areas over the course of the next 5 years. Application of well-validated experimental paradigms from other literatures, such as experimental psychopathology (e.g., [ 105 ]), will continue in order to better understand the shared and unique determinants of pain catastrophizing on pain-related outcomes. In addition, use of multiple neuroimaging techniques will further characterize the neural underpinnings of catastrophizing, and the role of various neurotransmitter substances. For example, PET and magnetic resonance spectroscopy methodologies can be used to evaluate the activity of particular neurotransmitter systems in the brain under various experimental conditions. There will also be studies of the development and determinants of pain-related catastrophizing. For instance, we have only recently begun to evaluate potential genetic moderators of individual differences in catastrophizing [ 79 , 80 ], or the contribution of early life experiences, such as parenting styles, to the development of catastrophizing among children and adolescents [ 110 ]. Assessment issues represent a barrier to furthering our understanding of catastrophizing. Consequently, we expect this field of research to benefit greatly from studies that utilize multi-contextual assessment of catastrophizing (e.g., using daily diaries, spouse reports and application of standardized stress/pain tasks to elicit catastrophizing), and that place catastrophizing within the context of other related cognitive processes (e.g., attentional bias) in order to determine unique versus common contributions of catastrophizing to pain-related outcomes. Finally, and most crucially, we believe that for the field to most readily advance will require explorations of interactive mechanisms involved in pain-related catastrophizing. To that end, we have advanced a heuristic model for the integrative study of pain catastrophizing ( Figure 2 ). This model explicitly notes and emphasizes possible inter-relationships between the aforementioned theoretical mediators and moderators of catastophizing’s effects on pain and pain-related outcomes, such as disability and social networks. Importantly, we believe this model can most expediently advance the field by focusing hypotheses on multiple process and/or moderating variables theoretically and/or conceptually related to catastrophizing. For instance, genetic polymorphisms might contribute to exaggerated inflammation, in turn leading to elevated levels of pain and so lead to a catastrophizing process and, ultimately, to socially-observable expressions of pain behaviors. As a second example, family history of chronic pain may lead to exaggerated threat perceptions (i.e., catastrophizing) for a child experiencing a painful episode (e.g., tonsillectomy), thereby leading to increased subjective pain experience and concomitant maladaptive neurophysiological responses. Utilization of a framework such as that illuminated in Figure 2 therefore has the potential to move researchers toward integrative versus piecemeal studies of pain catastrophizing, and in doing so circumvent potentially unhelpful debates over whether catastrophizing is an appraisal, a coping strategy or a maladaptive belief. It is most plausible that catastrophizing is an unfolding process [ 45 ] with multiple determinants (e.g., primary and secondary appraisals) and moderators (e.g., genetic polymorphisms, such as catechol- O -methyltransferase). We believe the coming years will yield exciting findings concerning not only pain catastrophizing, but other negative pain-related cognitive constructs, such as fear of pain, pain anxiety and pain helplessness. Such findings will no doubt lead to improved, perhaps even novel, therapeutic interventions for those suffering from chronic, often disabling, pain. Key issues Pain catastrophizing stems from original conceptualizations of catastrophizing in the context of depressive and anxiety disorders advanced by Albert Ellis and Aaron Beck. Pain catastrophizing has been associated with a number of pain-related outcomes, including acute and chronic pain severity, altered CNS pain processing (e.g., diminished endogenous pain inhibition), exaggerated healthcare utilization, postsurgical pain outcomes and disability, and pain-related activity interference. Catastrophizers appear to attend most readily to pain-related stimuli and have a particularly pronounced inability to disengage cognitive resources from such stimuli. Catastrophizing behaviors appear to exert significant, and potentially deleterious, effects on a patient’s support network. For example, longer durations of pain appear to exaggerate the relationship between pain catastrophizing and punishing responses from the spouse/significant other. Development of systematic behavioral assessments of catastrophizing would be timely. There are preliminary data suggesting that pain-related catastrophizing is associated with altered hypothalamic pituitary responses to pain and amplified activation in neural regions implicated in processing and regulation of affective components of pain (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex). Pain-related catastrophizing appears to represent a robust cognitive process variable in multidisciplinary pain treatment outcomes studies, as well as in cognitive behavioral and stand-alone physical therapy (i.e., behavioral) for chronic pain. Future studies will need to more rigorously explore the empirical distinctiveness of the pain catastrophizing construct apart from related constructs, such as fear of pain, as well as from more general constructs imbued with negative affectivity, such as depression, anxiety and neuroticism. Innovative assessment techniques that move beyond self-report, or that can augment self-report methods, need to be advanced so that the process of catastrophizing can be more readily characterized. Greater reliance on theory and methods employed by experimental psychopathology researchers may shed novel light on the processes that underlie the effects of catastrophizing on pain-related outcomes. For the field of pain catastrophizing research to advance will require a concerted effort to employ studies that aim to systematically and concurrently examine multiple proposed processes versus one process or another.  Key issues Pain catastrophizing stems from original conceptualizations of catastrophizing in the context of depressive and anxiety disorders advanced by Albert Ellis and Aaron Beck. Pain catastrophizing has been associated with a number of pain-related outcomes, including acute and chronic pain severity, altered CNS pain processing (e.g., diminished endogenous pain inhibition), exaggerated healthcare utilization, postsurgical pain outcomes and disability, and pain-related activity interference. Catastrophizers appear to attend most readily to pain-related stimuli and have a particularly pronounced inability to disengage cognitive resources from such stimuli. Catastrophizing behaviors appear to exert significant, and potentially deleterious, effects on a patient’s support network. For example, longer durations of pain appear to exaggerate the relationship between pain catastrophizing and punishing responses from the spouse/significant other. Development of systematic behavioral assessments of catastrophizing would be timely. There are preliminary data suggesting that pain-related catastrophizing is associated with altered hypothalamic pituitary responses to pain and amplified activation in neural regions implicated in processing and regulation of affective components of pain (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex). Pain-related catastrophizing appears to represent a robust cognitive process variable in multidisciplinary pain treatment outcomes studies, as well as in cognitive behavioral and stand-alone physical therapy (i.e., behavioral) for chronic pain. Future studies will need to more rigorously explore the empirical distinctiveness of the pain catastrophizing construct apart from related constructs, such as fear of pain, as well as from more general constructs imbued with negative affectivity, such as depression, anxiety and neuroticism. Innovative assessment techniques that move beyond self-report, or that can augment self-report methods, need to be advanced so that the process of catastrophizing can be more readily characterized. Greater reliance on theory and methods employed by experimental psychopathology researchers may shed novel light on the processes that underlie the effects of catastrophizing on pain-related outcomes. For the field of pain catastrophizing research to advance will require a concerted effort to employ studies that aim to systematically and concurrently examine multiple proposed processes versus one process or another.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Hierarchical factor structure of pain catastrophizing and corresponding Pain Catastrophizing Scale items. Figure 2 A proposed multiprocess framework for pain catastrophizing research COMT: Catchol- O -methyltransferase; DNIC: Diffuse noxious inhibitory controls. Table 1 Theoretical conceptualizations of pain catastrophizing. Conceptualization Details Appraisal theory Pain catastrophizing is viewed as an appraisal process. Painful stimuli are appraised in a primary (magnification, rumination) and secondary (helplessness) fashion. Behavior is deployed based on this appraisal process Attention bias/information processing Pain catastrophizing is comprised of an information processing or attention bias to pain-related stimuli, particularly the negative affective or ‘hot’ dimensions of such stimuli Communal coping Pain catastrophizing is an interpersonal coping style that is used to solicit interpersonal support of a tangible and emotional nature CNS mechanisms Pain catastrophizing is associated with altered CNS processes, such as enhanced temporal summation, aberrant hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis activity and altered cytokine responses to pain Neural underpinnings Pain catastrophizing is associated with activation in brain regions implicated in processing of affective dimensions of pain; regions that are also implicated in the cognitive regulation of emotion and cognition (e.g., anterior cingulate cortex and ventromedial and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices) 