Communication between Toxoplasma gondii and its host: impact on parasite growth, development, immune evasion, and virulence Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular protozoan parasite that can infect most warm-blooded animals and cause severe and life-threatening disease in developing fetuses and in immune-compromised patients. Although Toxoplasma was discovered over 100 years ago, we are only now beginning to appreciate the importance of the role that parasite modulation of its host has on parasite growth, bradyzoite development, immune evasion, and virulence. The goal of this review is to highlight these findings, to develop an integrated model for communication between Toxoplasma and its host, and to discuss new questions that arise out of these studies.  CONCLUSIONS Although Toxoplasma was discovered over 100 years ago ( 169 , 170 ), we are only now beginning to appreciate the importance of the role that parasite modulation of its host has on parasite growth, bradyzoite development, immune evasion, and virulence. These discoveries are significant not only because they taught us about Toxoplasma -specific processes but also because they illuminate novel biological processes. Recent examples include hijacking of microtubule-based LDL-trafficking, invasion via the RON complex, rhoptry injection of virulence factors, and IFN?-inducible GTPase-mediated autophagy. But many important questions remain about how Toxoplasma grows within its host. The development of new biochemical and genetic tools will facilitate studies to answer these questions. These tools include high-throughput RNAi and small molecule inhibitor screens that have already yielded important information about Toxoplasma invasion ( 171 ). In addition, the development of cosmid libraries to identify mutated genes in forward genetic screens will now allow many investigators to use chemical mutagenesis-based screens to identify parasite genes that modulate host cell functions ( 172 ). Besides the topics we covered in this review, future Toxoplasma research will likely focus on understanding how epigenetic regulation of both parasite and host gene expression affect communication between Toxoplasma and its host. In addition, recent evidence has indicated that Toxoplasma infections can have significant effects on host behavior ( 173 – 176 ) and future work will likely aim to elucidate the molecular basis for these changes. Finally, the long-term goal of studying an important infectious disease like Toxoplasma is the development of protective vaccines as well the production of effective drug therapies that have few side effects. Understanding the basic biology underlying the interaction between Toxoplasma and its host will greatly aid in reaching these goals.  Figure Fig. 1 Overview of Toxoplasma host cell interactions. (A). Innate immune responses are initiated by Toll-like receptor (TLR) and CCR5 recognition of Toxoplasma -derived factors. (B). Parasite invasion is accomplished by the release of micronemal adhesins that interact with host surface factors. This is then followed by rhoptry secretion that results in the formation of the moving junction and in the release of parasite factors (e.g ROP2 family members, ROP16, ROP18, and PP2c-hn) that either interact with the parasitophorous vacuole (PV) (ROP2 family and ROP18) or are transported to the host cytoplasm (ROP16) or nucleus [PP2c-hn ( 177 )]. Some of these factors (ROP16 and ROP18) are polymorphic virulence factors. (C). Intracellular parasites reorganize host mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum as well as the host microtubule organizing center and cytoskeleton around the PV. Host microtubules associated with LDL-loaded cholesterol form membrane tubules that push into the PV and are wrapped with the dense granule protein GRA7. (D). Small soluble nutrients freely diffuse across the PV and then are taken up by the parasite presumably by membrane transporters. (E). Host transcription is regulated either by the parasite directly activating host transcription factors or by the parasite triggering host signaling cascades that culminate in activating the host transcription factors. Changes in host gene expression can act to either promote parasite growth, immune evasion, virulence, or bradyzoite development. 