Tissue Biomarkers in Renal Cell Carcinoma: Issues and Solutions Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is an aggressive malignancy associated with a high rate of metastasis. Although several promising therapeutic strategies are now available for the treatment of patients with metastatic kidney cancer, the prognosis of these patients remains poor. Research is ongoing to identify RCC-specific biomarkers that can improve early diagnosis, surveillance of tumor progression, and prediction of patient prognosis. The identification of biomarkers that may predict response to specific therapies will also be useful in stratifying RCC patients for treatment selection. Unfortunately, biomarker detection and measurement in kidney tumor tissues can be significantly biased by the lack of standardization in tissue sample acquisition, storage, and analysis. As a consequence, the establishment of standardized operating procedures is necessary to maximize the accuracy of tissue-based biomarker assays. Herein, we discuss current issues in tissue-based translational research aimed at identifying clinically useful biomarkers for kidney cancer.  Conclusions The identification and validation of clinically relevant tissue biomarkers in RCC are warranted. Besides the well-recognized difficulty in identifying candidate markers to evaluate, several sources of variability in sample acquisition, processing, storage, and analysis significantly affect accuracy and reproducibility of the data, further limiting RCC biomarker development. Automated quantitative imaging systems can be helpful in objectively measuring biomarkers in tissue samples. Nevertheless, these systems are sensitive to technical variables that can influence the intensity of the immunostaining. Thus, strict standardization of the overall assay, using standard operating procedures and appropriate quantifiable reference controls, must be a fundamental prerequisite to achieve accurate and reliable quantification of protein biomarkers in tissues. 