Prevalence and Outcome of Anemia After Restorative Proctocolectomy: A Clinical Literature Review PURPOSE Iron and/or vitamin B12 deficiency anemias, which have adverse effects on patients’ quality of life, are commonly observed and often overlooked complications after restorative proctocolectomy. We performed a systematic review of publications on the prevalence of anemia as well as on the impact of anemia on a range of clinical, functional, quality of life, and economic outcomes in restorative proctocolectomy patients. This information is important to help healthcare providers through a comprehensive overview to increase awareness about a condition that could require therapy to improve patient healthcare and quality of life. METHODS We reviewed the English language publications on the incidence of anemia and its adverse effect after restorative proctocolectomy The United States National Library of Medicine database (MEDLINE), the Excerpta Medica database (EMBASE), the Cochran Library, and the Google® search engine were searched for published articles on the prevalence and impact of anemia in post-restorative proctocolectomy surgical patients. RESULTS The long-term complication most frequently described after RPC is pouchitis. Pouchitis is significantly associated with iron deficiency anemia caused by pouch mucosal bleeding. Other causes are insufficient and/or impaired iron absorption. It has also been observed, however, that restorative proctocolectomy patients with underlying familial adenomatous polyposis rarely develop pouchitis yet show higher rates of iron deficiency anemia compared to those patients with underlying ulcerative colitis. Other causes shown as independent risk factors for iron deficiency anemia in restorative proctocolectomy patients are malignancy, desmoid tumors, and J-pouch configuration. Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is also common after restorative proctocolectomy. About one-third of restorative proctocolectomy patients show abnormal Schilling test and 5 percent have low referenced serum cobalamin. It has been observed that the degree resection of the terminal-ileum, malabsorption, bacterial overgrowth, and dietary factors are among the known causes of cobalamin deficiency. Folate deficiency has not been reported in restorative proctocolectomy patients. Describing restorative proctocolectomy surgery and its outcomes, in patients without anemia, the quality of life is reported excellent regardless of operative technique. CONCLUSIONS Anemia is not uncommon following restorative proctocolectomy and has been shown to have negative effects on the patient's quality of life and the economy and may substantially increase healthcare costs. The treatment of anemia and its underlying causes is important to improving clinical and economic outcomes.  METHODS We reviewed the English language publications on the incidence of anemia after RPC as well as on the impact of anemia on a range of clinical, functional, and economic (direct and indirect costs of care) outcomes as well as QoL after RPC. The United States National Library of Medicine database (MEDLINE), the Excerpta Medica database (EMBASE), the Cochran Library, and the Google® search engine were searched for published articles on the prevalence and impact of anemia in RPC surgical patients. The initial search covered from January 1975 through December 2007. A second search was performed in February 2008 to update the initial search. The search excluded foreign language and nonhuman studies as well as editorials. Searched key words literature that included “ulcerative colitis,” “familial adenomatous polyposis,” “colectomy,” “restorative proctocolectomy,” “pouchitis,” “anemia,” “iron deficiency,” “vitamin B12,” and “folate deficiency.” Additional articles were identified by cross-referencing from papers retrieved in the initial search. Papers were included on the basis of most recent available evidence for each specific point of interest. Final and conclusive agreement was assessed with the k -statistic during the title review and abstract review. If the k -value was ?0.6 the titles were reviewed divided into 2 sets; each was reviewed by only 1 of the 2 researchers. If the k -value was <0.6 reviewers discussed discrepancies followed by other assessments of agreement. Similar process for abstract review like the title review was done, with an increased k -value of 0.7 for acceptance. The same team of researchers involved in the original title, abstract, and article review process conducted hand searches of bibliography from accepted articles and review articles. These hand searches resulted in retrieval of a limited number of additional articles for review.  RESULTS Anemia Anemia is defined as a pathologic condition in which the blood is deficient in either red blood cells (RBC), in hemoglobin (Hb), in total volume, and/or deficient in VB12 or folic acid. 23 – 25 Anemia was defined according to World Health Organization (WHO) criteria hemoglobin (Hb) less than 13.0 g/dL in men and less than 12.0 g/dL in women with hematocrit levels less than 38 percent in men and less than 33 percent in women. Anemia, which is known to cause adverse impact on patient's health related QoL 26 – 28 is frequently observed in RPC patients with a prevalence of 5 to 56 percent. 7 , 29 – 31 There have only been four studies with over 100 patients that assessed hematologic outcomes after RPC 7 , 29 , 32 , 33 and were designed specifically to address the prevalence and possible causes of post-RPC anemia. The identification of the underlying causes of anemia in RPC can be challenging. 33 Anemia may require blood transfusion perioperatively and/or postoperatively. 29 , 34 A Cleveland Clinic assessment 34 of risk factors associated with anemia and the use of perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion and the effect of transfusion on infectious complications after RPC highlighted vital clinical information. They reported that preoperative anemia is a significant risk factor for perioperative transfusion with significant increase in postoperative infectious complications and anastomotic complications after RPC. 34 The study recommended that strategies to correct preoperative anemia, refine indications for transfusion, and define the use of blood salvage techniques may be helpful in decreasing this risk. Another intriguing study from the same institution 35 reports that an intraoperative blood transfusion had a negative impact on fertility in women patients who tried to conceive both before and after RPC. Larger sized benchmark hematologic evaluation and performance improvements from Karolinska University, 36 before and after RPC of functionally acceptable pouches following closure of diverting loop ileostomy is depicted in Tables 1 and 2 . Table 3 depicts the differing definition of anemia and the assessment experiences from different countries. 7 , 29 – 34 , 37 – 44 Iron Deficiency Anemia Iron is a critical element required for the normal functioning of all cells, and is necessary for basic metabolic processes such as oxygen transport, DNA synthesis, cyto-chrome P450 enzyme oxidative metabolism, and electron transport. Fortunately, humans are able to maintain appropriate levels of available iron in the body, even if our iron consumption does not always match the body's iron loss. 23 Physiologically, most stored iron is bound by ferritin molecules; the largest amount of ferritin-bound iron is found in hepatocytes, the bone marrow, and the spleen. The liver's stores of ferritin are the primary physiologic source of reserve iron in the body. Ferritin is the key to this important control of the amount of iron available to the body. Hence, the body has a “buffer” against iron deficiency (if the blood has too little iron, ferritin can release more) and, to a lesser extent, iron overload (if the blood and tissues of the body have too much iron, ferritin can help to store the excess iron). Iron is stored in the Fe (III) oxidation state. To release iron when the body needs it, the iron must be changed from the Fe (III) to the Fe (II) oxidation state. Mean serum transferrin saturation was noted to be insignificantly increased and was above the referenced level in 6 percent to 14 percent after colectomy during the manipulative period with terminal ileostomy and diverting loop ileostomy. 36 During functionally acceptable pouches, 21 percent of the patients were reported to have had serum transferrin lower than the referenced level. 29 , 36 The deprivation of systematic transferrin in these patients corresponded with iron deficiency anemia. 7 , 36 Other researchers 40 , 41 have observed normal referenced transferrin values during the same phases. Until recently, iron-deficiency anemia has not been included as a possible long-term complication 31 , 33 , 37 after RPC. Iron deficiency anemia is seen in about 6 to 21 percent of patients with functionally acceptable pouches. 7 , 29 – 31 , 33 , 36 , 37 Oikonomou et al . 33 showed a higher rate of iron deficiency anemia in RPC patients with underlying FAP compared to RPC for UC. In their study, the multivariable analysis showed that the presence of malignancy or desmoid tumor and the J-pouch configuration were the only independent risk factors associated with iron deficiency anemia in 75 percent of cases. One-fourth of the RPC patient population with anemia showed unclear etiology. Other possible factors observed leading to iron-deficiency anemia include insufficient iron intake, impaired absorption and increased requirements and/or chronic blood loss. 29 , 31 , 33 , 37 A recent Puerto Rican trial 37 evaluated RPC-patients who presented with iron-deficiency anemia. They used clinical, serologic and histologic, and endoscopic data and found that more than half of the patients developed iron-deficiency anemia during long-term follow-up. They noted Iron deficiency anemia in 55.5 percent (10/18) of patients and pouchitis was found in 77 percent (14/18). All ten patients with anemia had pouchitis, suggesting that chronic blood loss because of hemorrhagic mucosal pouchitis as the cause of the anemia; whereas only four of the eight without anemia had pouchitis. Interestingly, in half of the anemic patients, their pouchitis was asymptomatic. 37 These observations are in accordance with other reports that the identified leading cause of iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients to be prolonged pouchitis. 7 , 38 Currently, there is an argument among clinician-scientists suggesting that iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients may be a presenting clinical sign of active pouchitis and that hemoglobin and hematocrit levels should be considered as surveillance tools for pouchitis. 37 Obviously, studies to exclude other possibilities that might cause anemia are required including evaluation of iron intake, absorption, transport, storage, serum iron levels, total binding globulins, ferrin levels, percentage of iron saturation, stool for occult blood, and ferrin receptor levels. Nicholls and associates 6 carried out a metabolic and physiologic assessment in RPC patients and found that a significant number of their patients (5 out of 14) had low serum iron levels. Tulchinsky et al . 39 had similar results and reports iron-deficiency anemia in 22 percent of their RPC patients. Kuisma et al . 38 observed that of 34 of their RPC-patients, 10 (29.4 percent) had hypohemoglobinemia. In both studies, patients were treated and responded well with oral or intravenous iron supplements. Controversially, they found no correlation between pouchitis and iron deficiency anemia. 29 , 31 , 33 , 36 , 45 Tiainen et al . 31 described the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia after long-term follow-up after RPC; but no clear correlation or further investigational assessments have been reported. Among females, the etiology of iron deficiency anemia could not be attributed to a past history of excessive bleeding or metrorrhagia. 33 These studies raise concern that RPC-patients may be at risk of developing iron deficiency anemia, which (if undetected) may ultimately result in other clinical and economic outcome complications. 31 , 33 , 37 Vitamin B<sub>12</sub> Deficiency Anemia VB12, also known as cobalamin, was first isolated in 1948 and obviously shown to be effective in the treatment of pernicious anemia. 24 In recent years, an interest in VB12 has been renewed because of the recognition that cobalamin deficiency occurs in 3 percent to 40 percent of the general population 27 (compared to 25 percent to 53 percent in pouch recipients). The distribution of VB12 deficiency in the general population is roughly 2:1 female:male, but is not the case in RPC patients, in which 53 percent of those patients with low B12 levels were females. The reason for this difference is uncertain, but with a median age of 40, this was not a relatively young study group. Looking at an older population, Lindenbaum et al . 27 found that 15 percent of normal subjects over 60 years of age have undiagnosed VB12 deficiency attributed to food-cobalamin malabsorption as the probable main cause. Absorption of VB12 from foods is complex and a defect in any step can lead to deficiency. 25 In the stomach, gastric acid and pepsin release cobalamin from proteins, and it binds preferentially to salivary R protein. In the upper small intestine, pancreatic enzymes and an alkaline pH digest the R protein-cobalamin complex then binds to intrinsic factor (IF) to form an IF-cobalamin complex. Endogenous VB12, excreted in bile, also binds to IF. The IF-cobalamin complex attaches to membrane receptors in the ileum and is absorbed through endocytosis. Absorption of VB12 by this process is limited (< 3 micrograms per meal). About 1 percent of the VB12 dose is absorbed by passive diffusion even in the absence of IF. 25 The liver stores most of the body's cobalamin (about 1.5 mg), followed by the kidneys, heart, spleen, and brain. Normal body stores of VB12 range from 2 to 10 mg while daily losses are 2 to 5 micrograms. Over 75 percent of the cobalamin excreted in bile is reabsorbed. Urinary excretion of cobalamin is usually low. 46 Because of this efficient enterohepatic circulation, in normal circumstances, VB12 deficiency typically takes a long time to develop. At least 2 to 5 years must elapse from an event until there is noted to be a serum cobalamine decrease. 47 Patients that have undergone RPC are often reported to develop VB12 deficiency anemia. One Swedish trial reported more than one-third of RPC-patients to have had abnormal Schilling tests and 5 percent had serum VB12 below referenced levels ( Table 2 ). 29 Another similar trial from Ireland 32 also observed abnormally low serum VB12 in 25 percent of their RPC-patients. About 40 percent of their RPC patients had three or more sequential VB12 measurements, and of these, 66 percent showed steadily declining VB12 levels. Surprisingly, 94 percent of these patients with low serum VB12 had a normal Schilling test and were negative for bacterial overgrowth. 32 Kuisma et al . 38 observed VB12 deficiency in approximately 5 percent of their 34 RPC-patients. Hylander et al . 42 reported VB12 malabsorption in 32 percent of their RPC-patients. Studies on Kock's original pouch and continent ileostomy patients showed abnormal Schilling tests and abnormal absorption of VB12. 48 , 49 Gadacz et al . 50 studied patients that had undergone the same procedure and found abnormal Schilling test in three out of four patients. They also observed that VB12 was poorly absorbed when a solution containing VB12 without IF, was instilled directly into the pouch. However, they found indirect evidence of active absorption of VB12 by the pouch, since patients who had IF given with VB12 solution directly into the pouch, demonstrated cobalamin absorption. Substitution therapy with VB12 was necessary in about one-third of the patients. Controversially, one Canadian study found no RPC-patients with low serum VB12 levels at a long-term follow-up, and Schilling tests were normal in all of their 38 patients tested. 51 Similarly, observations from St. Mark's Hospital in London 6 and the Mayo Clinic 52 also reported that they found no VB12 abnormalities, though the earlier study noted four patients to have had marginally low values. There are three described possible causes for VB12 deficiency observed in patients who have undergone RPC. First, patients may have had the absorptive capacity for VB12 reduced because of resection of the distal ileum. 53 , 54 The exact minimum length of terminal ileum required for adequate VB12 absorption is unclear, but has been reported to be between 13-36 cm. 53 , 54 Thompson et al . 55 concluded that VB12 malabsorption was likely if more than 60 cm of terminal ileum was resected. Another group 56 discovered receptors for the VB12-IF complex over, “the entire lower 3/5 of the human small intestine,” supporting the fact that excising small amount of terminal ileum does not remove the entire area capable of absorbing VB12. Since the ileocecal valve is removed in RPC procedure, changes in transit time may play a factor. Hagedorn et al . 56 also stated that it is possible that only certain parts of the ileum contain the complete absorption system, rather than just the VB12-IF receptor necessary to transport VB12 from receptor into enterocyte and that there may be additional intracellular factors to be defined that may be only located in the terminal ileum. Some researchers 32 argue that the short length of ileal resection and the fact that all but one patient with a sub-normal VB12 had a normal Schilling test suggests that removal of the terminal ileum segment was not the cause of the falling VB12 levels. This is despite the fact that the manipulated terminal ileum for creation of the pouch is the only known active part for the absorption of VB12 in humans. 57 – 59 The question of whether or not the surface of the defunctionalized intestinal segment during temporary diverting loop ileostomy is sufficient for the cause of malabsorption of VB12 has been widely discussed. 5 , 60 – 62 It has been repeatedly confirmed that cobalamin in sufficient amounts cannot be absorbed in the absence of the terminal ileum. 63 , 64 A reversible absorptive loss of ileal capacity was demonstrated in the case of VB12 deficiency, and it was suggested that a depletion of VB12 further impairs the absorption of VB12. 65 The pouch design with use of a diverting loop ileostomy leads to temporary bypassing the terminal ileum of about a mean length of ?120 cm (range, 45Some researchers212 cm, including the pouch). 2 , 5 , 29 Despite the fact that patients with terminal ileal exclusion less than 20 cm are not at risk of developing VB12 deficiency, 58 the stasis of small bowel contents predis-poses to bacterial overgrowth in both the ileal reservoir and the more proximal ileum until closure of the loop ileostomy. 32 For predicting pernicious anemia in patients with resections of 20 to 60 cm of terminal ileum, options include doing a Schilling test and treating those with abnormal results, empirically treating patients on the presumption that they are at high risk of developing deficiency, or monitoring for biochemical evidence of deficiency. Duerksen et al . 58 and Behrend et al . 61 differ from other studies and showed that patients with ileal resections less than 20 cm had a 38 percent chance of having an abnormal Schilling test result. They found that there were no abnormal test findings if patients had a resection less than 20 cm. 58 Possible reasons for this difference vs. the previously mentioned studies may relate to the patient population studied (all patients in the study by Behrend et al . 61 had ileorectal anastomoses), inadequate urine collections, or there could have been active ileal disease at the time of the Schilling test. Other studies have attempted to correlate length of ileal resection with risk of developing VB12 deficiency. Ooi et al . 66 showed that, over time, VB12 absorption may normalize in patients who have had ileal resections because of intestinal adaptation. This has been shown in pediatric populations but not in adult patients, 67 e.g ., repeat testing in 35 patients did not demonstrate any normalization of previously abnormal test results. 61 However, this latter study also demonstrated that in a few cases the Schilling test repeated in the same individual varied between a normal and abnormal result over time. In a long-term follow-up study of a pediatric population with ileal resections of 3 to 45 cm for necrotizing enterocolitis in infancy, only one patient developed VB12 deficiency after a follow-up at a median of 7.2 years. 68 Despite these controversies, clinicians are left with the dilemma of how to manage VB12 in patients who have had ileal resections. The literature appears consistent that resections more than 60 cm have a high likelihood of causing VB12 deficiency and therefore these patients should empirically be treated with VB12 supplementation. 55 , 61 , 67 However, further studies are needed to determine whether oral VB12 supplementation is effective enough in these patients. Second, there may be “competition” for VB12 within the pouch secondary to the recognized bacterial over-growth. 69 Using a quantitative method, O'Connell et al . 70 found evidence of ileal bacterial overgrowth in all 20 of their study RPC-patients. They stated that, rather than bacterial overgrowth, it is an increase in anaerobic bacteria in the pouch that reduces VB12 absorption by binding the vitamin in its free and IF-complex states, thereby reducing absorption without altering the processes by which it occurs. While some studies 71 , 72 concluded that bacterial overgrowth of the small bowel may have lead to VB12 deficiency, Riordan et al . 73 found that serum VB12 levels were not significantly different in subjects with or without such bacterial overgrowth. Other studies 73 , 74 have shown that while the proportion of aerobic bacteria is relatively high within ileostomy flora, the pouch is colonized by a bacterial population with a composition comparable to the physiologic colonic flora, with anaerobic bacteria outnumbering the aerobic flora by several orders of magnitude. Despite the fact that absolute counts of bacteria are lower in pouch contents (1010/g) than in the normal large intestine, metabolic activity is comparable. 74 – 77 In two other studies 78 , 79 hydrogen breath tests were performed after the patients were given lactulose which causes fermentation of colonic bacteria with the subsequent release of hydrogen. Using this technique, bacterial overgrowth was reported in 53 to 68 percent of the RPC-patients respectively. In contrast, Coull et al . study 32 found no evidence of bacterial overgrowth using the hydrogen breath test, but no quantitive studies of the bacterial flora were undertaken. Since their RPC-patients were not given lactulose in the study 21 it may explain the discrepancy in their results. Further studies of the effect of the bacterial flora on VB12 absorption in pouch patients would be required to determine the role of bacterial overgrowth. Finally, patients with UC often report dietary intolerances. 80 , 81 RPC largely improves preoperative dietary intolerances in 67 percent 82 but in 25 percent remain unchanged while in 18 percent show exacerbated. Some RPC-patients however, are at risk for onset of new dietary intolerances 82 , 83 and in some a concomitant worsening of a preoperative dietary intolerance. 82 There was, however, a 20 to 40 percent incidence of post-RPC dietary intolerance across all dietary intolerance categories examined. 82 However, patients with UC appear to be more susceptible to developing persistent dietary intolerance after RPC than other patient populations undergoing RPC. 82 The observed VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients may simply because of dietary restriction 82 , 83 since little is known about the long-term nutritional consequences of ileal pouch surgery. Clinicians, however, are aware that RPC-patients avoid foods that increase bowel frequency. It is of interest that patients, who have an end ileostomy without a pouch, have also been shown to develop VB12 deficiency. 77 In these patients, a shortened intestinal transit time has been suggested as a contributory or alternative explanation for B12 malabsorption. Another likely dietary cause of cobalamin deficiency in RPC patients is food-cobalamin malabsorption secondary to achlorhydria/ hypochlorhydria which could be confirmed by testing for abnormal absorption of protein-bound cyanocobalamin. 84 , 85 Although the exact cause of low VB12 levels in RPC-patients has not been determined, it has been observed to be possible to correct low serum VB12 levels by giving oral cyanocobalamin. All VB12 deficient RPC-patients who were given oral VB12 had their deficiency corrected. 32 Oral VB12 replacements is as effective as intramuscular injections, even in patients with pernicious anemia or ileal disease. This suggests that the absorption mechanism is normal and may point to either an inadequate dietary intake or a competitive bacteriologic environment for VB12 within the pouch, despite the fact that the breath test was observed to be normal. 32 Andres et al . 86 reported that all of their patients with subnormal VB12 levels had normal VB12 levels within two months of treatment with oral cyanocobalamin (500–1000 2g/day). Based on the results of the aforementioned studies, the risk of developing VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients is much greater than has previously been recognized. It is assumed that the higher incidence in some studies is related to a longer period of follow-up. 32 Combining the above studies as the global pouch community (GPC) has shown that one-quarter of patients who have undergone RPC have subnormal VB12 levels. 32 These levels progressively fall in up to two-thirds of patients. Since this may have serious clinical consequences, VB12 levels should be monitored in RPC-patients, and dietary advice should be given as most RPC-patients suffer dietary restrictions, forcing them to adopt a fixed dietary regimen, 87 such as being vegetarian. 29 , 88 Cobalamine - folate interrelationships and the effects of folate deficiency on VB12 are presented below.  RESULTS Anemia Anemia is defined as a pathologic condition in which the blood is deficient in either red blood cells (RBC), in hemoglobin (Hb), in total volume, and/or deficient in VB12 or folic acid. 23 – 25 Anemia was defined according to World Health Organization (WHO) criteria hemoglobin (Hb) less than 13.0 g/dL in men and less than 12.0 g/dL in women with hematocrit levels less than 38 percent in men and less than 33 percent in women. Anemia, which is known to cause adverse impact on patient's health related QoL 26 – 28 is frequently observed in RPC patients with a prevalence of 5 to 56 percent. 7 , 29 – 31 There have only been four studies with over 100 patients that assessed hematologic outcomes after RPC 7 , 29 , 32 , 33 and were designed specifically to address the prevalence and possible causes of post-RPC anemia. The identification of the underlying causes of anemia in RPC can be challenging. 33 Anemia may require blood transfusion perioperatively and/or postoperatively. 29 , 34 A Cleveland Clinic assessment 34 of risk factors associated with anemia and the use of perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion and the effect of transfusion on infectious complications after RPC highlighted vital clinical information. They reported that preoperative anemia is a significant risk factor for perioperative transfusion with significant increase in postoperative infectious complications and anastomotic complications after RPC. 34 The study recommended that strategies to correct preoperative anemia, refine indications for transfusion, and define the use of blood salvage techniques may be helpful in decreasing this risk. Another intriguing study from the same institution 35 reports that an intraoperative blood transfusion had a negative impact on fertility in women patients who tried to conceive both before and after RPC. Larger sized benchmark hematologic evaluation and performance improvements from Karolinska University, 36 before and after RPC of functionally acceptable pouches following closure of diverting loop ileostomy is depicted in Tables 1 and 2 . Table 3 depicts the differing definition of anemia and the assessment experiences from different countries. 7 , 29 – 34 , 37 – 44 Iron Deficiency Anemia Iron is a critical element required for the normal functioning of all cells, and is necessary for basic metabolic processes such as oxygen transport, DNA synthesis, cyto-chrome P450 enzyme oxidative metabolism, and electron transport. Fortunately, humans are able to maintain appropriate levels of available iron in the body, even if our iron consumption does not always match the body's iron loss. 23 Physiologically, most stored iron is bound by ferritin molecules; the largest amount of ferritin-bound iron is found in hepatocytes, the bone marrow, and the spleen. The liver's stores of ferritin are the primary physiologic source of reserve iron in the body. Ferritin is the key to this important control of the amount of iron available to the body. Hence, the body has a “buffer” against iron deficiency (if the blood has too little iron, ferritin can release more) and, to a lesser extent, iron overload (if the blood and tissues of the body have too much iron, ferritin can help to store the excess iron). Iron is stored in the Fe (III) oxidation state. To release iron when the body needs it, the iron must be changed from the Fe (III) to the Fe (II) oxidation state. Mean serum transferrin saturation was noted to be insignificantly increased and was above the referenced level in 6 percent to 14 percent after colectomy during the manipulative period with terminal ileostomy and diverting loop ileostomy. 36 During functionally acceptable pouches, 21 percent of the patients were reported to have had serum transferrin lower than the referenced level. 29 , 36 The deprivation of systematic transferrin in these patients corresponded with iron deficiency anemia. 7 , 36 Other researchers 40 , 41 have observed normal referenced transferrin values during the same phases. Until recently, iron-deficiency anemia has not been included as a possible long-term complication 31 , 33 , 37 after RPC. Iron deficiency anemia is seen in about 6 to 21 percent of patients with functionally acceptable pouches. 7 , 29 – 31 , 33 , 36 , 37 Oikonomou et al . 33 showed a higher rate of iron deficiency anemia in RPC patients with underlying FAP compared to RPC for UC. In their study, the multivariable analysis showed that the presence of malignancy or desmoid tumor and the J-pouch configuration were the only independent risk factors associated with iron deficiency anemia in 75 percent of cases. One-fourth of the RPC patient population with anemia showed unclear etiology. Other possible factors observed leading to iron-deficiency anemia include insufficient iron intake, impaired absorption and increased requirements and/or chronic blood loss. 29 , 31 , 33 , 37 A recent Puerto Rican trial 37 evaluated RPC-patients who presented with iron-deficiency anemia. They used clinical, serologic and histologic, and endoscopic data and found that more than half of the patients developed iron-deficiency anemia during long-term follow-up. They noted Iron deficiency anemia in 55.5 percent (10/18) of patients and pouchitis was found in 77 percent (14/18). All ten patients with anemia had pouchitis, suggesting that chronic blood loss because of hemorrhagic mucosal pouchitis as the cause of the anemia; whereas only four of the eight without anemia had pouchitis. Interestingly, in half of the anemic patients, their pouchitis was asymptomatic. 37 These observations are in accordance with other reports that the identified leading cause of iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients to be prolonged pouchitis. 7 , 38 Currently, there is an argument among clinician-scientists suggesting that iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients may be a presenting clinical sign of active pouchitis and that hemoglobin and hematocrit levels should be considered as surveillance tools for pouchitis. 37 Obviously, studies to exclude other possibilities that might cause anemia are required including evaluation of iron intake, absorption, transport, storage, serum iron levels, total binding globulins, ferrin levels, percentage of iron saturation, stool for occult blood, and ferrin receptor levels. Nicholls and associates 6 carried out a metabolic and physiologic assessment in RPC patients and found that a significant number of their patients (5 out of 14) had low serum iron levels. Tulchinsky et al . 39 had similar results and reports iron-deficiency anemia in 22 percent of their RPC patients. Kuisma et al . 38 observed that of 34 of their RPC-patients, 10 (29.4 percent) had hypohemoglobinemia. In both studies, patients were treated and responded well with oral or intravenous iron supplements. Controversially, they found no correlation between pouchitis and iron deficiency anemia. 29 , 31 , 33 , 36 , 45 Tiainen et al . 31 described the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia after long-term follow-up after RPC; but no clear correlation or further investigational assessments have been reported. Among females, the etiology of iron deficiency anemia could not be attributed to a past history of excessive bleeding or metrorrhagia. 33 These studies raise concern that RPC-patients may be at risk of developing iron deficiency anemia, which (if undetected) may ultimately result in other clinical and economic outcome complications. 31 , 33 , 37 Vitamin B<sub>12</sub> Deficiency Anemia VB12, also known as cobalamin, was first isolated in 1948 and obviously shown to be effective in the treatment of pernicious anemia. 24 In recent years, an interest in VB12 has been renewed because of the recognition that cobalamin deficiency occurs in 3 percent to 40 percent of the general population 27 (compared to 25 percent to 53 percent in pouch recipients). The distribution of VB12 deficiency in the general population is roughly 2:1 female:male, but is not the case in RPC patients, in which 53 percent of those patients with low B12 levels were females. The reason for this difference is uncertain, but with a median age of 40, this was not a relatively young study group. Looking at an older population, Lindenbaum et al . 27 found that 15 percent of normal subjects over 60 years of age have undiagnosed VB12 deficiency attributed to food-cobalamin malabsorption as the probable main cause. Absorption of VB12 from foods is complex and a defect in any step can lead to deficiency. 25 In the stomach, gastric acid and pepsin release cobalamin from proteins, and it binds preferentially to salivary R protein. In the upper small intestine, pancreatic enzymes and an alkaline pH digest the R protein-cobalamin complex then binds to intrinsic factor (IF) to form an IF-cobalamin complex. Endogenous VB12, excreted in bile, also binds to IF. The IF-cobalamin complex attaches to membrane receptors in the ileum and is absorbed through endocytosis. Absorption of VB12 by this process is limited (< 3 micrograms per meal). About 1 percent of the VB12 dose is absorbed by passive diffusion even in the absence of IF. 25 The liver stores most of the body's cobalamin (about 1.5 mg), followed by the kidneys, heart, spleen, and brain. Normal body stores of VB12 range from 2 to 10 mg while daily losses are 2 to 5 micrograms. Over 75 percent of the cobalamin excreted in bile is reabsorbed. Urinary excretion of cobalamin is usually low. 46 Because of this efficient enterohepatic circulation, in normal circumstances, VB12 deficiency typically takes a long time to develop. At least 2 to 5 years must elapse from an event until there is noted to be a serum cobalamine decrease. 47 Patients that have undergone RPC are often reported to develop VB12 deficiency anemia. One Swedish trial reported more than one-third of RPC-patients to have had abnormal Schilling tests and 5 percent had serum VB12 below referenced levels ( Table 2 ). 29 Another similar trial from Ireland 32 also observed abnormally low serum VB12 in 25 percent of their RPC-patients. About 40 percent of their RPC patients had three or more sequential VB12 measurements, and of these, 66 percent showed steadily declining VB12 levels. Surprisingly, 94 percent of these patients with low serum VB12 had a normal Schilling test and were negative for bacterial overgrowth. 32 Kuisma et al . 38 observed VB12 deficiency in approximately 5 percent of their 34 RPC-patients. Hylander et al . 42 reported VB12 malabsorption in 32 percent of their RPC-patients. Studies on Kock's original pouch and continent ileostomy patients showed abnormal Schilling tests and abnormal absorption of VB12. 48 , 49 Gadacz et al . 50 studied patients that had undergone the same procedure and found abnormal Schilling test in three out of four patients. They also observed that VB12 was poorly absorbed when a solution containing VB12 without IF, was instilled directly into the pouch. However, they found indirect evidence of active absorption of VB12 by the pouch, since patients who had IF given with VB12 solution directly into the pouch, demonstrated cobalamin absorption. Substitution therapy with VB12 was necessary in about one-third of the patients. Controversially, one Canadian study found no RPC-patients with low serum VB12 levels at a long-term follow-up, and Schilling tests were normal in all of their 38 patients tested. 51 Similarly, observations from St. Mark's Hospital in London 6 and the Mayo Clinic 52 also reported that they found no VB12 abnormalities, though the earlier study noted four patients to have had marginally low values. There are three described possible causes for VB12 deficiency observed in patients who have undergone RPC. First, patients may have had the absorptive capacity for VB12 reduced because of resection of the distal ileum. 53 , 54 The exact minimum length of terminal ileum required for adequate VB12 absorption is unclear, but has been reported to be between 13-36 cm. 53 , 54 Thompson et al . 55 concluded that VB12 malabsorption was likely if more than 60 cm of terminal ileum was resected. Another group 56 discovered receptors for the VB12-IF complex over, “the entire lower 3/5 of the human small intestine,” supporting the fact that excising small amount of terminal ileum does not remove the entire area capable of absorbing VB12. Since the ileocecal valve is removed in RPC procedure, changes in transit time may play a factor. Hagedorn et al . 56 also stated that it is possible that only certain parts of the ileum contain the complete absorption system, rather than just the VB12-IF receptor necessary to transport VB12 from receptor into enterocyte and that there may be additional intracellular factors to be defined that may be only located in the terminal ileum. Some researchers 32 argue that the short length of ileal resection and the fact that all but one patient with a sub-normal VB12 had a normal Schilling test suggests that removal of the terminal ileum segment was not the cause of the falling VB12 levels. This is despite the fact that the manipulated terminal ileum for creation of the pouch is the only known active part for the absorption of VB12 in humans. 57 – 59 The question of whether or not the surface of the defunctionalized intestinal segment during temporary diverting loop ileostomy is sufficient for the cause of malabsorption of VB12 has been widely discussed. 5 , 60 – 62 It has been repeatedly confirmed that cobalamin in sufficient amounts cannot be absorbed in the absence of the terminal ileum. 63 , 64 A reversible absorptive loss of ileal capacity was demonstrated in the case of VB12 deficiency, and it was suggested that a depletion of VB12 further impairs the absorption of VB12. 65 The pouch design with use of a diverting loop ileostomy leads to temporary bypassing the terminal ileum of about a mean length of ?120 cm (range, 45Some researchers212 cm, including the pouch). 2 , 5 , 29 Despite the fact that patients with terminal ileal exclusion less than 20 cm are not at risk of developing VB12 deficiency, 58 the stasis of small bowel contents predis-poses to bacterial overgrowth in both the ileal reservoir and the more proximal ileum until closure of the loop ileostomy. 32 For predicting pernicious anemia in patients with resections of 20 to 60 cm of terminal ileum, options include doing a Schilling test and treating those with abnormal results, empirically treating patients on the presumption that they are at high risk of developing deficiency, or monitoring for biochemical evidence of deficiency. Duerksen et al . 58 and Behrend et al . 61 differ from other studies and showed that patients with ileal resections less than 20 cm had a 38 percent chance of having an abnormal Schilling test result. They found that there were no abnormal test findings if patients had a resection less than 20 cm. 58 Possible reasons for this difference vs. the previously mentioned studies may relate to the patient population studied (all patients in the study by Behrend et al . 61 had ileorectal anastomoses), inadequate urine collections, or there could have been active ileal disease at the time of the Schilling test. Other studies have attempted to correlate length of ileal resection with risk of developing VB12 deficiency. Ooi et al . 66 showed that, over time, VB12 absorption may normalize in patients who have had ileal resections because of intestinal adaptation. This has been shown in pediatric populations but not in adult patients, 67 e.g ., repeat testing in 35 patients did not demonstrate any normalization of previously abnormal test results. 61 However, this latter study also demonstrated that in a few cases the Schilling test repeated in the same individual varied between a normal and abnormal result over time. In a long-term follow-up study of a pediatric population with ileal resections of 3 to 45 cm for necrotizing enterocolitis in infancy, only one patient developed VB12 deficiency after a follow-up at a median of 7.2 years. 68 Despite these controversies, clinicians are left with the dilemma of how to manage VB12 in patients who have had ileal resections. The literature appears consistent that resections more than 60 cm have a high likelihood of causing VB12 deficiency and therefore these patients should empirically be treated with VB12 supplementation. 55 , 61 , 67 However, further studies are needed to determine whether oral VB12 supplementation is effective enough in these patients. Second, there may be “competition” for VB12 within the pouch secondary to the recognized bacterial over-growth. 69 Using a quantitative method, O'Connell et al . 70 found evidence of ileal bacterial overgrowth in all 20 of their study RPC-patients. They stated that, rather than bacterial overgrowth, it is an increase in anaerobic bacteria in the pouch that reduces VB12 absorption by binding the vitamin in its free and IF-complex states, thereby reducing absorption without altering the processes by which it occurs. While some studies 71 , 72 concluded that bacterial overgrowth of the small bowel may have lead to VB12 deficiency, Riordan et al . 73 found that serum VB12 levels were not significantly different in subjects with or without such bacterial overgrowth. Other studies 73 , 74 have shown that while the proportion of aerobic bacteria is relatively high within ileostomy flora, the pouch is colonized by a bacterial population with a composition comparable to the physiologic colonic flora, with anaerobic bacteria outnumbering the aerobic flora by several orders of magnitude. Despite the fact that absolute counts of bacteria are lower in pouch contents (1010/g) than in the normal large intestine, metabolic activity is comparable. 74 – 77 In two other studies 78 , 79 hydrogen breath tests were performed after the patients were given lactulose which causes fermentation of colonic bacteria with the subsequent release of hydrogen. Using this technique, bacterial overgrowth was reported in 53 to 68 percent of the RPC-patients respectively. In contrast, Coull et al . study 32 found no evidence of bacterial overgrowth using the hydrogen breath test, but no quantitive studies of the bacterial flora were undertaken. Since their RPC-patients were not given lactulose in the study 21 it may explain the discrepancy in their results. Further studies of the effect of the bacterial flora on VB12 absorption in pouch patients would be required to determine the role of bacterial overgrowth. Finally, patients with UC often report dietary intolerances. 80 , 81 RPC largely improves preoperative dietary intolerances in 67 percent 82 but in 25 percent remain unchanged while in 18 percent show exacerbated. Some RPC-patients however, are at risk for onset of new dietary intolerances 82 , 83 and in some a concomitant worsening of a preoperative dietary intolerance. 82 There was, however, a 20 to 40 percent incidence of post-RPC dietary intolerance across all dietary intolerance categories examined. 82 However, patients with UC appear to be more susceptible to developing persistent dietary intolerance after RPC than other patient populations undergoing RPC. 82 The observed VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients may simply because of dietary restriction 82 , 83 since little is known about the long-term nutritional consequences of ileal pouch surgery. Clinicians, however, are aware that RPC-patients avoid foods that increase bowel frequency. It is of interest that patients, who have an end ileostomy without a pouch, have also been shown to develop VB12 deficiency. 77 In these patients, a shortened intestinal transit time has been suggested as a contributory or alternative explanation for B12 malabsorption. Another likely dietary cause of cobalamin deficiency in RPC patients is food-cobalamin malabsorption secondary to achlorhydria/ hypochlorhydria which could be confirmed by testing for abnormal absorption of protein-bound cyanocobalamin. 84 , 85 Although the exact cause of low VB12 levels in RPC-patients has not been determined, it has been observed to be possible to correct low serum VB12 levels by giving oral cyanocobalamin. All VB12 deficient RPC-patients who were given oral VB12 had their deficiency corrected. 32 Oral VB12 replacements is as effective as intramuscular injections, even in patients with pernicious anemia or ileal disease. This suggests that the absorption mechanism is normal and may point to either an inadequate dietary intake or a competitive bacteriologic environment for VB12 within the pouch, despite the fact that the breath test was observed to be normal. 32 Andres et al . 86 reported that all of their patients with subnormal VB12 levels had normal VB12 levels within two months of treatment with oral cyanocobalamin (500–1000 2g/day). Based on the results of the aforementioned studies, the risk of developing VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients is much greater than has previously been recognized. It is assumed that the higher incidence in some studies is related to a longer period of follow-up. 32 Combining the above studies as the global pouch community (GPC) has shown that one-quarter of patients who have undergone RPC have subnormal VB12 levels. 32 These levels progressively fall in up to two-thirds of patients. Since this may have serious clinical consequences, VB12 levels should be monitored in RPC-patients, and dietary advice should be given as most RPC-patients suffer dietary restrictions, forcing them to adopt a fixed dietary regimen, 87 such as being vegetarian. 29 , 88 Cobalamine - folate interrelationships and the effects of folate deficiency on VB12 are presented below.  Anemia Anemia is defined as a pathologic condition in which the blood is deficient in either red blood cells (RBC), in hemoglobin (Hb), in total volume, and/or deficient in VB12 or folic acid. 23 – 25 Anemia was defined according to World Health Organization (WHO) criteria hemoglobin (Hb) less than 13.0 g/dL in men and less than 12.0 g/dL in women with hematocrit levels less than 38 percent in men and less than 33 percent in women. Anemia, which is known to cause adverse impact on patient's health related QoL 26 – 28 is frequently observed in RPC patients with a prevalence of 5 to 56 percent. 7 , 29 – 31 There have only been four studies with over 100 patients that assessed hematologic outcomes after RPC 7 , 29 , 32 , 33 and were designed specifically to address the prevalence and possible causes of post-RPC anemia. The identification of the underlying causes of anemia in RPC can be challenging. 33 Anemia may require blood transfusion perioperatively and/or postoperatively. 29 , 34 A Cleveland Clinic assessment 34 of risk factors associated with anemia and the use of perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion and the effect of transfusion on infectious complications after RPC highlighted vital clinical information. They reported that preoperative anemia is a significant risk factor for perioperative transfusion with significant increase in postoperative infectious complications and anastomotic complications after RPC. 34 The study recommended that strategies to correct preoperative anemia, refine indications for transfusion, and define the use of blood salvage techniques may be helpful in decreasing this risk. Another intriguing study from the same institution 35 reports that an intraoperative blood transfusion had a negative impact on fertility in women patients who tried to conceive both before and after RPC. Larger sized benchmark hematologic evaluation and performance improvements from Karolinska University, 36 before and after RPC of functionally acceptable pouches following closure of diverting loop ileostomy is depicted in Tables 1 and 2 . Table 3 depicts the differing definition of anemia and the assessment experiences from different countries. 7 , 29 – 34 , 37 – 44  Anemia Anemia is defined as a pathologic condition in which the blood is deficient in either red blood cells (RBC), in hemoglobin (Hb), in total volume, and/or deficient in VB12 or folic acid. 23 – 25 Anemia was defined according to World Health Organization (WHO) criteria hemoglobin (Hb) less than 13.0 g/dL in men and less than 12.0 g/dL in women with hematocrit levels less than 38 percent in men and less than 33 percent in women. Anemia, which is known to cause adverse impact on patient's health related QoL 26 – 28 is frequently observed in RPC patients with a prevalence of 5 to 56 percent. 7 , 29 – 31 There have only been four studies with over 100 patients that assessed hematologic outcomes after RPC 7 , 29 , 32 , 33 and were designed specifically to address the prevalence and possible causes of post-RPC anemia. The identification of the underlying causes of anemia in RPC can be challenging. 33 Anemia may require blood transfusion perioperatively and/or postoperatively. 29 , 34 A Cleveland Clinic assessment 34 of risk factors associated with anemia and the use of perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion and the effect of transfusion on infectious complications after RPC highlighted vital clinical information. They reported that preoperative anemia is a significant risk factor for perioperative transfusion with significant increase in postoperative infectious complications and anastomotic complications after RPC. 34 The study recommended that strategies to correct preoperative anemia, refine indications for transfusion, and define the use of blood salvage techniques may be helpful in decreasing this risk. Another intriguing study from the same institution 35 reports that an intraoperative blood transfusion had a negative impact on fertility in women patients who tried to conceive both before and after RPC. Larger sized benchmark hematologic evaluation and performance improvements from Karolinska University, 36 before and after RPC of functionally acceptable pouches following closure of diverting loop ileostomy is depicted in Tables 1 and 2 . Table 3 depicts the differing definition of anemia and the assessment experiences from different countries. 7 , 29 – 34 , 37 – 44  Iron Deficiency Anemia Iron is a critical element required for the normal functioning of all cells, and is necessary for basic metabolic processes such as oxygen transport, DNA synthesis, cyto-chrome P450 enzyme oxidative metabolism, and electron transport. Fortunately, humans are able to maintain appropriate levels of available iron in the body, even if our iron consumption does not always match the body's iron loss. 23 Physiologically, most stored iron is bound by ferritin molecules; the largest amount of ferritin-bound iron is found in hepatocytes, the bone marrow, and the spleen. The liver's stores of ferritin are the primary physiologic source of reserve iron in the body. Ferritin is the key to this important control of the amount of iron available to the body. Hence, the body has a “buffer” against iron deficiency (if the blood has too little iron, ferritin can release more) and, to a lesser extent, iron overload (if the blood and tissues of the body have too much iron, ferritin can help to store the excess iron). Iron is stored in the Fe (III) oxidation state. To release iron when the body needs it, the iron must be changed from the Fe (III) to the Fe (II) oxidation state. Mean serum transferrin saturation was noted to be insignificantly increased and was above the referenced level in 6 percent to 14 percent after colectomy during the manipulative period with terminal ileostomy and diverting loop ileostomy. 36 During functionally acceptable pouches, 21 percent of the patients were reported to have had serum transferrin lower than the referenced level. 29 , 36 The deprivation of systematic transferrin in these patients corresponded with iron deficiency anemia. 7 , 36 Other researchers 40 , 41 have observed normal referenced transferrin values during the same phases. Until recently, iron-deficiency anemia has not been included as a possible long-term complication 31 , 33 , 37 after RPC. Iron deficiency anemia is seen in about 6 to 21 percent of patients with functionally acceptable pouches. 7 , 29 – 31 , 33 , 36 , 37 Oikonomou et al . 33 showed a higher rate of iron deficiency anemia in RPC patients with underlying FAP compared to RPC for UC. In their study, the multivariable analysis showed that the presence of malignancy or desmoid tumor and the J-pouch configuration were the only independent risk factors associated with iron deficiency anemia in 75 percent of cases. One-fourth of the RPC patient population with anemia showed unclear etiology. Other possible factors observed leading to iron-deficiency anemia include insufficient iron intake, impaired absorption and increased requirements and/or chronic blood loss. 29 , 31 , 33 , 37 A recent Puerto Rican trial 37 evaluated RPC-patients who presented with iron-deficiency anemia. They used clinical, serologic and histologic, and endoscopic data and found that more than half of the patients developed iron-deficiency anemia during long-term follow-up. They noted Iron deficiency anemia in 55.5 percent (10/18) of patients and pouchitis was found in 77 percent (14/18). All ten patients with anemia had pouchitis, suggesting that chronic blood loss because of hemorrhagic mucosal pouchitis as the cause of the anemia; whereas only four of the eight without anemia had pouchitis. Interestingly, in half of the anemic patients, their pouchitis was asymptomatic. 37 These observations are in accordance with other reports that the identified leading cause of iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients to be prolonged pouchitis. 7 , 38 Currently, there is an argument among clinician-scientists suggesting that iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients may be a presenting clinical sign of active pouchitis and that hemoglobin and hematocrit levels should be considered as surveillance tools for pouchitis. 37 Obviously, studies to exclude other possibilities that might cause anemia are required including evaluation of iron intake, absorption, transport, storage, serum iron levels, total binding globulins, ferrin levels, percentage of iron saturation, stool for occult blood, and ferrin receptor levels. Nicholls and associates 6 carried out a metabolic and physiologic assessment in RPC patients and found that a significant number of their patients (5 out of 14) had low serum iron levels. Tulchinsky et al . 39 had similar results and reports iron-deficiency anemia in 22 percent of their RPC patients. Kuisma et al . 38 observed that of 34 of their RPC-patients, 10 (29.4 percent) had hypohemoglobinemia. In both studies, patients were treated and responded well with oral or intravenous iron supplements. Controversially, they found no correlation between pouchitis and iron deficiency anemia. 29 , 31 , 33 , 36 , 45 Tiainen et al . 31 described the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia after long-term follow-up after RPC; but no clear correlation or further investigational assessments have been reported. Among females, the etiology of iron deficiency anemia could not be attributed to a past history of excessive bleeding or metrorrhagia. 33 These studies raise concern that RPC-patients may be at risk of developing iron deficiency anemia, which (if undetected) may ultimately result in other clinical and economic outcome complications. 31 , 33 , 37  Iron Deficiency Anemia Iron is a critical element required for the normal functioning of all cells, and is necessary for basic metabolic processes such as oxygen transport, DNA synthesis, cyto-chrome P450 enzyme oxidative metabolism, and electron transport. Fortunately, humans are able to maintain appropriate levels of available iron in the body, even if our iron consumption does not always match the body's iron loss. 23 Physiologically, most stored iron is bound by ferritin molecules; the largest amount of ferritin-bound iron is found in hepatocytes, the bone marrow, and the spleen. The liver's stores of ferritin are the primary physiologic source of reserve iron in the body. Ferritin is the key to this important control of the amount of iron available to the body. Hence, the body has a “buffer” against iron deficiency (if the blood has too little iron, ferritin can release more) and, to a lesser extent, iron overload (if the blood and tissues of the body have too much iron, ferritin can help to store the excess iron). Iron is stored in the Fe (III) oxidation state. To release iron when the body needs it, the iron must be changed from the Fe (III) to the Fe (II) oxidation state. Mean serum transferrin saturation was noted to be insignificantly increased and was above the referenced level in 6 percent to 14 percent after colectomy during the manipulative period with terminal ileostomy and diverting loop ileostomy. 36 During functionally acceptable pouches, 21 percent of the patients were reported to have had serum transferrin lower than the referenced level. 29 , 36 The deprivation of systematic transferrin in these patients corresponded with iron deficiency anemia. 7 , 36 Other researchers 40 , 41 have observed normal referenced transferrin values during the same phases. Until recently, iron-deficiency anemia has not been included as a possible long-term complication 31 , 33 , 37 after RPC. Iron deficiency anemia is seen in about 6 to 21 percent of patients with functionally acceptable pouches. 7 , 29 – 31 , 33 , 36 , 37 Oikonomou et al . 33 showed a higher rate of iron deficiency anemia in RPC patients with underlying FAP compared to RPC for UC. In their study, the multivariable analysis showed that the presence of malignancy or desmoid tumor and the J-pouch configuration were the only independent risk factors associated with iron deficiency anemia in 75 percent of cases. One-fourth of the RPC patient population with anemia showed unclear etiology. Other possible factors observed leading to iron-deficiency anemia include insufficient iron intake, impaired absorption and increased requirements and/or chronic blood loss. 29 , 31 , 33 , 37 A recent Puerto Rican trial 37 evaluated RPC-patients who presented with iron-deficiency anemia. They used clinical, serologic and histologic, and endoscopic data and found that more than half of the patients developed iron-deficiency anemia during long-term follow-up. They noted Iron deficiency anemia in 55.5 percent (10/18) of patients and pouchitis was found in 77 percent (14/18). All ten patients with anemia had pouchitis, suggesting that chronic blood loss because of hemorrhagic mucosal pouchitis as the cause of the anemia; whereas only four of the eight without anemia had pouchitis. Interestingly, in half of the anemic patients, their pouchitis was asymptomatic. 37 These observations are in accordance with other reports that the identified leading cause of iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients to be prolonged pouchitis. 7 , 38 Currently, there is an argument among clinician-scientists suggesting that iron-deficiency anemia in RPC patients may be a presenting clinical sign of active pouchitis and that hemoglobin and hematocrit levels should be considered as surveillance tools for pouchitis. 37 Obviously, studies to exclude other possibilities that might cause anemia are required including evaluation of iron intake, absorption, transport, storage, serum iron levels, total binding globulins, ferrin levels, percentage of iron saturation, stool for occult blood, and ferrin receptor levels. Nicholls and associates 6 carried out a metabolic and physiologic assessment in RPC patients and found that a significant number of their patients (5 out of 14) had low serum iron levels. Tulchinsky et al . 39 had similar results and reports iron-deficiency anemia in 22 percent of their RPC patients. Kuisma et al . 38 observed that of 34 of their RPC-patients, 10 (29.4 percent) had hypohemoglobinemia. In both studies, patients were treated and responded well with oral or intravenous iron supplements. Controversially, they found no correlation between pouchitis and iron deficiency anemia. 29 , 31 , 33 , 36 , 45 Tiainen et al . 31 described the prevalence of iron deficiency anemia after long-term follow-up after RPC; but no clear correlation or further investigational assessments have been reported. Among females, the etiology of iron deficiency anemia could not be attributed to a past history of excessive bleeding or metrorrhagia. 33 These studies raise concern that RPC-patients may be at risk of developing iron deficiency anemia, which (if undetected) may ultimately result in other clinical and economic outcome complications. 31 , 33 , 37  Vitamin B<sub>12</sub> Deficiency Anemia VB12, also known as cobalamin, was first isolated in 1948 and obviously shown to be effective in the treatment of pernicious anemia. 24 In recent years, an interest in VB12 has been renewed because of the recognition that cobalamin deficiency occurs in 3 percent to 40 percent of the general population 27 (compared to 25 percent to 53 percent in pouch recipients). The distribution of VB12 deficiency in the general population is roughly 2:1 female:male, but is not the case in RPC patients, in which 53 percent of those patients with low B12 levels were females. The reason for this difference is uncertain, but with a median age of 40, this was not a relatively young study group. Looking at an older population, Lindenbaum et al . 27 found that 15 percent of normal subjects over 60 years of age have undiagnosed VB12 deficiency attributed to food-cobalamin malabsorption as the probable main cause. Absorption of VB12 from foods is complex and a defect in any step can lead to deficiency. 25 In the stomach, gastric acid and pepsin release cobalamin from proteins, and it binds preferentially to salivary R protein. In the upper small intestine, pancreatic enzymes and an alkaline pH digest the R protein-cobalamin complex then binds to intrinsic factor (IF) to form an IF-cobalamin complex. Endogenous VB12, excreted in bile, also binds to IF. The IF-cobalamin complex attaches to membrane receptors in the ileum and is absorbed through endocytosis. Absorption of VB12 by this process is limited (< 3 micrograms per meal). About 1 percent of the VB12 dose is absorbed by passive diffusion even in the absence of IF. 25 The liver stores most of the body's cobalamin (about 1.5 mg), followed by the kidneys, heart, spleen, and brain. Normal body stores of VB12 range from 2 to 10 mg while daily losses are 2 to 5 micrograms. Over 75 percent of the cobalamin excreted in bile is reabsorbed. Urinary excretion of cobalamin is usually low. 46 Because of this efficient enterohepatic circulation, in normal circumstances, VB12 deficiency typically takes a long time to develop. At least 2 to 5 years must elapse from an event until there is noted to be a serum cobalamine decrease. 47 Patients that have undergone RPC are often reported to develop VB12 deficiency anemia. One Swedish trial reported more than one-third of RPC-patients to have had abnormal Schilling tests and 5 percent had serum VB12 below referenced levels ( Table 2 ). 29 Another similar trial from Ireland 32 also observed abnormally low serum VB12 in 25 percent of their RPC-patients. About 40 percent of their RPC patients had three or more sequential VB12 measurements, and of these, 66 percent showed steadily declining VB12 levels. Surprisingly, 94 percent of these patients with low serum VB12 had a normal Schilling test and were negative for bacterial overgrowth. 32 Kuisma et al . 38 observed VB12 deficiency in approximately 5 percent of their 34 RPC-patients. Hylander et al . 42 reported VB12 malabsorption in 32 percent of their RPC-patients. Studies on Kock's original pouch and continent ileostomy patients showed abnormal Schilling tests and abnormal absorption of VB12. 48 , 49 Gadacz et al . 50 studied patients that had undergone the same procedure and found abnormal Schilling test in three out of four patients. They also observed that VB12 was poorly absorbed when a solution containing VB12 without IF, was instilled directly into the pouch. However, they found indirect evidence of active absorption of VB12 by the pouch, since patients who had IF given with VB12 solution directly into the pouch, demonstrated cobalamin absorption. Substitution therapy with VB12 was necessary in about one-third of the patients. Controversially, one Canadian study found no RPC-patients with low serum VB12 levels at a long-term follow-up, and Schilling tests were normal in all of their 38 patients tested. 51 Similarly, observations from St. Mark's Hospital in London 6 and the Mayo Clinic 52 also reported that they found no VB12 abnormalities, though the earlier study noted four patients to have had marginally low values. There are three described possible causes for VB12 deficiency observed in patients who have undergone RPC. First, patients may have had the absorptive capacity for VB12 reduced because of resection of the distal ileum. 53 , 54 The exact minimum length of terminal ileum required for adequate VB12 absorption is unclear, but has been reported to be between 13-36 cm. 53 , 54 Thompson et al . 55 concluded that VB12 malabsorption was likely if more than 60 cm of terminal ileum was resected. Another group 56 discovered receptors for the VB12-IF complex over, “the entire lower 3/5 of the human small intestine,” supporting the fact that excising small amount of terminal ileum does not remove the entire area capable of absorbing VB12. Since the ileocecal valve is removed in RPC procedure, changes in transit time may play a factor. Hagedorn et al . 56 also stated that it is possible that only certain parts of the ileum contain the complete absorption system, rather than just the VB12-IF receptor necessary to transport VB12 from receptor into enterocyte and that there may be additional intracellular factors to be defined that may be only located in the terminal ileum. Some researchers 32 argue that the short length of ileal resection and the fact that all but one patient with a sub-normal VB12 had a normal Schilling test suggests that removal of the terminal ileum segment was not the cause of the falling VB12 levels. This is despite the fact that the manipulated terminal ileum for creation of the pouch is the only known active part for the absorption of VB12 in humans. 57 – 59 The question of whether or not the surface of the defunctionalized intestinal segment during temporary diverting loop ileostomy is sufficient for the cause of malabsorption of VB12 has been widely discussed. 5 , 60 – 62 It has been repeatedly confirmed that cobalamin in sufficient amounts cannot be absorbed in the absence of the terminal ileum. 63 , 64 A reversible absorptive loss of ileal capacity was demonstrated in the case of VB12 deficiency, and it was suggested that a depletion of VB12 further impairs the absorption of VB12. 65 The pouch design with use of a diverting loop ileostomy leads to temporary bypassing the terminal ileum of about a mean length of ?120 cm (range, 45Some researchers212 cm, including the pouch). 2 , 5 , 29 Despite the fact that patients with terminal ileal exclusion less than 20 cm are not at risk of developing VB12 deficiency, 58 the stasis of small bowel contents predis-poses to bacterial overgrowth in both the ileal reservoir and the more proximal ileum until closure of the loop ileostomy. 32 For predicting pernicious anemia in patients with resections of 20 to 60 cm of terminal ileum, options include doing a Schilling test and treating those with abnormal results, empirically treating patients on the presumption that they are at high risk of developing deficiency, or monitoring for biochemical evidence of deficiency. Duerksen et al . 58 and Behrend et al . 61 differ from other studies and showed that patients with ileal resections less than 20 cm had a 38 percent chance of having an abnormal Schilling test result. They found that there were no abnormal test findings if patients had a resection less than 20 cm. 58 Possible reasons for this difference vs. the previously mentioned studies may relate to the patient population studied (all patients in the study by Behrend et al . 61 had ileorectal anastomoses), inadequate urine collections, or there could have been active ileal disease at the time of the Schilling test. Other studies have attempted to correlate length of ileal resection with risk of developing VB12 deficiency. Ooi et al . 66 showed that, over time, VB12 absorption may normalize in patients who have had ileal resections because of intestinal adaptation. This has been shown in pediatric populations but not in adult patients, 67 e.g ., repeat testing in 35 patients did not demonstrate any normalization of previously abnormal test results. 61 However, this latter study also demonstrated that in a few cases the Schilling test repeated in the same individual varied between a normal and abnormal result over time. In a long-term follow-up study of a pediatric population with ileal resections of 3 to 45 cm for necrotizing enterocolitis in infancy, only one patient developed VB12 deficiency after a follow-up at a median of 7.2 years. 68 Despite these controversies, clinicians are left with the dilemma of how to manage VB12 in patients who have had ileal resections. The literature appears consistent that resections more than 60 cm have a high likelihood of causing VB12 deficiency and therefore these patients should empirically be treated with VB12 supplementation. 55 , 61 , 67 However, further studies are needed to determine whether oral VB12 supplementation is effective enough in these patients. Second, there may be “competition” for VB12 within the pouch secondary to the recognized bacterial over-growth. 69 Using a quantitative method, O'Connell et al . 70 found evidence of ileal bacterial overgrowth in all 20 of their study RPC-patients. They stated that, rather than bacterial overgrowth, it is an increase in anaerobic bacteria in the pouch that reduces VB12 absorption by binding the vitamin in its free and IF-complex states, thereby reducing absorption without altering the processes by which it occurs. While some studies 71 , 72 concluded that bacterial overgrowth of the small bowel may have lead to VB12 deficiency, Riordan et al . 73 found that serum VB12 levels were not significantly different in subjects with or without such bacterial overgrowth. Other studies 73 , 74 have shown that while the proportion of aerobic bacteria is relatively high within ileostomy flora, the pouch is colonized by a bacterial population with a composition comparable to the physiologic colonic flora, with anaerobic bacteria outnumbering the aerobic flora by several orders of magnitude. Despite the fact that absolute counts of bacteria are lower in pouch contents (1010/g) than in the normal large intestine, metabolic activity is comparable. 74 – 77 In two other studies 78 , 79 hydrogen breath tests were performed after the patients were given lactulose which causes fermentation of colonic bacteria with the subsequent release of hydrogen. Using this technique, bacterial overgrowth was reported in 53 to 68 percent of the RPC-patients respectively. In contrast, Coull et al . study 32 found no evidence of bacterial overgrowth using the hydrogen breath test, but no quantitive studies of the bacterial flora were undertaken. Since their RPC-patients were not given lactulose in the study 21 it may explain the discrepancy in their results. Further studies of the effect of the bacterial flora on VB12 absorption in pouch patients would be required to determine the role of bacterial overgrowth. Finally, patients with UC often report dietary intolerances. 80 , 81 RPC largely improves preoperative dietary intolerances in 67 percent 82 but in 25 percent remain unchanged while in 18 percent show exacerbated. Some RPC-patients however, are at risk for onset of new dietary intolerances 82 , 83 and in some a concomitant worsening of a preoperative dietary intolerance. 82 There was, however, a 20 to 40 percent incidence of post-RPC dietary intolerance across all dietary intolerance categories examined. 82 However, patients with UC appear to be more susceptible to developing persistent dietary intolerance after RPC than other patient populations undergoing RPC. 82 The observed VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients may simply because of dietary restriction 82 , 83 since little is known about the long-term nutritional consequences of ileal pouch surgery. Clinicians, however, are aware that RPC-patients avoid foods that increase bowel frequency. It is of interest that patients, who have an end ileostomy without a pouch, have also been shown to develop VB12 deficiency. 77 In these patients, a shortened intestinal transit time has been suggested as a contributory or alternative explanation for B12 malabsorption. Another likely dietary cause of cobalamin deficiency in RPC patients is food-cobalamin malabsorption secondary to achlorhydria/ hypochlorhydria which could be confirmed by testing for abnormal absorption of protein-bound cyanocobalamin. 84 , 85 Although the exact cause of low VB12 levels in RPC-patients has not been determined, it has been observed to be possible to correct low serum VB12 levels by giving oral cyanocobalamin. All VB12 deficient RPC-patients who were given oral VB12 had their deficiency corrected. 32 Oral VB12 replacements is as effective as intramuscular injections, even in patients with pernicious anemia or ileal disease. This suggests that the absorption mechanism is normal and may point to either an inadequate dietary intake or a competitive bacteriologic environment for VB12 within the pouch, despite the fact that the breath test was observed to be normal. 32 Andres et al . 86 reported that all of their patients with subnormal VB12 levels had normal VB12 levels within two months of treatment with oral cyanocobalamin (500–1000 2g/day). Based on the results of the aforementioned studies, the risk of developing VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients is much greater than has previously been recognized. It is assumed that the higher incidence in some studies is related to a longer period of follow-up. 32 Combining the above studies as the global pouch community (GPC) has shown that one-quarter of patients who have undergone RPC have subnormal VB12 levels. 32 These levels progressively fall in up to two-thirds of patients. Since this may have serious clinical consequences, VB12 levels should be monitored in RPC-patients, and dietary advice should be given as most RPC-patients suffer dietary restrictions, forcing them to adopt a fixed dietary regimen, 87 such as being vegetarian. 29 , 88 Cobalamine - folate interrelationships and the effects of folate deficiency on VB12 are presented below.  Vitamin B<sub>12</sub> Deficiency Anemia VB12, also known as cobalamin, was first isolated in 1948 and obviously shown to be effective in the treatment of pernicious anemia. 24 In recent years, an interest in VB12 has been renewed because of the recognition that cobalamin deficiency occurs in 3 percent to 40 percent of the general population 27 (compared to 25 percent to 53 percent in pouch recipients). The distribution of VB12 deficiency in the general population is roughly 2:1 female:male, but is not the case in RPC patients, in which 53 percent of those patients with low B12 levels were females. The reason for this difference is uncertain, but with a median age of 40, this was not a relatively young study group. Looking at an older population, Lindenbaum et al . 27 found that 15 percent of normal subjects over 60 years of age have undiagnosed VB12 deficiency attributed to food-cobalamin malabsorption as the probable main cause. Absorption of VB12 from foods is complex and a defect in any step can lead to deficiency. 25 In the stomach, gastric acid and pepsin release cobalamin from proteins, and it binds preferentially to salivary R protein. In the upper small intestine, pancreatic enzymes and an alkaline pH digest the R protein-cobalamin complex then binds to intrinsic factor (IF) to form an IF-cobalamin complex. Endogenous VB12, excreted in bile, also binds to IF. The IF-cobalamin complex attaches to membrane receptors in the ileum and is absorbed through endocytosis. Absorption of VB12 by this process is limited (< 3 micrograms per meal). About 1 percent of the VB12 dose is absorbed by passive diffusion even in the absence of IF. 25 The liver stores most of the body's cobalamin (about 1.5 mg), followed by the kidneys, heart, spleen, and brain. Normal body stores of VB12 range from 2 to 10 mg while daily losses are 2 to 5 micrograms. Over 75 percent of the cobalamin excreted in bile is reabsorbed. Urinary excretion of cobalamin is usually low. 46 Because of this efficient enterohepatic circulation, in normal circumstances, VB12 deficiency typically takes a long time to develop. At least 2 to 5 years must elapse from an event until there is noted to be a serum cobalamine decrease. 47 Patients that have undergone RPC are often reported to develop VB12 deficiency anemia. One Swedish trial reported more than one-third of RPC-patients to have had abnormal Schilling tests and 5 percent had serum VB12 below referenced levels ( Table 2 ). 29 Another similar trial from Ireland 32 also observed abnormally low serum VB12 in 25 percent of their RPC-patients. About 40 percent of their RPC patients had three or more sequential VB12 measurements, and of these, 66 percent showed steadily declining VB12 levels. Surprisingly, 94 percent of these patients with low serum VB12 had a normal Schilling test and were negative for bacterial overgrowth. 32 Kuisma et al . 38 observed VB12 deficiency in approximately 5 percent of their 34 RPC-patients. Hylander et al . 42 reported VB12 malabsorption in 32 percent of their RPC-patients. Studies on Kock's original pouch and continent ileostomy patients showed abnormal Schilling tests and abnormal absorption of VB12. 48 , 49 Gadacz et al . 50 studied patients that had undergone the same procedure and found abnormal Schilling test in three out of four patients. They also observed that VB12 was poorly absorbed when a solution containing VB12 without IF, was instilled directly into the pouch. However, they found indirect evidence of active absorption of VB12 by the pouch, since patients who had IF given with VB12 solution directly into the pouch, demonstrated cobalamin absorption. Substitution therapy with VB12 was necessary in about one-third of the patients. Controversially, one Canadian study found no RPC-patients with low serum VB12 levels at a long-term follow-up, and Schilling tests were normal in all of their 38 patients tested. 51 Similarly, observations from St. Mark's Hospital in London 6 and the Mayo Clinic 52 also reported that they found no VB12 abnormalities, though the earlier study noted four patients to have had marginally low values. There are three described possible causes for VB12 deficiency observed in patients who have undergone RPC. First, patients may have had the absorptive capacity for VB12 reduced because of resection of the distal ileum. 53 , 54 The exact minimum length of terminal ileum required for adequate VB12 absorption is unclear, but has been reported to be between 13-36 cm. 53 , 54 Thompson et al . 55 concluded that VB12 malabsorption was likely if more than 60 cm of terminal ileum was resected. Another group 56 discovered receptors for the VB12-IF complex over, “the entire lower 3/5 of the human small intestine,” supporting the fact that excising small amount of terminal ileum does not remove the entire area capable of absorbing VB12. Since the ileocecal valve is removed in RPC procedure, changes in transit time may play a factor. Hagedorn et al . 56 also stated that it is possible that only certain parts of the ileum contain the complete absorption system, rather than just the VB12-IF receptor necessary to transport VB12 from receptor into enterocyte and that there may be additional intracellular factors to be defined that may be only located in the terminal ileum. Some researchers 32 argue that the short length of ileal resection and the fact that all but one patient with a sub-normal VB12 had a normal Schilling test suggests that removal of the terminal ileum segment was not the cause of the falling VB12 levels. This is despite the fact that the manipulated terminal ileum for creation of the pouch is the only known active part for the absorption of VB12 in humans. 57 – 59 The question of whether or not the surface of the defunctionalized intestinal segment during temporary diverting loop ileostomy is sufficient for the cause of malabsorption of VB12 has been widely discussed. 5 , 60 – 62 It has been repeatedly confirmed that cobalamin in sufficient amounts cannot be absorbed in the absence of the terminal ileum. 63 , 64 A reversible absorptive loss of ileal capacity was demonstrated in the case of VB12 deficiency, and it was suggested that a depletion of VB12 further impairs the absorption of VB12. 65 The pouch design with use of a diverting loop ileostomy leads to temporary bypassing the terminal ileum of about a mean length of ?120 cm (range, 45Some researchers212 cm, including the pouch). 2 , 5 , 29 Despite the fact that patients with terminal ileal exclusion less than 20 cm are not at risk of developing VB12 deficiency, 58 the stasis of small bowel contents predis-poses to bacterial overgrowth in both the ileal reservoir and the more proximal ileum until closure of the loop ileostomy. 32 For predicting pernicious anemia in patients with resections of 20 to 60 cm of terminal ileum, options include doing a Schilling test and treating those with abnormal results, empirically treating patients on the presumption that they are at high risk of developing deficiency, or monitoring for biochemical evidence of deficiency. Duerksen et al . 58 and Behrend et al . 61 differ from other studies and showed that patients with ileal resections less than 20 cm had a 38 percent chance of having an abnormal Schilling test result. They found that there were no abnormal test findings if patients had a resection less than 20 cm. 58 Possible reasons for this difference vs. the previously mentioned studies may relate to the patient population studied (all patients in the study by Behrend et al . 61 had ileorectal anastomoses), inadequate urine collections, or there could have been active ileal disease at the time of the Schilling test. Other studies have attempted to correlate length of ileal resection with risk of developing VB12 deficiency. Ooi et al . 66 showed that, over time, VB12 absorption may normalize in patients who have had ileal resections because of intestinal adaptation. This has been shown in pediatric populations but not in adult patients, 67 e.g ., repeat testing in 35 patients did not demonstrate any normalization of previously abnormal test results. 61 However, this latter study also demonstrated that in a few cases the Schilling test repeated in the same individual varied between a normal and abnormal result over time. In a long-term follow-up study of a pediatric population with ileal resections of 3 to 45 cm for necrotizing enterocolitis in infancy, only one patient developed VB12 deficiency after a follow-up at a median of 7.2 years. 68 Despite these controversies, clinicians are left with the dilemma of how to manage VB12 in patients who have had ileal resections. The literature appears consistent that resections more than 60 cm have a high likelihood of causing VB12 deficiency and therefore these patients should empirically be treated with VB12 supplementation. 55 , 61 , 67 However, further studies are needed to determine whether oral VB12 supplementation is effective enough in these patients. Second, there may be “competition” for VB12 within the pouch secondary to the recognized bacterial over-growth. 69 Using a quantitative method, O'Connell et al . 70 found evidence of ileal bacterial overgrowth in all 20 of their study RPC-patients. They stated that, rather than bacterial overgrowth, it is an increase in anaerobic bacteria in the pouch that reduces VB12 absorption by binding the vitamin in its free and IF-complex states, thereby reducing absorption without altering the processes by which it occurs. While some studies 71 , 72 concluded that bacterial overgrowth of the small bowel may have lead to VB12 deficiency, Riordan et al . 73 found that serum VB12 levels were not significantly different in subjects with or without such bacterial overgrowth. Other studies 73 , 74 have shown that while the proportion of aerobic bacteria is relatively high within ileostomy flora, the pouch is colonized by a bacterial population with a composition comparable to the physiologic colonic flora, with anaerobic bacteria outnumbering the aerobic flora by several orders of magnitude. Despite the fact that absolute counts of bacteria are lower in pouch contents (1010/g) than in the normal large intestine, metabolic activity is comparable. 74 – 77 In two other studies 78 , 79 hydrogen breath tests were performed after the patients were given lactulose which causes fermentation of colonic bacteria with the subsequent release of hydrogen. Using this technique, bacterial overgrowth was reported in 53 to 68 percent of the RPC-patients respectively. In contrast, Coull et al . study 32 found no evidence of bacterial overgrowth using the hydrogen breath test, but no quantitive studies of the bacterial flora were undertaken. Since their RPC-patients were not given lactulose in the study 21 it may explain the discrepancy in their results. Further studies of the effect of the bacterial flora on VB12 absorption in pouch patients would be required to determine the role of bacterial overgrowth. Finally, patients with UC often report dietary intolerances. 80 , 81 RPC largely improves preoperative dietary intolerances in 67 percent 82 but in 25 percent remain unchanged while in 18 percent show exacerbated. Some RPC-patients however, are at risk for onset of new dietary intolerances 82 , 83 and in some a concomitant worsening of a preoperative dietary intolerance. 82 There was, however, a 20 to 40 percent incidence of post-RPC dietary intolerance across all dietary intolerance categories examined. 82 However, patients with UC appear to be more susceptible to developing persistent dietary intolerance after RPC than other patient populations undergoing RPC. 82 The observed VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients may simply because of dietary restriction 82 , 83 since little is known about the long-term nutritional consequences of ileal pouch surgery. Clinicians, however, are aware that RPC-patients avoid foods that increase bowel frequency. It is of interest that patients, who have an end ileostomy without a pouch, have also been shown to develop VB12 deficiency. 77 In these patients, a shortened intestinal transit time has been suggested as a contributory or alternative explanation for B12 malabsorption. Another likely dietary cause of cobalamin deficiency in RPC patients is food-cobalamin malabsorption secondary to achlorhydria/ hypochlorhydria which could be confirmed by testing for abnormal absorption of protein-bound cyanocobalamin. 84 , 85 Although the exact cause of low VB12 levels in RPC-patients has not been determined, it has been observed to be possible to correct low serum VB12 levels by giving oral cyanocobalamin. All VB12 deficient RPC-patients who were given oral VB12 had their deficiency corrected. 32 Oral VB12 replacements is as effective as intramuscular injections, even in patients with pernicious anemia or ileal disease. This suggests that the absorption mechanism is normal and may point to either an inadequate dietary intake or a competitive bacteriologic environment for VB12 within the pouch, despite the fact that the breath test was observed to be normal. 32 Andres et al . 86 reported that all of their patients with subnormal VB12 levels had normal VB12 levels within two months of treatment with oral cyanocobalamin (500–1000 2g/day). Based on the results of the aforementioned studies, the risk of developing VB12 deficiency in RPC-patients is much greater than has previously been recognized. It is assumed that the higher incidence in some studies is related to a longer period of follow-up. 32 Combining the above studies as the global pouch community (GPC) has shown that one-quarter of patients who have undergone RPC have subnormal VB12 levels. 32 These levels progressively fall in up to two-thirds of patients. Since this may have serious clinical consequences, VB12 levels should be monitored in RPC-patients, and dietary advice should be given as most RPC-patients suffer dietary restrictions, forcing them to adopt a fixed dietary regimen, 87 such as being vegetarian. 29 , 88 Cobalamine - folate interrelationships and the effects of folate deficiency on VB12 are presented below.  FOLATE DEFICIENCY ANEMIA Folic acid or folate deficiency anemia has not been reported in RPC population. Folate works closely with VB12. 89 – 92 Cobalamin is needed to free folate from an inactive to an active state. 93 There is a concern, though rare, that high intakes of folate supplements might mask the macrocytic anemia of VB12 deficiency, thereby eliminating an important diagnostic sign. 94 One of folate's key functions is to allow for complete development of healthy red blood cells (erythrocytes) and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). 95 When body folic acid is deficient, the red blood cells cannot develop properly 93 – 95 and as a result small size/volume hypochromic erythrocytes are produced. In two studies from Karolinska University 29 , 88 that followed RPC-patients 6:36 months after closure of their diverting loop ileostomy, observed a significantly increase of mean serum folate retentions compared to preoperative saturation ( Table 2 ). Preoperatively, 12 percent of the studied cases (n=42) showed serum folate concentration below referenced level. These patients were prescribed with the anti-inflammatory drug sulfasalazine preoperatively in triple therapy scheme (sulfasalazine, corticosteroid, and total parental nutrition) to treat fulminant UC. One common known side effect of sulfasalazine is depletion in the body's supply of folate. 96 – 98 Postoperatively, no patient received sulfasalazine and none was noted to have folate lower than the referenced level 29 , 41 , 43 , 88 even after 20 years of having a functional pouch. 7 Similar observations were noted by others. 38 , 40 Nicholls et al . 6 reported that of their 14 RPC-patients, 2 (14.5 percent) cases showed folate concentration below referenced level, but all had normal red cell folate values. There was, therefore, no evidence for folate deficiency anemia despite having a low serum level of folate and perhaps there was not enough time to become symptomatic.  FOLATE DEFICIENCY ANEMIA Folic acid or folate deficiency anemia has not been reported in RPC population. Folate works closely with VB12. 89 – 92 Cobalamin is needed to free folate from an inactive to an active state. 93 There is a concern, though rare, that high intakes of folate supplements might mask the macrocytic anemia of VB12 deficiency, thereby eliminating an important diagnostic sign. 94 One of folate's key functions is to allow for complete development of healthy red blood cells (erythrocytes) and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). 95 When body folic acid is deficient, the red blood cells cannot develop properly 93 – 95 and as a result small size/volume hypochromic erythrocytes are produced. In two studies from Karolinska University 29 , 88 that followed RPC-patients 6:36 months after closure of their diverting loop ileostomy, observed a significantly increase of mean serum folate retentions compared to preoperative saturation ( Table 2 ). Preoperatively, 12 percent of the studied cases (n=42) showed serum folate concentration below referenced level. These patients were prescribed with the anti-inflammatory drug sulfasalazine preoperatively in triple therapy scheme (sulfasalazine, corticosteroid, and total parental nutrition) to treat fulminant UC. One common known side effect of sulfasalazine is depletion in the body's supply of folate. 96 – 98 Postoperatively, no patient received sulfasalazine and none was noted to have folate lower than the referenced level 29 , 41 , 43 , 88 even after 20 years of having a functional pouch. 7 Similar observations were noted by others. 38 , 40 Nicholls et al . 6 reported that of their 14 RPC-patients, 2 (14.5 percent) cases showed folate concentration below referenced level, but all had normal red cell folate values. There was, therefore, no evidence for folate deficiency anemia despite having a low serum level of folate and perhaps there was not enough time to become symptomatic.  POUCHITIS Publications from the Mayo Clinic, 8 , 45 , 52 Karolinska Institute, 7 , 29 , 36 , 99 Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 100 and St. Mark's Hospital 1 , 4 , 6 , 11 , 101 extensively describe the clinical results of patients after RPC. Among the described complications is pouchitis, the most common long-term complication of RPC in UC patients (? 60 percent). 7 , 11 , 12 , 29 – 33 , 37 , 45 , 101 Pouchitis is defined as a clinical syndrome of watery, frequent, and (at times), bloody stool accompanied by urgency, incontinence, abdominal cramps, malaise, and fever. 101 Moskowitz et al . 11 defined pouchitis applying more specific diagnostic criteria as a triad of diarrhea, endoscopic findings, and a minimum grade of 4 in a 6-point histopathologic index. In 1994, the Pouchitis Disease Activity Index (PDAI) was developed incorporating these two definitions. 52 , 102 The PDAI provided a standardized definition of pouchitis based on clinical, endoscopic, and histologic markers, with pouchitis defined as a score ? 7 points. 11 , 52 Diagnosis based on the modified pouchitis disease activity index (mPDAI) is seen to offer similar sensitivity and specificity when compared with the PDAI for patients with acute or acute relapsing pouchitis. 103 Pouchitis and anemia has been frequently observed to occur concomitantly. Quality of Life (QoL) After RPC The most important goal of RPC operation is to cure the disease and improve QoL of the patients. 8 , 104 – 107 QoL evaluation included physical function, physical status, corporal pain, general health, vitality, social function, emotional status, employment, and mental health. The studies show that RPC is a safe and effective procedure and that QoL remains at or above population norms regardless of surgical technique. 104 , 108 , 109 However, the presence of stoma and fecal incontinence are factors that contribute to deterioration of QoL after RPC. 110 Approximately 87.5 percent of patients consider that their health status has improved during the first year postoperatively. 110 Ninety-two percent of post-RPC patients retained their employment. 8 Economic Burden of RPC Patients With Anemia Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) carries with it a high incidence of anemia as a result of gastrointestinal blood loss. 111 – 113 Surgical intervention in selected patients has had an important effect on well-being despite the fact that post-RPC anemia is an issue for many IBD patients. 7 , 31 – 33 , 37 , 48 , 61 , 88 A retrospective cohort study used to estimate the effects, the differences, and the impact in health-care costs between anemic and nonanemic IBD patients is depicted in Table 4 . Although cost analyses of IBD in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Sweden have been published, there are no such studies focused specifically for anemia in RPC patients per se. The prevalence of anemia in patients with IBD ranges from 8.8 percent to 73.7 percent depending on the patient subpopulation. 111 Because of the long disease duration, IBD is responsible for high use of health services and high lifetime costs for medical care. 114 – 117 Even in times of remission, patients with IBD regularly need outpatient care for monitoring the course of disease and drug therapy. 118 The cost includes physician costs, laboratory costs, and costs for diagnostic procedures following the visit. The average annual medical cost per patient with UC in the United States was estimated at $2,801 119 with an overall annual health care cost for IBD of more than $1.7 billion. 120 , 121 In Germany the mean cost of one outpatient visit in 2004 was $252. 118 Based on the statistics of the Association of German Pension Insurance Institutes (VDR), and total of 840 patients with IBD were unable to work and retired at a mean age of 42 years (female) and 46 years (male), which is approximately 15 to 20 years before the official age for retirement. 122 Over a decade ago, Blomqvist and Ekbom 116 reported direct annual health-care costs of patients with IBD of $44.7 million for Sweden. According to a Swedish analysis, the indirect costs as a result of morbidity were approximately double the direct costs. 116 Indirect costs to society caused by morbidity are estimated to be as high as $94.8 million. The authors also analyzed the distribution of outpatient (OPD) care because of IBD. They found that only 10 percent of the visits took place in primary care, whereas 90 percent of the visits occurred in the OPD of hospitals (66 percent to internal medicine and 21 percent to surgery). Ershler et al . 123 reported about the economic burden of patients with anemia in IBD. Their results for unadjusted direct costs of the anemic and nonanemic populations and the differences as well as the budget impact in a model of hypothetical population of one million members are depicted in Table 4 . 123 Hay et al . 119 concluded that approximately 5 to 10 percent of IBD patients experience work disability annually. Thus, the annual morbidity-related loss of productivity would be in the range of $0.8–1.55 billion. 124 The costs are likely to continue to increase.  POUCHITIS Publications from the Mayo Clinic, 8 , 45 , 52 Karolinska Institute, 7 , 29 , 36 , 99 Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 100 and St. Mark's Hospital 1 , 4 , 6 , 11 , 101 extensively describe the clinical results of patients after RPC. Among the described complications is pouchitis, the most common long-term complication of RPC in UC patients (? 60 percent). 7 , 11 , 12 , 29 – 33 , 37 , 45 , 101 Pouchitis is defined as a clinical syndrome of watery, frequent, and (at times), bloody stool accompanied by urgency, incontinence, abdominal cramps, malaise, and fever. 101 Moskowitz et al . 11 defined pouchitis applying more specific diagnostic criteria as a triad of diarrhea, endoscopic findings, and a minimum grade of 4 in a 6-point histopathologic index. In 1994, the Pouchitis Disease Activity Index (PDAI) was developed incorporating these two definitions. 52 , 102 The PDAI provided a standardized definition of pouchitis based on clinical, endoscopic, and histologic markers, with pouchitis defined as a score ? 7 points. 11 , 52 Diagnosis based on the modified pouchitis disease activity index (mPDAI) is seen to offer similar sensitivity and specificity when compared with the PDAI for patients with acute or acute relapsing pouchitis. 103 Pouchitis and anemia has been frequently observed to occur concomitantly. Quality of Life (QoL) After RPC The most important goal of RPC operation is to cure the disease and improve QoL of the patients. 8 , 104 – 107 QoL evaluation included physical function, physical status, corporal pain, general health, vitality, social function, emotional status, employment, and mental health. The studies show that RPC is a safe and effective procedure and that QoL remains at or above population norms regardless of surgical technique. 104 , 108 , 109 However, the presence of stoma and fecal incontinence are factors that contribute to deterioration of QoL after RPC. 110 Approximately 87.5 percent of patients consider that their health status has improved during the first year postoperatively. 110 Ninety-two percent of post-RPC patients retained their employment. 8 Economic Burden of RPC Patients With Anemia Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) carries with it a high incidence of anemia as a result of gastrointestinal blood loss. 111 – 113 Surgical intervention in selected patients has had an important effect on well-being despite the fact that post-RPC anemia is an issue for many IBD patients. 7 , 31 – 33 , 37 , 48 , 61 , 88 A retrospective cohort study used to estimate the effects, the differences, and the impact in health-care costs between anemic and nonanemic IBD patients is depicted in Table 4 . Although cost analyses of IBD in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Sweden have been published, there are no such studies focused specifically for anemia in RPC patients per se. The prevalence of anemia in patients with IBD ranges from 8.8 percent to 73.7 percent depending on the patient subpopulation. 111 Because of the long disease duration, IBD is responsible for high use of health services and high lifetime costs for medical care. 114 – 117 Even in times of remission, patients with IBD regularly need outpatient care for monitoring the course of disease and drug therapy. 118 The cost includes physician costs, laboratory costs, and costs for diagnostic procedures following the visit. The average annual medical cost per patient with UC in the United States was estimated at $2,801 119 with an overall annual health care cost for IBD of more than $1.7 billion. 120 , 121 In Germany the mean cost of one outpatient visit in 2004 was $252. 118 Based on the statistics of the Association of German Pension Insurance Institutes (VDR), and total of 840 patients with IBD were unable to work and retired at a mean age of 42 years (female) and 46 years (male), which is approximately 15 to 20 years before the official age for retirement. 122 Over a decade ago, Blomqvist and Ekbom 116 reported direct annual health-care costs of patients with IBD of $44.7 million for Sweden. According to a Swedish analysis, the indirect costs as a result of morbidity were approximately double the direct costs. 116 Indirect costs to society caused by morbidity are estimated to be as high as $94.8 million. The authors also analyzed the distribution of outpatient (OPD) care because of IBD. They found that only 10 percent of the visits took place in primary care, whereas 90 percent of the visits occurred in the OPD of hospitals (66 percent to internal medicine and 21 percent to surgery). Ershler et al . 123 reported about the economic burden of patients with anemia in IBD. Their results for unadjusted direct costs of the anemic and nonanemic populations and the differences as well as the budget impact in a model of hypothetical population of one million members are depicted in Table 4 . 123 Hay et al . 119 concluded that approximately 5 to 10 percent of IBD patients experience work disability annually. Thus, the annual morbidity-related loss of productivity would be in the range of $0.8–1.55 billion. 124 The costs are likely to continue to increase.  Quality of Life (QoL) After RPC The most important goal of RPC operation is to cure the disease and improve QoL of the patients. 8 , 104 – 107 QoL evaluation included physical function, physical status, corporal pain, general health, vitality, social function, emotional status, employment, and mental health. The studies show that RPC is a safe and effective procedure and that QoL remains at or above population norms regardless of surgical technique. 104 , 108 , 109 However, the presence of stoma and fecal incontinence are factors that contribute to deterioration of QoL after RPC. 110 Approximately 87.5 percent of patients consider that their health status has improved during the first year postoperatively. 110 Ninety-two percent of post-RPC patients retained their employment. 8  Quality of Life (QoL) After RPC The most important goal of RPC operation is to cure the disease and improve QoL of the patients. 8 , 104 – 107 QoL evaluation included physical function, physical status, corporal pain, general health, vitality, social function, emotional status, employment, and mental health. The studies show that RPC is a safe and effective procedure and that QoL remains at or above population norms regardless of surgical technique. 104 , 108 , 109 However, the presence of stoma and fecal incontinence are factors that contribute to deterioration of QoL after RPC. 110 Approximately 87.5 percent of patients consider that their health status has improved during the first year postoperatively. 110 Ninety-two percent of post-RPC patients retained their employment. 8  Economic Burden of RPC Patients With Anemia Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) carries with it a high incidence of anemia as a result of gastrointestinal blood loss. 111 – 113 Surgical intervention in selected patients has had an important effect on well-being despite the fact that post-RPC anemia is an issue for many IBD patients. 7 , 31 – 33 , 37 , 48 , 61 , 88 A retrospective cohort study used to estimate the effects, the differences, and the impact in health-care costs between anemic and nonanemic IBD patients is depicted in Table 4 . Although cost analyses of IBD in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Sweden have been published, there are no such studies focused specifically for anemia in RPC patients per se. The prevalence of anemia in patients with IBD ranges from 8.8 percent to 73.7 percent depending on the patient subpopulation. 111 Because of the long disease duration, IBD is responsible for high use of health services and high lifetime costs for medical care. 114 – 117 Even in times of remission, patients with IBD regularly need outpatient care for monitoring the course of disease and drug therapy. 118 The cost includes physician costs, laboratory costs, and costs for diagnostic procedures following the visit. The average annual medical cost per patient with UC in the United States was estimated at $2,801 119 with an overall annual health care cost for IBD of more than $1.7 billion. 120 , 121 In Germany the mean cost of one outpatient visit in 2004 was $252. 118 Based on the statistics of the Association of German Pension Insurance Institutes (VDR), and total of 840 patients with IBD were unable to work and retired at a mean age of 42 years (female) and 46 years (male), which is approximately 15 to 20 years before the official age for retirement. 122 Over a decade ago, Blomqvist and Ekbom 116 reported direct annual health-care costs of patients with IBD of $44.7 million for Sweden. According to a Swedish analysis, the indirect costs as a result of morbidity were approximately double the direct costs. 116 Indirect costs to society caused by morbidity are estimated to be as high as $94.8 million. The authors also analyzed the distribution of outpatient (OPD) care because of IBD. They found that only 10 percent of the visits took place in primary care, whereas 90 percent of the visits occurred in the OPD of hospitals (66 percent to internal medicine and 21 percent to surgery). Ershler et al . 123 reported about the economic burden of patients with anemia in IBD. Their results for unadjusted direct costs of the anemic and nonanemic populations and the differences as well as the budget impact in a model of hypothetical population of one million members are depicted in Table 4 . 123 Hay et al . 119 concluded that approximately 5 to 10 percent of IBD patients experience work disability annually. Thus, the annual morbidity-related loss of productivity would be in the range of $0.8–1.55 billion. 124 The costs are likely to continue to increase.  Economic Burden of RPC Patients With Anemia Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) carries with it a high incidence of anemia as a result of gastrointestinal blood loss. 111 – 113 Surgical intervention in selected patients has had an important effect on well-being despite the fact that post-RPC anemia is an issue for many IBD patients. 7 , 31 – 33 , 37 , 48 , 61 , 88 A retrospective cohort study used to estimate the effects, the differences, and the impact in health-care costs between anemic and nonanemic IBD patients is depicted in Table 4 . Although cost analyses of IBD in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Sweden have been published, there are no such studies focused specifically for anemia in RPC patients per se. The prevalence of anemia in patients with IBD ranges from 8.8 percent to 73.7 percent depending on the patient subpopulation. 111 Because of the long disease duration, IBD is responsible for high use of health services and high lifetime costs for medical care. 114 – 117 Even in times of remission, patients with IBD regularly need outpatient care for monitoring the course of disease and drug therapy. 118 The cost includes physician costs, laboratory costs, and costs for diagnostic procedures following the visit. The average annual medical cost per patient with UC in the United States was estimated at $2,801 119 with an overall annual health care cost for IBD of more than $1.7 billion. 120 , 121 In Germany the mean cost of one outpatient visit in 2004 was $252. 118 Based on the statistics of the Association of German Pension Insurance Institutes (VDR), and total of 840 patients with IBD were unable to work and retired at a mean age of 42 years (female) and 46 years (male), which is approximately 15 to 20 years before the official age for retirement. 122 Over a decade ago, Blomqvist and Ekbom 116 reported direct annual health-care costs of patients with IBD of $44.7 million for Sweden. According to a Swedish analysis, the indirect costs as a result of morbidity were approximately double the direct costs. 116 Indirect costs to society caused by morbidity are estimated to be as high as $94.8 million. The authors also analyzed the distribution of outpatient (OPD) care because of IBD. They found that only 10 percent of the visits took place in primary care, whereas 90 percent of the visits occurred in the OPD of hospitals (66 percent to internal medicine and 21 percent to surgery). Ershler et al . 123 reported about the economic burden of patients with anemia in IBD. Their results for unadjusted direct costs of the anemic and nonanemic populations and the differences as well as the budget impact in a model of hypothetical population of one million members are depicted in Table 4 . 123 Hay et al . 119 concluded that approximately 5 to 10 percent of IBD patients experience work disability annually. Thus, the annual morbidity-related loss of productivity would be in the range of $0.8–1.55 billion. 124 The costs are likely to continue to increase.  DISCUSSION Anemia is common in the RPC patient population, 7 , 31 – 33 , 37 but the prevalence varies dramatically. It has been reported to range from as low as 5 percent to as high as 56 percent. Interpretation of this range of results is complicated both by the definition of anemia and by the variety of possible causes and the onset of clinical manifestations. A large study relied on the presence of The International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) codes in a discharge database to identify patients with anemia. 125 This classification method, of course, is likely to underestimate the true anemia prevalence because anemia may not be coded reliably in the hospital record. Because mild anemia is the most likely to be undercoded, such a study population may be skewed toward patients with more severe anemia and thus is unlikely to underestimate the true incidence of anemia. Iron and/or Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is an important frequent extraintestinal post-RPC complication that is commonly overlooked despite its impact on QoL in RPC patients. It is a commonly undetected complication as both medical as well as a surgical problem. In this review, most studies demonstrate that some patients are at higher risk of developing anemia after RPC than others often as the result of recurrent bleeding from the pelvic pouch mucosa and with chronic pouchitis. 31 , 33 , 37 , 38 Metabolic consequences after RPC are commonly associated with pouchitis, 7 , 37 , 38 , 52 , 126 grade of villous atrophy, 69 , 127 , 128 and extent of inflammation 30 , 102 , 129 in the remaining ileum. The impacts of these post-RPC sequelae on anemia are not clearly understood. Patients with active chronic pouch inflammation therefore need long-term follow-up 7 , 8 , 31 , 38 , 45 , 51 , 99 since some patients run a risk of significant anemia. Follow-up should include blood tests. 7 , 31 , 33 A report suggesting that iron-deficiency anemia may be a clinical sign of active pouchitis, and that hemoglobin and hematocrit levels may serve as surveillance tools for pouchitis, should be considered when pouchitis is a concern. This would need to be confirmed with larger prospective, multi-institutional studies. One recent study from Cleveland Clinic 33 reported that there is a higher rate of iron deficiency anemia in RPC patients with underlying FAP compared to those patients with UC. They also found that multivariable analysis showed that the presence of malignancy or desmoid tumor and the J-pouch configuration were the only independent risk factors associated with iron deficiency anemia. The mechanism for post-RPC vitamin B12 deficiency is unknown but often requires the exogenous addition of this vitamin. 57 – 59 A possible explanation for this complication in RPC patients may be because of changes in bacterial flora in the neoterminal ileum and pouch, 32 , 69 degree of ileal resection, 55 , 58 and/or even dietary. 39 , 77 A likely dietary cause of cobalamin deficiency in RPC patients is food-cobalamin malabsorption secondary to achlorhydria/hypochlorhydria which could be confirmed by testing for abnormal absorption of protein-bound cyanocobalamin. 84 , 85 This would be strengthened by analyzing gastric biopsies to test for achlorhydria/hypochlorhydria and fecal elastase tests to exclude chronic pancreatitis. Folic acid deficiency, which has not been reported in RPC population, may result in falsely low serum vitamin B12 levels. 93 This review emphasizes that 25 percent of RPC patients develop cobalamin deficiency thus encouraging vitamin B12 levels be checked if an RPC-patient is anemic. It should be understood that vitamin B12 levels may start to fall preoperatively during the stage of active colitis. Normal Schilling test in vitamin B12-deficient RPC-patients suggest that the terminal ileal resection alone may not be the cause (and also that backwash ileitis is an unlikely cause). Pouchitis may be a contributory factor and that the increasing usage of probiotics to treat pouchitis may have a beneficial influence on declining vitamin B12 levels. Anemia has shown to have a negative impact on the economy. 116 – 124 Direct and indirect medical and other costs of anemia (after adjusting for differences in demographics) in IBD patients was substantially higher than in the nonanemic. 123 Nonanemic patients incurred higher average annual income costs because they could manage to return to work, compared to anemic patients who had higher absent records and therefore had negative impact on work productivity among IBD patients. 116 – 124  DISCUSSION Anemia is common in the RPC patient population, 7 , 31 – 33 , 37 but the prevalence varies dramatically. It has been reported to range from as low as 5 percent to as high as 56 percent. Interpretation of this range of results is complicated both by the definition of anemia and by the variety of possible causes and the onset of clinical manifestations. A large study relied on the presence of The International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) codes in a discharge database to identify patients with anemia. 125 This classification method, of course, is likely to underestimate the true anemia prevalence because anemia may not be coded reliably in the hospital record. Because mild anemia is the most likely to be undercoded, such a study population may be skewed toward patients with more severe anemia and thus is unlikely to underestimate the true incidence of anemia. Iron and/or Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is an important frequent extraintestinal post-RPC complication that is commonly overlooked despite its impact on QoL in RPC patients. It is a commonly undetected complication as both medical as well as a surgical problem. In this review, most studies demonstrate that some patients are at higher risk of developing anemia after RPC than others often as the result of recurrent bleeding from the pelvic pouch mucosa and with chronic pouchitis. 31 , 33 , 37 , 38 Metabolic consequences after RPC are commonly associated with pouchitis, 7 , 37 , 38 , 52 , 126 grade of villous atrophy, 69 , 127 , 128 and extent of inflammation 30 , 102 , 129 in the remaining ileum. The impacts of these post-RPC sequelae on anemia are not clearly understood. Patients with active chronic pouch inflammation therefore need long-term follow-up 7 , 8 , 31 , 38 , 45 , 51 , 99 since some patients run a risk of significant anemia. Follow-up should include blood tests. 7 , 31 , 33 A report suggesting that iron-deficiency anemia may be a clinical sign of active pouchitis, and that hemoglobin and hematocrit levels may serve as surveillance tools for pouchitis, should be considered when pouchitis is a concern. This would need to be confirmed with larger prospective, multi-institutional studies. One recent study from Cleveland Clinic 33 reported that there is a higher rate of iron deficiency anemia in RPC patients with underlying FAP compared to those patients with UC. They also found that multivariable analysis showed that the presence of malignancy or desmoid tumor and the J-pouch configuration were the only independent risk factors associated with iron deficiency anemia. The mechanism for post-RPC vitamin B12 deficiency is unknown but often requires the exogenous addition of this vitamin. 57 – 59 A possible explanation for this complication in RPC patients may be because of changes in bacterial flora in the neoterminal ileum and pouch, 32 , 69 degree of ileal resection, 55 , 58 and/or even dietary. 39 , 77 A likely dietary cause of cobalamin deficiency in RPC patients is food-cobalamin malabsorption secondary to achlorhydria/hypochlorhydria which could be confirmed by testing for abnormal absorption of protein-bound cyanocobalamin. 84 , 85 This would be strengthened by analyzing gastric biopsies to test for achlorhydria/hypochlorhydria and fecal elastase tests to exclude chronic pancreatitis. Folic acid deficiency, which has not been reported in RPC population, may result in falsely low serum vitamin B12 levels. 93 This review emphasizes that 25 percent of RPC patients develop cobalamin deficiency thus encouraging vitamin B12 levels be checked if an RPC-patient is anemic. It should be understood that vitamin B12 levels may start to fall preoperatively during the stage of active colitis. Normal Schilling test in vitamin B12-deficient RPC-patients suggest that the terminal ileal resection alone may not be the cause (and also that backwash ileitis is an unlikely cause). Pouchitis may be a contributory factor and that the increasing usage of probiotics to treat pouchitis may have a beneficial influence on declining vitamin B12 levels. Anemia has shown to have a negative impact on the economy. 116 – 124 Direct and indirect medical and other costs of anemia (after adjusting for differences in demographics) in IBD patients was substantially higher than in the nonanemic. 123 Nonanemic patients incurred higher average annual income costs because they could manage to return to work, compared to anemic patients who had higher absent records and therefore had negative impact on work productivity among IBD patients. 116 – 124  SUMMARY If one has to weigh the risk of symptoms of preoperative chronic colonic disease, patient QoL improved significantly after successful RPC. Patients after RPC may develop iron and/ or vitamin B12 deficiency anemia while having functionally acceptable pouches. Folic acid deficiency anemia has not been reported in RPC-patients. Pouchitis, which corresponds significantly with anemia, continues to be a challenging and frequent complication. Pouchitis with pouch mucosal bleeding and malabsorption are observed to be associated with iron deficiency anemia. Iron deficiency anemia is being considered as a possible indicator of active pouchitis. Presence of malignancy, desmoid tumors and J-shaped pouch are seen associated with iron deficiency anemia. Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia after RPC is attributed to the degree of terminal ileal resection, malabsorption, bacterial overgrowth, and dietary intolerance factors. Anemia may substantially increase healthcare costs at a level that is economically very relevant. Treatment of anemia and the underlying cause is critical as this has the potential to improve clinical and economic outcomes.  SUMMARY If one has to weigh the risk of symptoms of preoperative chronic colonic disease, patient QoL improved significantly after successful RPC. Patients after RPC may develop iron and/ or vitamin B12 deficiency anemia while having functionally acceptable pouches. Folic acid deficiency anemia has not been reported in RPC-patients. Pouchitis, which corresponds significantly with anemia, continues to be a challenging and frequent complication. Pouchitis with pouch mucosal bleeding and malabsorption are observed to be associated with iron deficiency anemia. Iron deficiency anemia is being considered as a possible indicator of active pouchitis. Presence of malignancy, desmoid tumors and J-shaped pouch are seen associated with iron deficiency anemia. Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia after RPC is attributed to the degree of terminal ileal resection, malabsorption, bacterial overgrowth, and dietary intolerance factors. Anemia may substantially increase healthcare costs at a level that is economically very relevant. Treatment of anemia and the underlying cause is critical as this has the potential to improve clinical and economic outcomes.  CONCLUSION Both Iron and vitamin B12 deficiency anemia are not uncommon after RPC surgery. Given its high prevalence, patients undergoing RPC surgery should, therefore, undergo high index suspicion hematologic laboratory evaluation, unless reliable and satisfying, on long-term surveillances. Delays in diagnosis and treatment of anemia may result in irreversible complications. In patients that are shown to be intolerant of oral iron replacement therapy or their anemia were refractory to such supplementation, correction of such anemias through the administration of intravenous iron saccharate or supplemental erythropoietin has shown to improve patient hematologic indices and QoL. 111 , 130 In the case of vitamin B12 deficiency anemia oral vitamin B12 supplement have equally shown to be as effective as intramuscular injections. Timely screening and treatment of anemia makes a difference. 