Brief Report: Language Ability and School Functioning of Youth Perinatally Infected with HIV Introduction The purpose of this paper is to describe the language ability and school functioning of early adolescents with perinatal HIV/AIDS. Method Participants included 43 youths, 9–15 years, and their primary caregivers. Youths completed the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) and the Reading Subtest of the Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT3), and were interviewed regarding their future educational aspirations and parental supervision and involvement with homework. Caregivers were interviewed regarding the child’s school achievement, parental supervision and monitoring, and educational aspirations for their child. Results Fifty-four percent of youths scored below average (<25th percentile) on the PPVT, and 29% scored <10th percentile; 40% scored below average (<25th percentile) on the WRAT3, and 24% scored <10th percentile. Scores were associated with parental monitoring and educational aspirations. Discussion Youths performed poorly on tests of verbal and reading ability, although not dissimilar to other samples of inner-city youths. Future research should attempt to isolate the impact of HIV disease on intellectual and school functioning of HIV+ youths.  Method Participants included 43 youths, 9–15 years, and their primary caregivers. Youths completed the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) and the Reading Subtest of the Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT3), and were interviewed regarding their future educational aspirations and parental supervision and involvement with homework. Caregivers were interviewed regarding the child’s school achievement, parental supervision and monitoring, and educational aspirations for their child.  Results Fifty-four percent of youths scored below average (<25th percentile) on the PPVT, and 29% scored <10th percentile; 40% scored below average (<25th percentile) on the WRAT3, and 24% scored <10th percentile. Scores were associated with parental monitoring and educational aspirations.  Discussion Youths performed poorly on tests of verbal and reading ability, although not dissimilar to other samples of inner-city youths. Future research should attempt to isolate the impact of HIV disease on intellectual and school functioning of HIV+ youths.  Methods Participants and Procedures In a pilot study for a larger, longitudinal project examining a range of psychosocial and behavioral functioning variables ( Mellins, Brackis-Cott, Dolezal, & Abrams, 2006 ), 43 early adolescents perinatally infected with HIV/AIDS and their primary caregivers were recruited in 2004 from a comprehensive pediatric HIV care and research program in NYC. Inclusion criteria for youth were 1) perinatal infection with HIV, 2) ages 9–16 years, 3) English speaking, and 4) having a legal guardian who could provide informed consent. Caregivers had to be English or Spanish speaking. Both youths who had and had not been formally told of their HIV status were included. To determine eligibility, a list of all eligible families was created by the medical director (n=63). Each caregiver was approached by a medical provider during the child’s monthly medical appointment. The project was presented and verbal consent to be contacted by the research team was requested. A member of the research team then contacted the family to further explain the study and confirm eligibility and interest. Of the 63 eligible dyads, 48 were enrolled; 13 refused to participate due to time constraints, family stressors, or lack of interest; two dyads agreed to participate but were never available to be interviewed. New York State HIV confidentiality laws preclude any data collection on families who refused participation. Caregivers and children signed consent/assent forms and were interviewed simultaneously and separately at two time points, one-to-three months apart (to reduce interview burden). Each interview lasted from one to two hours and was conducted at the youth’s medical clinic (79%), research offices (15%), or the families’ homes (5%) depending on participant preference. Participants were compensated $25 for each interview, and reimbursed for travel expenses. This study received Institutional Review Board approval and was compliant with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. Among the 48 dyads enrolled who received the first interview, 4 were not able to complete the two study interviews within the three month time period, and one (2%) child was too distressed to complete the interview. Thus, the final sample size was 43.  Participants and Procedures In a pilot study for a larger, longitudinal project examining a range of psychosocial and behavioral functioning variables ( Mellins, Brackis-Cott, Dolezal, & Abrams, 2006 ), 43 early adolescents perinatally infected with HIV/AIDS and their primary caregivers were recruited in 2004 from a comprehensive pediatric HIV care and research program in NYC. Inclusion criteria for youth were 1) perinatal infection with HIV, 2) ages 9–16 years, 3) English speaking, and 4) having a legal guardian who could provide informed consent. Caregivers had to be English or Spanish speaking. Both youths who had and had not been formally told of their HIV status were included. To determine eligibility, a list of all eligible families was created by the medical director (n=63). Each caregiver was approached by a medical provider during the child’s monthly medical appointment. The project was presented and verbal consent to be contacted by the research team was requested. A member of the research team then contacted the family to further explain the study and confirm eligibility and interest. Of the 63 eligible dyads, 48 were enrolled; 13 refused to participate due to time constraints, family stressors, or lack of interest; two dyads agreed to participate but were never available to be interviewed. New York State HIV confidentiality laws preclude any data collection on families who refused participation. Caregivers and children signed consent/assent forms and were interviewed simultaneously and separately at two time points, one-to-three months apart (to reduce interview burden). Each interview lasted from one to two hours and was conducted at the youth’s medical clinic (79%), research offices (15%), or the families’ homes (5%) depending on participant preference. Participants were compensated $25 for each interview, and reimbursed for travel expenses. This study received Institutional Review Board approval and was compliant with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. Among the 48 dyads enrolled who received the first interview, 4 were not able to complete the two study interviews within the three month time period, and one (2%) child was too distressed to complete the interview. Thus, the final sample size was 43.  Assessments Child verbal ability and reading skills The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, is a widely used test of verbal ability (PPVT-III, Dunn & Dunn, 1997 ). The examiner reads each word aloud; the child chooses which of four pictures best illustrates the word. The Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT3; Wilkinson, 1993 ) Reading Subtest is a widely used measure of reading skills, focusing on recognizing and naming letters and pronouncing printed words. Excellent psychometric properties have been established including reliability and validity for both measures ( Dunn & Dunn, 1997 ; Wilkinson, 1993 ). Maternal-child supervision and involvement The Supervision and Involvement Scale (S&I Scale) from the Pittsburgh Youth Study ( Loeber, Stouthamer-Loeber, Van Kammen, & Farrington, 1991 ) was administered to caregivers and youths and consists of 37 items assessing the caregiver’s knowledge of where the child is at all points in the day, family routines, caregiver’s knowledge of child’s friends, amount of time caregiver and youth spend together, etc. The Pittsburgh Youth Study is a longitudinal study of a community sample of inner-city boys documenting the development of antisocial and delinquent behavior from childhood to early adulthood. The scale is based on a literature review of family factors related to delinquency ( Loeber & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1986 ), on Moos’ Family Environment Scale ( Moos & Moos, 1975 ), and Skinner, Steinhauer, and Santa-Barbara’s (1983) Family Assessment Measure. Descriptions of the psychometrics have been published elsewhere supporting the use of this measure ( Loeber, Drinkwater, Yin, Anderson, Schmidt & Crawford, 2000 ). Caregiver and youth versions of this measure are not comparable. We used the communication, supervision, and monitoring scales from the caregiver responses only for this paper. Future goals and school motivation Questions from the Monitoring the Future survey ( Johnstone, Bachman, O’Malley, 1993 ) were used to assess the youths’ future goals in the areas of school and vocational aspirations as well as the caregivers’ goals for their children. In addition, caregivers and youths were asked to report on level of parental supervision over homework and amount of communication about homework. Monitoring the Future is an ongoing study of the behaviors, attitudes, and values of American secondary school students, college students, and young adults and has been administered annually since 1975. Adequate psychometric properties have been established for this measure ( Johnston, O’Malley, Bachman, & Schulenberg, 2007 ). Demographics Items included child age, gender, ethnic identity, child relationship to caregiver (biological vs. adoptive), household income, education and work status of caregiver, single-parent status of caregiver. Caregivers also reported on whether the child was in special or regular education classes, whether the child had ever skipped a grade, been held back, suspended, expelled. Child health status CD-4+ number (cells/m3), HIV RNA viral load (copies/ml) values and CDC classification for the closest date to the research interview were obtained through medical record abstraction. The mean interval between the date chart abstractions were obtained and the research interview was completed was 67 days (range=12–184 days). Data Analyses Post hoc, secondary analyses were conducted on youths’ verbal ability, reading ability, and school achievement. SPSS was used to generate descriptive statistics. Regression analyses were used to assess the associations between WRAT3/PPVT scores and various predictor variables. Individual models were tested for each predictor variable separately. We also ran these analyses on dichotomized outcome variables (WRAT3 <25th percentile vs. > 25 th percentile, PPVT <25th percentile vs. > 25 th percentile). The pattern of significant associations was comparable to analyses using continuous scores (data not shown). Some variables from the Monitoring the Future survey had little to no variability and thus were deemed inappropriate for inclusion in statistical analyses and only used for descriptive purposes.  Child verbal ability and reading skills The Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, is a widely used test of verbal ability (PPVT-III, Dunn & Dunn, 1997 ). The examiner reads each word aloud; the child chooses which of four pictures best illustrates the word. The Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT3; Wilkinson, 1993 ) Reading Subtest is a widely used measure of reading skills, focusing on recognizing and naming letters and pronouncing printed words. Excellent psychometric properties have been established including reliability and validity for both measures ( Dunn & Dunn, 1997 ; Wilkinson, 1993 ).  Maternal-child supervision and involvement The Supervision and Involvement Scale (S&I Scale) from the Pittsburgh Youth Study ( Loeber, Stouthamer-Loeber, Van Kammen, & Farrington, 1991 ) was administered to caregivers and youths and consists of 37 items assessing the caregiver’s knowledge of where the child is at all points in the day, family routines, caregiver’s knowledge of child’s friends, amount of time caregiver and youth spend together, etc. The Pittsburgh Youth Study is a longitudinal study of a community sample of inner-city boys documenting the development of antisocial and delinquent behavior from childhood to early adulthood. The scale is based on a literature review of family factors related to delinquency ( Loeber & Stouthamer-Loeber, 1986 ), on Moos’ Family Environment Scale ( Moos & Moos, 1975 ), and Skinner, Steinhauer, and Santa-Barbara’s (1983) Family Assessment Measure. Descriptions of the psychometrics have been published elsewhere supporting the use of this measure ( Loeber, Drinkwater, Yin, Anderson, Schmidt & Crawford, 2000 ). Caregiver and youth versions of this measure are not comparable. We used the communication, supervision, and monitoring scales from the caregiver responses only for this paper.  Future goals and school motivation Questions from the Monitoring the Future survey ( Johnstone, Bachman, O’Malley, 1993 ) were used to assess the youths’ future goals in the areas of school and vocational aspirations as well as the caregivers’ goals for their children. In addition, caregivers and youths were asked to report on level of parental supervision over homework and amount of communication about homework. Monitoring the Future is an ongoing study of the behaviors, attitudes, and values of American secondary school students, college students, and young adults and has been administered annually since 1975. Adequate psychometric properties have been established for this measure ( Johnston, O’Malley, Bachman, & Schulenberg, 2007 ).  Demographics Items included child age, gender, ethnic identity, child relationship to caregiver (biological vs. adoptive), household income, education and work status of caregiver, single-parent status of caregiver. Caregivers also reported on whether the child was in special or regular education classes, whether the child had ever skipped a grade, been held back, suspended, expelled.  Child health status CD-4+ number (cells/m3), HIV RNA viral load (copies/ml) values and CDC classification for the closest date to the research interview were obtained through medical record abstraction. The mean interval between the date chart abstractions were obtained and the research interview was completed was 67 days (range=12–184 days).  Data Analyses Post hoc, secondary analyses were conducted on youths’ verbal ability, reading ability, and school achievement. SPSS was used to generate descriptive statistics. Regression analyses were used to assess the associations between WRAT3/PPVT scores and various predictor variables. Individual models were tested for each predictor variable separately. We also ran these analyses on dichotomized outcome variables (WRAT3 <25th percentile vs. > 25 th percentile, PPVT <25th percentile vs. > 25 th percentile). The pattern of significant associations was comparable to analyses using continuous scores (data not shown). Some variables from the Monitoring the Future survey had little to no variability and thus were deemed inappropriate for inclusion in statistical analyses and only used for descriptive purposes.  Results Table 1 describes the demographic characteristics of the youths and their caregivers. Table 2 describes school-related difficulties for these youths. Verbal and reading ability The mean PPVT score was 84.65 (SD=16.66). Scores ranged from 1st–87th percentile (mean= 24th percentile); 54% scored below average (< 25th percentile) and 29% scored <10th percentile. The mean WRAT3 score was 91.72 (SD=18.25). Scores ranged from <1st–95th percentile (mean= 38th percentile); 40% of the sample scored below average (<25th percentile) and 24% scored <10th percentile. Caregiver-child educational involvement The majority of caregivers reported that it was very important that their child graduate high school (95%), attend college (84%), graduate college (88%), and get a job (93%). Similarly, the majority of youths felt they definitely would graduate high school (74%), go to college (74%), graduate college (74%), and get a job (61%). Both caregivers and youths reported high levels of parental supervision over homework. All of the caregivers reported that they either ask if homework is done or ask to review it; 86% of youths said that their caregivers ask if homework is done and 70% ask to review it. Both caregivers and youths reported good communication about school. All of the caregivers reported talking with their children about school in the past month; 65% of the youths reported talking with their caregivers about school in the past month. Associations with verbal and reading ability Increased parental monitoring of the child (the parental monitoring subscale of the S&I scale) was associated with better PPVT scores (b=14.3, se=5.8, p=.018) and better WRAT3 reading subscores (b=24.4, se=8.6, p=.007). Better WRAT3 reading subscores were also associated with the greater level of importance parents placed on going to college (b=16.3, se=7.3, p=.032). Neither the PPVT or WRAT3 subscores were related to CD4+ number, viral load, CDC classification, child relationship to caregiver, whether caregiver was single parent, caregiver employment, caregiver education, income, or child or caregiver ethnic identity.  Results Table 1 describes the demographic characteristics of the youths and their caregivers. Table 2 describes school-related difficulties for these youths. Verbal and reading ability The mean PPVT score was 84.65 (SD=16.66). Scores ranged from 1st–87th percentile (mean= 24th percentile); 54% scored below average (< 25th percentile) and 29% scored <10th percentile. The mean WRAT3 score was 91.72 (SD=18.25). Scores ranged from <1st–95th percentile (mean= 38th percentile); 40% of the sample scored below average (<25th percentile) and 24% scored <10th percentile. Caregiver-child educational involvement The majority of caregivers reported that it was very important that their child graduate high school (95%), attend college (84%), graduate college (88%), and get a job (93%). Similarly, the majority of youths felt they definitely would graduate high school (74%), go to college (74%), graduate college (74%), and get a job (61%). Both caregivers and youths reported high levels of parental supervision over homework. All of the caregivers reported that they either ask if homework is done or ask to review it; 86% of youths said that their caregivers ask if homework is done and 70% ask to review it. Both caregivers and youths reported good communication about school. All of the caregivers reported talking with their children about school in the past month; 65% of the youths reported talking with their caregivers about school in the past month. Associations with verbal and reading ability Increased parental monitoring of the child (the parental monitoring subscale of the S&I scale) was associated with better PPVT scores (b=14.3, se=5.8, p=.018) and better WRAT3 reading subscores (b=24.4, se=8.6, p=.007). Better WRAT3 reading subscores were also associated with the greater level of importance parents placed on going to college (b=16.3, se=7.3, p=.032). Neither the PPVT or WRAT3 subscores were related to CD4+ number, viral load, CDC classification, child relationship to caregiver, whether caregiver was single parent, caregiver employment, caregiver education, income, or child or caregiver ethnic identity.  Verbal and reading ability The mean PPVT score was 84.65 (SD=16.66). Scores ranged from 1st–87th percentile (mean= 24th percentile); 54% scored below average (< 25th percentile) and 29% scored <10th percentile. The mean WRAT3 score was 91.72 (SD=18.25). Scores ranged from <1st–95th percentile (mean= 38th percentile); 40% of the sample scored below average (<25th percentile) and 24% scored <10th percentile.  Verbal and reading ability The mean PPVT score was 84.65 (SD=16.66). Scores ranged from 1st–87th percentile (mean= 24th percentile); 54% scored below average (< 25th percentile) and 29% scored <10th percentile. The mean WRAT3 score was 91.72 (SD=18.25). Scores ranged from <1st–95th percentile (mean= 38th percentile); 40% of the sample scored below average (<25th percentile) and 24% scored <10th percentile.  Caregiver-child educational involvement The majority of caregivers reported that it was very important that their child graduate high school (95%), attend college (84%), graduate college (88%), and get a job (93%). Similarly, the majority of youths felt they definitely would graduate high school (74%), go to college (74%), graduate college (74%), and get a job (61%). Both caregivers and youths reported high levels of parental supervision over homework. All of the caregivers reported that they either ask if homework is done or ask to review it; 86% of youths said that their caregivers ask if homework is done and 70% ask to review it. Both caregivers and youths reported good communication about school. All of the caregivers reported talking with their children about school in the past month; 65% of the youths reported talking with their caregivers about school in the past month.  Caregiver-child educational involvement The majority of caregivers reported that it was very important that their child graduate high school (95%), attend college (84%), graduate college (88%), and get a job (93%). Similarly, the majority of youths felt they definitely would graduate high school (74%), go to college (74%), graduate college (74%), and get a job (61%). Both caregivers and youths reported high levels of parental supervision over homework. All of the caregivers reported that they either ask if homework is done or ask to review it; 86% of youths said that their caregivers ask if homework is done and 70% ask to review it. Both caregivers and youths reported good communication about school. All of the caregivers reported talking with their children about school in the past month; 65% of the youths reported talking with their caregivers about school in the past month.  Associations with verbal and reading ability Increased parental monitoring of the child (the parental monitoring subscale of the S&I scale) was associated with better PPVT scores (b=14.3, se=5.8, p=.018) and better WRAT3 reading subscores (b=24.4, se=8.6, p=.007). Better WRAT3 reading subscores were also associated with the greater level of importance parents placed on going to college (b=16.3, se=7.3, p=.032). Neither the PPVT or WRAT3 subscores were related to CD4+ number, viral load, CDC classification, child relationship to caregiver, whether caregiver was single parent, caregiver employment, caregiver education, income, or child or caregiver ethnic identity.  Associations with verbal and reading ability Increased parental monitoring of the child (the parental monitoring subscale of the S&I scale) was associated with better PPVT scores (b=14.3, se=5.8, p=.018) and better WRAT3 reading subscores (b=24.4, se=8.6, p=.007). Better WRAT3 reading subscores were also associated with the greater level of importance parents placed on going to college (b=16.3, se=7.3, p=.032). Neither the PPVT or WRAT3 subscores were related to CD4+ number, viral load, CDC classification, child relationship to caregiver, whether caregiver was single parent, caregiver employment, caregiver education, income, or child or caregiver ethnic identity.  Discussion Although caregivers and youths reported high educational aspirations and levels of parental supervision over homework, our sample of perinatally HIV-infected youths scored poorly on measures of language functioning: 29% scored <10th percentile on the PPVT and 24% scored <10th percentile on the WRAT3. Large numbers of youths were academically retained and placed in special education classes. As hypothesized, performance by this cohort of early adolescents was below age expectations. However, performance was similar to previous studies of urban African-American uninfected children ( Luster & McAdoo, 1994 ), prenatally drug exposed children ( Goldschmidt, Richardson, Corneliius, & Day, 2004 ), and impoverished inner-city chronically ill adolescents ( Silver, Bauman, Coupey, Doctors, & Boeck, 1990 ), suggesting that poor language functioning may not necessarily be attributed to HIV infection. Rather, the etiology may likely be multifactorial, including the realities of living in impoverished neighborhoods with under-resourced schools, and the immediate stressors of daily living. Despite comparable achievement profiles between our sample and youths of similar demographic backgrounds, the implications of being placed in a remedial educational setting or being functionally illiterate becomes an additional stigmatizing attribute for youths with HIV. The stressors of living with a chronic stigmatized illness coupled with a sense of educational failure place youths with HIV at further risk for behavioral and health problems. For example, poor language skills may limit youths’ ability to understand their illness and compromise their ability to adhere to challenging medication regimens ( Hinkin et al., 2002 ; Wagner, 2002 ). Furthermore, better skills may operate as a protective factor against early sexual activity during adolescence, and lower intelligence may be a risk factor ( Halpern, Joyner, Udry, & Suchindran, 2000 ). Contrary to our second hypothesis, language delays were not associated with disease severity. Martin and colleagues’ (2006) also found viral load to be unrelated to cognitive test scores, although they found that CD4+ counts ?500 was associated with lower scores on subtests measuring processing speed. The authors speculate that the lack of association with viral load might be due to the fact that viral load values can be more variable and fluctuate with changes in adherence ( Haubrick et al., 1999 ; Van Dyke et al., 2002 ). Further research should continue to examine the relationship between markers of disease severity and cognitive functioning. Although many clinics providing medical care to perinatally HIV-infected youths grapple with these issues, it has been unclear how best to facilitate interventions to increase opportunities for these youths to acquire requisite skills for adult independent living, in part due to limited research. As this population ages, studies examining the association of cognitive and language skills and risk vs. health promoting behaviors will be needed. Interventions to address the learning gap among perinatally infected youths may need to consider multiple risk factors at the individual, familial, and environmental level. Psychosocial interventions for HIV+ children and adolescents commonly focus on behavioral and adjustment difficulties that compromise their medical treatment. However, it may be important to broaden the scope of these psychosocial services to include specialized evaluations and interventions that help youths and their parents identify effective learning strategies or navigate educational systems. Given that high levels of parental supervision and monitoring was associated with better language functioning, strategic family based interventions that promote structured, stimulating home environments, and facilitate caregiver-child interactions may also be helpful in HIV specialized programs for youths. In Coscia and colleagues’ (2001) study of impoverished HIV-infected children, for example, stimulating and supportive home settings buffered the negative effects of poverty on cognitive functioning. In conclusion, although our sample of youths with perinatal HIV infection performed poorly on tests of verbal and reading ability, they were not dissimilar to other samples of inner-city youths. The findings are however limited to a small convenience sample of HIV+ early adolescents receiving medical care from an urban medical center. The cross-sectional study design and small sampling does not allow us to determine the temporal sequence of events. Longitudinal follow-up studies with this cohort are needed to clarify whether family management practices continue to influence children’s cognitive and achievement functioning over time. Future research should focus on isolating the impact of HIV disease on intellectual and school functioning of HIV-infected youths by including a comparison group with similar socioeconomic status and other risk factors. Because of the high risk backgrounds of HIV-exposed children, both in the U.S. and internationally, the effects of HIV-infection on cognitive functioning, in the absence of disease progression, are often difficult to disentangle from other background characteristics that are also know to affect neuropsychological outcomes. Notwithstanding these limitations, this study highlights poor verbal and reading ability among youths with perinatal HIV, and highlights the importance of educational and family based interventions that address this emerging need, regardless of its etiology.  Discussion Although caregivers and youths reported high educational aspirations and levels of parental supervision over homework, our sample of perinatally HIV-infected youths scored poorly on measures of language functioning: 29% scored <10th percentile on the PPVT and 24% scored <10th percentile on the WRAT3. Large numbers of youths were academically retained and placed in special education classes. As hypothesized, performance by this cohort of early adolescents was below age expectations. However, performance was similar to previous studies of urban African-American uninfected children ( Luster & McAdoo, 1994 ), prenatally drug exposed children ( Goldschmidt, Richardson, Corneliius, & Day, 2004 ), and impoverished inner-city chronically ill adolescents ( Silver, Bauman, Coupey, Doctors, & Boeck, 1990 ), suggesting that poor language functioning may not necessarily be attributed to HIV infection. Rather, the etiology may likely be multifactorial, including the realities of living in impoverished neighborhoods with under-resourced schools, and the immediate stressors of daily living. Despite comparable achievement profiles between our sample and youths of similar demographic backgrounds, the implications of being placed in a remedial educational setting or being functionally illiterate becomes an additional stigmatizing attribute for youths with HIV. The stressors of living with a chronic stigmatized illness coupled with a sense of educational failure place youths with HIV at further risk for behavioral and health problems. For example, poor language skills may limit youths’ ability to understand their illness and compromise their ability to adhere to challenging medication regimens ( Hinkin et al., 2002 ; Wagner, 2002 ). Furthermore, better skills may operate as a protective factor against early sexual activity during adolescence, and lower intelligence may be a risk factor ( Halpern, Joyner, Udry, & Suchindran, 2000 ). Contrary to our second hypothesis, language delays were not associated with disease severity. Martin and colleagues’ (2006) also found viral load to be unrelated to cognitive test scores, although they found that CD4+ counts ?500 was associated with lower scores on subtests measuring processing speed. The authors speculate that the lack of association with viral load might be due to the fact that viral load values can be more variable and fluctuate with changes in adherence ( Haubrick et al., 1999 ; Van Dyke et al., 2002 ). Further research should continue to examine the relationship between markers of disease severity and cognitive functioning. Although many clinics providing medical care to perinatally HIV-infected youths grapple with these issues, it has been unclear how best to facilitate interventions to increase opportunities for these youths to acquire requisite skills for adult independent living, in part due to limited research. As this population ages, studies examining the association of cognitive and language skills and risk vs. health promoting behaviors will be needed. Interventions to address the learning gap among perinatally infected youths may need to consider multiple risk factors at the individual, familial, and environmental level. Psychosocial interventions for HIV+ children and adolescents commonly focus on behavioral and adjustment difficulties that compromise their medical treatment. However, it may be important to broaden the scope of these psychosocial services to include specialized evaluations and interventions that help youths and their parents identify effective learning strategies or navigate educational systems. Given that high levels of parental supervision and monitoring was associated with better language functioning, strategic family based interventions that promote structured, stimulating home environments, and facilitate caregiver-child interactions may also be helpful in HIV specialized programs for youths. In Coscia and colleagues’ (2001) study of impoverished HIV-infected children, for example, stimulating and supportive home settings buffered the negative effects of poverty on cognitive functioning. In conclusion, although our sample of youths with perinatal HIV infection performed poorly on tests of verbal and reading ability, they were not dissimilar to other samples of inner-city youths. The findings are however limited to a small convenience sample of HIV+ early adolescents receiving medical care from an urban medical center. The cross-sectional study design and small sampling does not allow us to determine the temporal sequence of events. Longitudinal follow-up studies with this cohort are needed to clarify whether family management practices continue to influence children’s cognitive and achievement functioning over time. Future research should focus on isolating the impact of HIV disease on intellectual and school functioning of HIV-infected youths by including a comparison group with similar socioeconomic status and other risk factors. Because of the high risk backgrounds of HIV-exposed children, both in the U.S. and internationally, the effects of HIV-infection on cognitive functioning, in the absence of disease progression, are often difficult to disentangle from other background characteristics that are also know to affect neuropsychological outcomes. Notwithstanding these limitations, this study highlights poor verbal and reading ability among youths with perinatal HIV, and highlights the importance of educational and family based interventions that address this emerging need, regardless of its etiology.  Tables Table 1 Characteristics of 43 HIV Infected Youth and Their Primary Caregivers * . Child Variables n (%) Race ?African American 35 (81) ?Hispanic or Other 8 (19) Age (in years) ?9–10 12 (28) ?11–12 15 (35) ?13–14 10 (23) ?15 6 (14) Female Gender 20 (46) Education (current grade) ?3rd–4th 9 (21) ?5th–6th 15 (35) ?7th–8th 11 (25) ?9th–10th 8 (19) Caregiver Variables n (%) Relationship to child ?Biological parent 10 (24) ?Adoptive parent 32 (76) HIV Infected 10(23) Race ?African American 35 (81) ?Hispanic 6 (14) Age (in years) 22–74 (mean=52) Female Gender 39 (91) Education ?< high school 4 (10) ?10th–12th grade 25 (61) ?> high school 12 (29) Currently unemployed 34 (79) Single parent 34 (81) * Note. Numbers do not always sum to 43 due to missing data. Table 2 School-Related Characteristics for 43 HIV Infected Youth School-related Characteristics n (%) Currently in school (yes) 42 (98) Ever held back in school (yes) 15 (35) Ever suspended from school (yes) 10 (23) Type of class child currently attends ?Regular education 29 (67) ?Special education 9 (21) ?Resource room or transitional class 5 (12) Ever attended special education class (yes) 21 (49) Reason for special education placement (n=21) ?Reading problems 12 (57) ?Math problems 8 (38) ?Attention problems 7 (33) ?Discipline problems 7 (33)  Tables Table 1 Characteristics of 43 HIV Infected Youth and Their Primary Caregivers * . Child Variables n (%) Race ?African American 35 (81) ?Hispanic or Other 8 (19) Age (in years) ?9–10 12 (28) ?11–12 15 (35) ?13–14 10 (23) ?15 6 (14) Female Gender 20 (46) Education (current grade) ?3rd–4th 9 (21) ?5th–6th 15 (35) ?7th–8th 11 (25) ?9th–10th 8 (19) Caregiver Variables n (%) Relationship to child ?Biological parent 10 (24) ?Adoptive parent 32 (76) HIV Infected 10(23) Race ?African American 35 (81) ?Hispanic 6 (14) Age (in years) 22–74 (mean=52) Female Gender 39 (91) Education ?< high school 4 (10) ?10th–12th grade 25 (61) ?> high school 12 (29) Currently unemployed 34 (79) Single parent 34 (81) * Note. Numbers do not always sum to 43 due to missing data. Table 2 School-Related Characteristics for 43 HIV Infected Youth School-related Characteristics n (%) Currently in school (yes) 42 (98) Ever held back in school (yes) 15 (35) Ever suspended from school (yes) 10 (23) Type of class child currently attends ?Regular education 29 (67) ?Special education 9 (21) ?Resource room or transitional class 5 (12) Ever attended special education class (yes) 21 (49) Reason for special education placement (n=21) ?Reading problems 12 (57) ?Math problems 8 (38) ?Attention problems 7 (33) ?Discipline problems 7 (33) 