Developing a Blended Course on Dying, Loss, and Grief An important component of end-of-life education is to provide health professionals with content related to dying, loss, and grief. The authors describe the strategies used to develop and offer a blended course (integration of classroom face-to-face learning with online learning) that addressed the sensitive and often emotional content associated with grieving and bereavement. Using Kolb’s experiential learning theory, a set of 4 online learning modules, with engaging, interactive elements, was created. Course evaluations demonstrated the success of the blended course in comparison to the traditional, exclusive face-to-face approach.  Conclusion Developing online courses on sensitive topics such as dying loss and grief are challenging. We demonstrated that by using an experiential approach and with well established strategies for successful online learning, we were able to develop and teach a blended course on dying, loss and grief that was extremely well received by the learners. We encourage other educators to consider this approach for teaching sensitive content in other areas.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Learning Circle for Palliative Care Courses based on Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theory Figure 2 Strategies for Successful Blended Learning for Sensitive Course Content Table 1 Description of Course Content and Learning Activities Module and Subtopics Examples of Learning Activities in the Module Face-to-Face Class Session for the Module Online Pretest Personal and Professional Narratives of Dying, Loss and Grief Personal/Professional Narratives Cumulative Grief in Healthcare Professionals Individual and Systems Levels of Support Online responses to questions about self-care strategies and posting of an initial plan to implement a strategy for institutional support of professionals in the clinical setting Further acquaintance work fellow learners; viewing IPPC video on professionals’ coping with pediatric death followed by reflective work on professional experience with bereavement The Dying Trajectory and Near Death Experiences The Illness and Dying Trajectories Near Death Experiences and Death Related Sensory Experiences Online posting of a case from clinical experience that portrayed the dying trajectory of a patient and subsequent responses to class mates’ postings with evidence-based recommendations for care None Grief and Loss: Conceptual Dimensions Grief Spousal Bereavement Grief Responses in Older Adults Pregnancy Loss and Infant Death Children and Grief Online responses to questions about gender differences in grief Electronic submission of a review of a book that is based on a personal account of content related to the course (dying, loss and grief) Electronic submission of a paper which entailed a discussion of themes portrayed in art at a museum exhibit for “Day of the Dead” Two separate panel discussions: bereaved individuals and palliative care advanced practice nurses Facilitating Healing in Individuals and Families Interventions to Facilitate Healing Interventions for the Older Adult Considerations for Parents of Unborn and Newly born Children who have Died Working with Families of the Dying Child Writing Letters of Condolence Online responses to questions regarding research that examined efficacy of grief interventions Electronic submission of a paper which entailed the development or evaluation of an evidence-based care guideline related to course content Verbal presentation of development/evaluation of care guideline and closing ritual with community of learners Online Post-test Table 2 Students’ Evaluations of Dying, Loss, and Grief Evaluation Item NUSC 520 (Traditional face-to-face, Fall 2006) N = 10 NUSC 520 (Blended, Fall 2007) N = 9 COURSE EVALUATION Mean rating (1 = disagree to 5 = strongly agree) The overall quality of the course was high. 4.9 4.89 The course objectives and expectations were clear. 4.8 4.78 The course content was relevant to the objectives. 4.78 4.9 The course materials were well-prepared. 4.8 4.89 The textbooks/required readings were useful. 4.8 4.78 Class assignments and learning activities were appropriate. 4.8 4.89 Evaluation methods were appropriate. 4.8 4.78 INSTRUCTOR EVALUATION The overall quality of the instruction was high. 4.9 4.89 The instructor was knowledgeable about the subject matter. 4.9 5.0 The instructor’s presentations were well organized. 4.7 4.78 The instructor employed a variety of teaching/learning strategies. 4.7 4.89 The instructor treated students with respect. 4.89 5.0 The instructor was receptive to student concerns. 4.78 4.89 