Trk Receptor Expression and Inhibition in Neuroblastomas Neuroblastoma, the most common and deadly solid tumor in children, exhibits heterogeneous clinical behavior, from spontaneous regression to relentless progression. Current evidence suggests that the TRK family of neurotrophin receptors plays a critical role in these diverse behaviors. Neuroblastomas expressing TrkA are biologically favorable and prone to spontaneous regression or differentiation, depending on the absence or presence of its ligand (NGF) in the microenvironment. In contrast, TrkB-expressing tumors frequently have MYCN amplification and are very aggressive and often fatal tumors. These tumors also express the TrkB ligand (BDNF), resulting in an autocrine or paracrine survival pathway. Exposure to BDNF promotes survival, drug resistance, and angiogenesis of TrkB-expressing tumors. Here we review the role of Trks in normal development, the different functions of Trk isoforms, and the major Trk signaling pathways. We also review the roles these receptors play in the heterogeneous biological and clinical behavior of neuroblastomas, and the activation of Trk receptors in other cancers. Finally we address the progress that has been made in developing targeted therapy with Trk-selective inhibitors to treat neuroblastomas and other tumors with activated Trk expression.  Conclusions It is clear that TrkA and TrkB play important roles in the biological and clinical behavior of neuroblastomas. Absent expression or abnormal function of Trks may render cells unable to undergo differentiation in response to ligand in their microenvironment, so they would continue to grow when they should differentiate, and survive when they should die. The delayed activation of these normal developmental pathways could explain the spontaneous regression of neuroblastoma seen in infants, or the spontaneous maturation to benign ganglioneuromas seen in older patients. Conversely, the coexpression of TrkB and its ligand BDNF in unfavorable neuroblastomas represents a potent survival pathway that promotes growth, angiogenesis, and resistance to therapy. The expression of TrkB in developing sympathetic neurons is rare, so TrkB expression in neuroblastomas seems to be aberrant or inappropriate for this cell type. In any case, there is great potential for the use of Trk inhibitors in the treatment of neuroblastomas, as well as other malignancies with activated or overexpressed Trk genes. Not only is there preclinical and clinical evidence of efficacy, but there has been very little toxicity, suggesting a favorable therapeutic index. 