Antagonistic effect of toll-like receptor signaling and bacterial infections on transplantation tolerance * The induction of donor-specific tolerance remains a major goal in the field of transplantation immunology. Therapies that target costimulatory molecules can induce tolerance to heart and pancreatic islet allografts in mouse models, but fail to do so following transplantation of skin or intestinal allografts. We have proposed that organs colonized by commensal bacteria such as skin, lung and intestine may be resistant to such therapies as a result of bacterial translocation at the time of transplantation, which may promote antigen-presenting cell (APC) maturation and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, consequently enhancing responses of alloreactive T cells. Our results indicate that the inability to sense signaling by most toll-like receptors (TLRs), as well as by interleukin (IL)-1R and IL-18R, as a result of genetic ablation of myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) promotes the acceptance of skin allografts. Conversely, TLR signals and infections by a model bacterium, Listeria monocytogenes (LM), at the time of transplantation can prevent the induction of transplantation tolerance. The effects of the TLR9 agonist CpG are MyD88-dependent, while the pro-rejection capacity of LM depends on the intracellular sensing of LM and the production of type I interferon (IFN). Therefore, transiently targeting these innate, pro-inflammatory pathways may have therapeutic value to promote transplantation tolerance.  Conclusions Our data indicate that TLR signaling and type I IFNR signaling can both prevent the induction of transplantation tolerance by costimulation-targeting therapies. It may be of interest to consider these pathways as therapeutic targets to facilitate transplantation tolerance to organs colonized by commensal bacteria. However, inhibiting such pathways should proceed with caution as such interventions may result in serious infectious complications. For instance, mice lacking IFN signaling are exquisitely sensitive to viral infections that become rapidly lethal ( 17 ). In addition, TLR signals have been described in some cases to potentiate Treg function ( 18 ), although they can also inhibit regulation ( 19 ), such that antagonism of this pathway may prevent the induction of regulation, a tolerance mechanism important in both the induction and maintenance of tolerance by anti-CD154 ( 20 ). Elimination of bacterial load from colonized donor organs may be an alternative approach to facilitate transplantation tolerance, although the efficacy of this intervention remains to be demonstrated in animal models. We conclude that TLR signals and bacterial infections can interfere with the induction of transplantation tolerance and that closer attention may need to be paid to peri-operative infections in the clinic, with respect to their capacity to promote transplant rejection. Future prospective clinical trials should help determine whether specific types of bacterial infections can precipitate acute or chronic rejection.  Figure Figure 1 Model for enhancement of alloresponses by bacteria Bacterial translocation may occur following transplantation of organs colonized by commensal bacteria or in patients experiencing active infections. Bacterial molecular patterns may activate donor and recipient antigen-presenting cells (APCs) resulting in APC maturation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Alloreactive T cells stimulated in this context may develop augmented responses leading to prevention of, or breach in, transplantation tolerance. 