Impacts of a Peer-Group Intervention on HIV-Related Knowledge, Attitudes, and Personal Behaviors for Urban Hospital Workers in Malawi This report describes the effects of a peer-group intervention on Malawian urban hospital workers’ HIV-related personal knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors. More than 850 clinical and nonclinical hospital workers received the intervention. Evaluation used independent surveys of a sample of workers at baseline (N = 366) and postintervention ( N = 561). Compared with the baseline survey, after the intervention, workers had higher knowledge of HIV transmission and prevention; more positive attitudes including more hope, less stigmatization of persons with HIV, more positive attitudes toward HIV testing and condom use, and higher self-efficacy for practicing safer sex and for community prevention; more reported recent personal HIV tests, more discussion of safer sex with partners, and more reported community HIV prevention activities. However, health workers’ risky sexual behaviors did not differ at baseline and postintervention. The intervention should be strengthened to support more sexual risk reduction and be made available to all health workers in Malawi.  Method The authors used a pre-post test design with no control group to evaluate the impacts of the intervention on urban hospital workers, using unmatched samples of health workers at each time period. There are only four large governmental referral hospitals in Malawi, and they are widely separated geographically to provide nationwide coverage. It was not feasible within budgetary constraints to use another referral hospital as a control group. At the referral hospital, all staff intermingled and discussed events at the work-place on a daily basis. Thus, randomizing units or individuals to the intervention or control group was not appropriate because of the threat of contamination of the control group. Also, the authors wanted to observe the impact of the intervention for the hospital as a whole, not just for individuals or designated units. Because the intervention took only 10 months to complete, when planning the project the authors hoped that changes resulting from relevant factors other than the intervention would be minimal. The stressful conditions at the hospital changed little over the course of the project, but the availability of HIV testing and drug treatment increased substantially at the hospital and other locales in Malawi. Site and Sample Malawi has a national health care system based on the World Health Organization primary health care model. Four governmental regional central hospitals provide the highest level of referral and also provide care for persons living in the urban area. The study site is one of these referral hospitals, providing both inpatient and outpatient care with a full complement of different specialty areas. There are approximately 700 inpatient beds, and 560 outpatients are seen daily in the clinics. Because this is a referral hospital the acuity level is high, especially for inpatients. The hospital has a newer building where most care units are located and an older facility about 5 kilometers away with prenatal, well woman, low-risk intrapartum, and postpartum care. A full-service HIV care facility is located next to the main hospital. In addition, the hospital inpatient and outpatient facilities serve many patients who are infected with HIV but have never been tested. The hospital has been part of a national infection control project and is viewed as a national model for infection control. Because all hospital workers are regarded as sources of health information by their family and neighbors, the authors offered the intervention to all hospital workers, including both clinical and nonclinical staff. At the time the authors planned this project, they estimated the work force at approximately 800, based on personnel records, although records were not exact. Workers were divided into three groups according to occupation. A total of 38% of the participants were professionally and technically trained health workers including doctors, clinical officers, dentists, registered nurses, nurse-midwives, and x-ray, dental, and laboratory technicians. Most provided direct patient care and supervised clinical support workers. A total of 32% made up the second group of clinical support workers; these were paraprofessionals with training of 6 months or less. Most of them had direct patient contact, usually while providing physical care to hospitalized patients directed by the nurses and other clinicians. A total of 30% were nonclinical workers, and these were all the workers whose jobs involved no patient treatment or care responsibilities. These included administrators, clerks, guards, maintenance personnel, laundry workers, and kitchen staff. An influx of workers, most of whom were clinical support staff, brought the total to over 850 by the end of the project. Intervention The Mzake ndi Mzake intervention for community members consisted of six sessions focused on the HIV epidemic and stigmatization; human sexuality and sexually transmitted infections; HIV prevention, AIDS, and testing; partner negotiation; condom use; and how to contribute to community HIV prevention. Based on the authors’ formative evaluation of health workers ( Talashek et al., 2007 ), four new sessions were added for health workers only on HIV issues they reported that they frequently encountered: a nontechnical overview of HIV treatment and symptom management, universal precautions, helping individuals and families address HIV prevention, and ethical issues for health workers related to HIV. Every session included guided discussions, role plays, return demonstrations with corrective feedback, and an assignment to practice a specific skill before the next session. Sessions lasted 90 to 120 minutes. Copies of the manual and data collection instruments are available from the corresponding author. The sessions were implemented by two trained peer-group facilitators. Severe staff shortages at the urban hospital made it difficult to use the initial model of using two trained volunteer hospital workers as the facilitators. Therefore, most hospital worker peer groups were facilitated by one hospital worker and one member of the research team whowas also a nurse. Training for both the workers and research team was accomplished by first having prospective facilitators go through the intervention as participants and then give return demonstrations with supportive corrective feedback from the trainers and their fellow volunteers. When they offered the sessions, the facilitators received ongoing support and guidance from the research team. The peer-group intervention was made available for all interested workers. Nearly all of the hospital workers ( n = 855) participated in all 10 sessions of the peer group. A total of 37% of the participants were clinicians/technicians, 39% were clinical support staff, and 24% were nonclinical staff. Variables and Operational Measures The data collection instrument was initially developed for the authors’ Botswana studies ( Norr et al., 2004 ) and revised for their Malawi primary school teachers'study ( Norr et al., 2007 ) and the district health worker study described previously ( Norr et al., 2006 ). The health worker variables presented here measure personal HIV prevention-related knowledge, attitudes, and HIV prevention behaviors. Table 1 shows the variables, operational measures, and reliability coefficients where appropriate. Knowledge measures include a 6-item index of transmission knowledge that had acceptable reliability ( ? = .74) and a single item on prevention of sexual transmission (the most common mode of transmission in Malawi) taken from the Malawi Demographic and Health Survey ( National Statistical Office, 2005 ) that has been widely used not only in Malawi but in many other African countries. The authors believed it was useful to retain this single-item measure to enhance the comparability of their report to other studies in Malawi and Africa. Attitudes measured included hope about controlling the epidemic, two measures of stigma, favoring HIV testing, condom attitudes, and two measures of self-efficacy, one for personal safer sex behaviors and one for community prevention. The measures of condom attitudes and self-efficacy for personal sexual behaviors were both multi-item measures with acceptable reliability. Where the authors had two items measuring the same concept they created an index, because that index was a more stable measure than either single item. Hope, one stigma measure, favoring HIV testing, and self-efficacy for community prevention were all two-item indices. Despite measurement limitations inherent in a two-item index, these measures were retained because all of the attitudes were directly relevant for health workers in a country with a high HIV prevalence. Stigma attitudes presented the authors with a measurement issue. They initially had six items about stigma, which they intended to use as a single attitude scale. However, psychometric analysis showed that the items were not a unidimensional construct. The two contact items were one factor, and the single item regarding blame was a unique dimension. Other items about HIV disclosure were not related to either contact or blame. The authors decided not to use them because respondents commented that they responded based on their beliefs about the societal stigma a person might be subjected to after disclosure rather than their personal attitudes. The four behavior measures included discussion of safer sex with one's partner, a five-item index of sexual risk taking, whether the health worker had a recent HIV test, and a six-item index of reported community HIV prevention activities. Talk with partner was a two-item index that included talking about being faithful and/or about using condoms. Because these are the two primary possible means of HIV prevention with a partner, a two-item index seemed appropriate to measure this behavior. Procedure Ethical approvals were first obtained from the University of Illinois at Chicago institutional review board and the University of Malawi College of Medicine Research and Ethics Review Committee, and then the project was discussed with the hospital management team. The 10-session peer-group intervention was offered to all cadres of hospital workers. Health workers gave anonymous informed consent to participate (signed and documented by the researcher) to protect their identity regarding their work-related behaviors. Experienced research team members facilitated the first sets of peer groups for health workers, who had expressed interest in becoming peer-group facilitators. After training, these health workers cofacilitated all the other peer groups with an experienced project member. An ongoing process evaluation monitored success and difficulty. Peer-group facilitators kept records of training sessions held, number and type of health workers trained in each session, and attendance. A structured observation of 110 sessions evaluated fidelity of the intervention regarding both content and peer-group processes. These observations established that trained health worker volunteers paired with a project staff member were effective peer-group facilitators who delivered the intervention with fidelity to the conceptual model ( McCreary et al., 2006 ). Analysis To evaluate the impact of the intervention, the authors examined the difference in proportions or means for each outcome variable between the baseline andfinal surveys. The authors also examined the regression coefficients (B), using ordinary least squares or logit regression models, for final-baseline differences in equations for each outcome variable controlling for the structural factors related to some of the outcome variables. These structural factors included job category, gender, age, food security, and education.  Site and Sample Malawi has a national health care system based on the World Health Organization primary health care model. Four governmental regional central hospitals provide the highest level of referral and also provide care for persons living in the urban area. The study site is one of these referral hospitals, providing both inpatient and outpatient care with a full complement of different specialty areas. There are approximately 700 inpatient beds, and 560 outpatients are seen daily in the clinics. Because this is a referral hospital the acuity level is high, especially for inpatients. The hospital has a newer building where most care units are located and an older facility about 5 kilometers away with prenatal, well woman, low-risk intrapartum, and postpartum care. A full-service HIV care facility is located next to the main hospital. In addition, the hospital inpatient and outpatient facilities serve many patients who are infected with HIV but have never been tested. The hospital has been part of a national infection control project and is viewed as a national model for infection control. Because all hospital workers are regarded as sources of health information by their family and neighbors, the authors offered the intervention to all hospital workers, including both clinical and nonclinical staff. At the time the authors planned this project, they estimated the work force at approximately 800, based on personnel records, although records were not exact. Workers were divided into three groups according to occupation. A total of 38% of the participants were professionally and technically trained health workers including doctors, clinical officers, dentists, registered nurses, nurse-midwives, and x-ray, dental, and laboratory technicians. Most provided direct patient care and supervised clinical support workers. A total of 32% made up the second group of clinical support workers; these were paraprofessionals with training of 6 months or less. Most of them had direct patient contact, usually while providing physical care to hospitalized patients directed by the nurses and other clinicians. A total of 30% were nonclinical workers, and these were all the workers whose jobs involved no patient treatment or care responsibilities. These included administrators, clerks, guards, maintenance personnel, laundry workers, and kitchen staff. An influx of workers, most of whom were clinical support staff, brought the total to over 850 by the end of the project.  Intervention The Mzake ndi Mzake intervention for community members consisted of six sessions focused on the HIV epidemic and stigmatization; human sexuality and sexually transmitted infections; HIV prevention, AIDS, and testing; partner negotiation; condom use; and how to contribute to community HIV prevention. Based on the authors’ formative evaluation of health workers ( Talashek et al., 2007 ), four new sessions were added for health workers only on HIV issues they reported that they frequently encountered: a nontechnical overview of HIV treatment and symptom management, universal precautions, helping individuals and families address HIV prevention, and ethical issues for health workers related to HIV. Every session included guided discussions, role plays, return demonstrations with corrective feedback, and an assignment to practice a specific skill before the next session. Sessions lasted 90 to 120 minutes. Copies of the manual and data collection instruments are available from the corresponding author. The sessions were implemented by two trained peer-group facilitators. Severe staff shortages at the urban hospital made it difficult to use the initial model of using two trained volunteer hospital workers as the facilitators. Therefore, most hospital worker peer groups were facilitated by one hospital worker and one member of the research team whowas also a nurse. Training for both the workers and research team was accomplished by first having prospective facilitators go through the intervention as participants and then give return demonstrations with supportive corrective feedback from the trainers and their fellow volunteers. When they offered the sessions, the facilitators received ongoing support and guidance from the research team. The peer-group intervention was made available for all interested workers. Nearly all of the hospital workers ( n = 855) participated in all 10 sessions of the peer group. A total of 37% of the participants were clinicians/technicians, 39% were clinical support staff, and 24% were nonclinical staff.  Variables and Operational Measures The data collection instrument was initially developed for the authors’ Botswana studies ( Norr et al., 2004 ) and revised for their Malawi primary school teachers'study ( Norr et al., 2007 ) and the district health worker study described previously ( Norr et al., 2006 ). The health worker variables presented here measure personal HIV prevention-related knowledge, attitudes, and HIV prevention behaviors. Table 1 shows the variables, operational measures, and reliability coefficients where appropriate. Knowledge measures include a 6-item index of transmission knowledge that had acceptable reliability ( ? = .74) and a single item on prevention of sexual transmission (the most common mode of transmission in Malawi) taken from the Malawi Demographic and Health Survey ( National Statistical Office, 2005 ) that has been widely used not only in Malawi but in many other African countries. The authors believed it was useful to retain this single-item measure to enhance the comparability of their report to other studies in Malawi and Africa. Attitudes measured included hope about controlling the epidemic, two measures of stigma, favoring HIV testing, condom attitudes, and two measures of self-efficacy, one for personal safer sex behaviors and one for community prevention. The measures of condom attitudes and self-efficacy for personal sexual behaviors were both multi-item measures with acceptable reliability. Where the authors had two items measuring the same concept they created an index, because that index was a more stable measure than either single item. Hope, one stigma measure, favoring HIV testing, and self-efficacy for community prevention were all two-item indices. Despite measurement limitations inherent in a two-item index, these measures were retained because all of the attitudes were directly relevant for health workers in a country with a high HIV prevalence. Stigma attitudes presented the authors with a measurement issue. They initially had six items about stigma, which they intended to use as a single attitude scale. However, psychometric analysis showed that the items were not a unidimensional construct. The two contact items were one factor, and the single item regarding blame was a unique dimension. Other items about HIV disclosure were not related to either contact or blame. The authors decided not to use them because respondents commented that they responded based on their beliefs about the societal stigma a person might be subjected to after disclosure rather than their personal attitudes. The four behavior measures included discussion of safer sex with one's partner, a five-item index of sexual risk taking, whether the health worker had a recent HIV test, and a six-item index of reported community HIV prevention activities. Talk with partner was a two-item index that included talking about being faithful and/or about using condoms. Because these are the two primary possible means of HIV prevention with a partner, a two-item index seemed appropriate to measure this behavior.  Procedure Ethical approvals were first obtained from the University of Illinois at Chicago institutional review board and the University of Malawi College of Medicine Research and Ethics Review Committee, and then the project was discussed with the hospital management team. The 10-session peer-group intervention was offered to all cadres of hospital workers. Health workers gave anonymous informed consent to participate (signed and documented by the researcher) to protect their identity regarding their work-related behaviors. Experienced research team members facilitated the first sets of peer groups for health workers, who had expressed interest in becoming peer-group facilitators. After training, these health workers cofacilitated all the other peer groups with an experienced project member. An ongoing process evaluation monitored success and difficulty. Peer-group facilitators kept records of training sessions held, number and type of health workers trained in each session, and attendance. A structured observation of 110 sessions evaluated fidelity of the intervention regarding both content and peer-group processes. These observations established that trained health worker volunteers paired with a project staff member were effective peer-group facilitators who delivered the intervention with fidelity to the conceptual model ( McCreary et al., 2006 ).  Analysis To evaluate the impact of the intervention, the authors examined the difference in proportions or means for each outcome variable between the baseline andfinal surveys. The authors also examined the regression coefficients (B), using ordinary least squares or logit regression models, for final-baseline differences in equations for each outcome variable controlling for the structural factors related to some of the outcome variables. These structural factors included job category, gender, age, food security, and education.  Results The proportion of clinicians/technicians in the baseline sample was greater than the proportion in the hospital workforce because of oversampling of professional workers. The authors made a correction in the sampling for the postintervention survey. Thus the baseline and final health workers’ survey samples differ significantly in job levels ( Table 2 ). There was a higher proportion of clinicians/technicians (51% vs. 39%) and a smaller proportion of nonclinical support staff (12% vs. 22%) at the baseline than at the final survey. No other demographic factor differed significantly between the baseline and final evaluation samples. About 45% of both samples had completed secondary school, whereas one third had only primary school education. More than two fifths of the hospital workers said that their households had adequate food all the time. About 40% of the health workers were male, and nearly 60% of the sample were over age 35. General HIV knowledge is important for health workers so that they know what behaviors will prevent the spread of HIV, both in their personal lives and in their work settings. The health workers had a fairly good knowledge of the general facts about HIV at baseline before the intervention began. On the 6-item HIV knowledge index, the health workers scored 81% correct at baseline (see Table 3 ). Their average knowledge increased significantly to 92% correct at the final evaluation. The authors asked health workers to name ways a person could keep from getting HIV and then counted how many named the three most widely recognized “ABC” strategies (i.e., abstinence, being faithful or reducing number of partners, and using condoms). The health workers were significantly more knowledgeable about HIV prevention strategies after the intervention. The impact of the intervention on both measures of knowledge remained significant when controlling for adequate food, age, gender, type of job, and education. The authors examined several attitudes that have relevance for health workers as HIV prevention leaders: hope about the HIV epidemic in Malawi, degree of stigmatization of persons living with HIV, attitudes toward HIV testing and condoms, and self-efficacy for practicing safer sex and for community prevention. The hope index combined two items: hope that the HIV epidemic could be stopped and perceived likelihood that people could change sexual behaviors to prevent HIV. Health workers had a significant increase in their sense of hope after the intervention. On a scale ranging from 1 to 4, with 4 being the most hopeful, the mean score increased from 2.3 to 2.8 ( Table 3 ). The authors examined two different aspects of HIV stigma: whether the health worker believed a person living with HIV should be blamed because of past behavior and whether contact with persons living with HIV should be permitted. Blaming people living with HIV declined significantly. However, acceptance of contact with persons living with HIV did not increase, mainly because the health workers were already at the top of the scale at baseline (2.97 on a scale where 3 = maximum acceptance of casual contact). Attitudes favoring HIV testing increased significantly for all health workers. On a two-item index with a range of 0 to 2, the mean score was 1.7 at baseline, increasing to 1.9 after the workers received the intervention. Attitudes toward condoms have generally been very negative in Malawi. The authors assessed condom attitudes using a 10-item scale (scored as the percentage of items answered positively). The health workers had a mean score of 61% at baseline, which increased significantly to 80% after the intervention. The final set of attitudes measured relate to self-efficacy, or confidence in the ability to engage in HIV prevention activities. The health workers significantly increased their self-efficacy to talk with others about HIV prevention and to practice safer sex in their personal lives (see Table 3 ). Controlling for individual health worker structural variables in regression equations did not reduce the strength of the intervention's effect on improving attitudes. Attitude about contact with persons living with HIV, the one attitude that was not significantly more positive in the postintervention survey, remained nonsignificant after controlling for structural factors. The intervention was designed to affect health workers’ personal HIV prevention behaviors as well as HIV prevention at the workplace. Personal behaviors examined were communication with partners about HIV prevention, sexual risk behaviors, being tested for HIV, and involvement in community HIV prevention activities ( Table 4 ). Talking with one's partner is an important first step in evaluating current behavior and making changes needed to prevent HIV infection. The hospital workers were significantly more likely to report that they had discussed safer sex with their partners in the previous 2 months. Despite their increased self-efficacy for safer sex and increased discussions about safer sex with partners, the hospital workers showed no change in their reported risky sexual behaviors from baseline to the final evaluation. The proportion of hospital workers who reported that they had an HIV test in the previous 12 months increased significantly from 20.8% at baseline to 40.8% at the final evaluation. Health workers reported whether during the previous 2 months they had engaged in each of six HIV prevention activities in the community. The mean number of HIV prevention activities increased significantly from 3.98 to 4.92, an increase of nearly one more activity. In every case in which there was a statistically significant zero-order impact of the intervention on these behavior outcomes, that difference remained significant when controlling for job and other structural variables.  Results The proportion of clinicians/technicians in the baseline sample was greater than the proportion in the hospital workforce because of oversampling of professional workers. The authors made a correction in the sampling for the postintervention survey. Thus the baseline and final health workers’ survey samples differ significantly in job levels ( Table 2 ). There was a higher proportion of clinicians/technicians (51% vs. 39%) and a smaller proportion of nonclinical support staff (12% vs. 22%) at the baseline than at the final survey. No other demographic factor differed significantly between the baseline and final evaluation samples. About 45% of both samples had completed secondary school, whereas one third had only primary school education. More than two fifths of the hospital workers said that their households had adequate food all the time. About 40% of the health workers were male, and nearly 60% of the sample were over age 35. General HIV knowledge is important for health workers so that they know what behaviors will prevent the spread of HIV, both in their personal lives and in their work settings. The health workers had a fairly good knowledge of the general facts about HIV at baseline before the intervention began. On the 6-item HIV knowledge index, the health workers scored 81% correct at baseline (see Table 3 ). Their average knowledge increased significantly to 92% correct at the final evaluation. The authors asked health workers to name ways a person could keep from getting HIV and then counted how many named the three most widely recognized “ABC” strategies (i.e., abstinence, being faithful or reducing number of partners, and using condoms). The health workers were significantly more knowledgeable about HIV prevention strategies after the intervention. The impact of the intervention on both measures of knowledge remained significant when controlling for adequate food, age, gender, type of job, and education. The authors examined several attitudes that have relevance for health workers as HIV prevention leaders: hope about the HIV epidemic in Malawi, degree of stigmatization of persons living with HIV, attitudes toward HIV testing and condoms, and self-efficacy for practicing safer sex and for community prevention. The hope index combined two items: hope that the HIV epidemic could be stopped and perceived likelihood that people could change sexual behaviors to prevent HIV. Health workers had a significant increase in their sense of hope after the intervention. On a scale ranging from 1 to 4, with 4 being the most hopeful, the mean score increased from 2.3 to 2.8 ( Table 3 ). The authors examined two different aspects of HIV stigma: whether the health worker believed a person living with HIV should be blamed because of past behavior and whether contact with persons living with HIV should be permitted. Blaming people living with HIV declined significantly. However, acceptance of contact with persons living with HIV did not increase, mainly because the health workers were already at the top of the scale at baseline (2.97 on a scale where 3 = maximum acceptance of casual contact). Attitudes favoring HIV testing increased significantly for all health workers. On a two-item index with a range of 0 to 2, the mean score was 1.7 at baseline, increasing to 1.9 after the workers received the intervention. Attitudes toward condoms have generally been very negative in Malawi. The authors assessed condom attitudes using a 10-item scale (scored as the percentage of items answered positively). The health workers had a mean score of 61% at baseline, which increased significantly to 80% after the intervention. The final set of attitudes measured relate to self-efficacy, or confidence in the ability to engage in HIV prevention activities. The health workers significantly increased their self-efficacy to talk with others about HIV prevention and to practice safer sex in their personal lives (see Table 3 ). Controlling for individual health worker structural variables in regression equations did not reduce the strength of the intervention's effect on improving attitudes. Attitude about contact with persons living with HIV, the one attitude that was not significantly more positive in the postintervention survey, remained nonsignificant after controlling for structural factors. The intervention was designed to affect health workers’ personal HIV prevention behaviors as well as HIV prevention at the workplace. Personal behaviors examined were communication with partners about HIV prevention, sexual risk behaviors, being tested for HIV, and involvement in community HIV prevention activities ( Table 4 ). Talking with one's partner is an important first step in evaluating current behavior and making changes needed to prevent HIV infection. The hospital workers were significantly more likely to report that they had discussed safer sex with their partners in the previous 2 months. Despite their increased self-efficacy for safer sex and increased discussions about safer sex with partners, the hospital workers showed no change in their reported risky sexual behaviors from baseline to the final evaluation. The proportion of hospital workers who reported that they had an HIV test in the previous 12 months increased significantly from 20.8% at baseline to 40.8% at the final evaluation. Health workers reported whether during the previous 2 months they had engaged in each of six HIV prevention activities in the community. The mean number of HIV prevention activities increased significantly from 3.98 to 4.92, an increase of nearly one more activity. In every case in which there was a statistically significant zero-order impact of the intervention on these behavior outcomes, that difference remained significant when controlling for job and other structural variables.  Discussion After the intervention, the hospital workers had significantly higher knowledge about general HIV transmission and prevention issues and more positive attitudes, including more hope, less stigmatization of persons with HIV, more positive attitudes toward HIV testing and condom use, and higher self-efficacy to engage in safer sex and to discuss HIV prevention with others. The impact of the intervention on health workers’ personal behaviors was mixed. Health workers were more likely to have had a recent HIV test, reported more discussion of safer sex and condoms with their sexual partners, and engaged in more community HIV prevention activities. However the peer-group intervention did not reduce health workers’ risky sexual behaviors. The lack of an intervention effect on personal sexual behaviors suggested that more work is needed to increase the effectiveness of the peer groups for this issue. The same peer-group intervention has been effective in reducing risky sexual behaviors for rural district health workers ( Norr, Jere, Mbeba, Crittenden, & Kaponda, 2008 ). In the rural district project, the health workers had support from the research team over a much longer period, and some health workers were actively involved in offering peer groups to rural community members. These activities may have resulted in continuing reinforcement of the importance of personal safer sex behaviors for health workers. Also, urban hospital workers are less likely than rural workers to meet each other and reinforce HIV prevention messages because they live scattered throughout the city, whereas rural workers live close to each other and to the health facility. A recent infection prevention program in the urban hospital may also have influenced the hospital workers to focus more on occupation-related HIV prevention messages than personal HIV prevention messages. Possible strategies to enhance the impact of the intervention on sexual behaviors include more role plays with situations specific to the urban setting where the hospital workers reside, more emphasis on sexual behaviorchangefrominterventionleaders,postintervention supportive meetings to encourage continued commitment to personal HIV prevention, and community outreach programs that encourage hospital workers to be role models for HIV prevention. This study had several limitations. There was no control group, and there were differences in the proportion of different types of workers in the baseline and postintervention health worker interviews. The authors statistically controlled for differences in types of workers and other structural factors, and the impact of the intervention remained significant for all outcomes that were statistically significant before adding controls. However, there was no way to fully control for the lack of a control group. Although the interval between the baseline and final evaluation was relatively brief, 12 months, a national effort to increase in the availability and promotion of HIV tests might have affected the results regarding testing, especially in urban areas where the central referral hospitals are located. There were also several attitudes measured with only two items, affecting reliability of those measures.  Discussion After the intervention, the hospital workers had significantly higher knowledge about general HIV transmission and prevention issues and more positive attitudes, including more hope, less stigmatization of persons with HIV, more positive attitudes toward HIV testing and condom use, and higher self-efficacy to engage in safer sex and to discuss HIV prevention with others. The impact of the intervention on health workers’ personal behaviors was mixed. Health workers were more likely to have had a recent HIV test, reported more discussion of safer sex and condoms with their sexual partners, and engaged in more community HIV prevention activities. However the peer-group intervention did not reduce health workers’ risky sexual behaviors. The lack of an intervention effect on personal sexual behaviors suggested that more work is needed to increase the effectiveness of the peer groups for this issue. The same peer-group intervention has been effective in reducing risky sexual behaviors for rural district health workers ( Norr, Jere, Mbeba, Crittenden, & Kaponda, 2008 ). In the rural district project, the health workers had support from the research team over a much longer period, and some health workers were actively involved in offering peer groups to rural community members. These activities may have resulted in continuing reinforcement of the importance of personal safer sex behaviors for health workers. Also, urban hospital workers are less likely than rural workers to meet each other and reinforce HIV prevention messages because they live scattered throughout the city, whereas rural workers live close to each other and to the health facility. A recent infection prevention program in the urban hospital may also have influenced the hospital workers to focus more on occupation-related HIV prevention messages than personal HIV prevention messages. Possible strategies to enhance the impact of the intervention on sexual behaviors include more role plays with situations specific to the urban setting where the hospital workers reside, more emphasis on sexual behaviorchangefrominterventionleaders,postintervention supportive meetings to encourage continued commitment to personal HIV prevention, and community outreach programs that encourage hospital workers to be role models for HIV prevention. This study had several limitations. There was no control group, and there were differences in the proportion of different types of workers in the baseline and postintervention health worker interviews. The authors statistically controlled for differences in types of workers and other structural factors, and the impact of the intervention remained significant for all outcomes that were statistically significant before adding controls. However, there was no way to fully control for the lack of a control group. Although the interval between the baseline and final evaluation was relatively brief, 12 months, a national effort to increase in the availability and promotion of HIV tests might have affected the results regarding testing, especially in urban areas where the central referral hospitals are located. There were also several attitudes measured with only two items, affecting reliability of those measures.  Implications This study has shown that the Mzake ndi Mzake peer-group intervention is effective in improving hospital workers’ HIV-related knowledge, attitudes, and some behaviors in their personal lives and in the community. Helping hospital workers to reduce their personal risk of HIV infection can have important benefits for the health care workforce. Improving health workers’ general knowledge of HIV and reducing their stigmatizing attitudes about persons living with HIV and condoms also may have positive effects on their interactions with clients and informal discussions with relatives and neighbors. Including lower-level workers in the intervention is important because they can provide more accurate information and appropriate referrals for care when they are asked questions by clients, relatives, and neighbors. The intervention had no effect on personal risky sexual behaviors, and the focus of the intervention on sexual behaviors must be strengthened. The authors recommend that the peer-group intervention be modified to incorporate more emphasis on personal sexual behaviors. The intervention then should be sustained at the hospital where it was introduced. All new workers should receive the intervention, and all workers should have regular opportunities for continuing HIV prevention discussion. The program should also be expanded to other hospital and clinic health workers throughout Malawi. The possibility of engaging hospital workers in community outreach programs should also be explored as a way to both sustain health workers’ enthusiasm for HIV prevention and as an important health promotion service to urban and peri-urban communities. The peer-group model may also be a more effective way than didactic instruction to introduce health workers to other innovations that require changes in attitudes and behavior as well as knowledge. This might include new programs related to HIV prevention and AIDS care as well as general health issues.  Implications This study has shown that the Mzake ndi Mzake peer-group intervention is effective in improving hospital workers’ HIV-related knowledge, attitudes, and some behaviors in their personal lives and in the community. Helping hospital workers to reduce their personal risk of HIV infection can have important benefits for the health care workforce. Improving health workers’ general knowledge of HIV and reducing their stigmatizing attitudes about persons living with HIV and condoms also may have positive effects on their interactions with clients and informal discussions with relatives and neighbors. Including lower-level workers in the intervention is important because they can provide more accurate information and appropriate referrals for care when they are asked questions by clients, relatives, and neighbors. The intervention had no effect on personal risky sexual behaviors, and the focus of the intervention on sexual behaviors must be strengthened. The authors recommend that the peer-group intervention be modified to incorporate more emphasis on personal sexual behaviors. The intervention then should be sustained at the hospital where it was introduced. All new workers should receive the intervention, and all workers should have regular opportunities for continuing HIV prevention discussion. The program should also be expanded to other hospital and clinic health workers throughout Malawi. The possibility of engaging hospital workers in community outreach programs should also be explored as a way to both sustain health workers’ enthusiasm for HIV prevention and as an important health promotion service to urban and peri-urban communities. The peer-group model may also be a more effective way than didactic instruction to introduce health workers to other innovations that require changes in attitudes and behavior as well as knowledge. This might include new programs related to HIV prevention and AIDS care as well as general health issues. 