New endoscopic and cytologic tools for cancer surveillance in the digestive tract Synopsis Cancer surveillance is an increasing part of everyday practice in gastrointestinal endoscopy due to the identification of high risk groups from genetic and biomarker testing, genealogic and epidemiologic studies, and the increasing number of cancer survivors. An efficient surveillance program requires a cost-effective means for image-guided cancer detection and biopsy. A laser-based tethered-capsule endoscope with enhanced spectral imaging is introduced for unsedated surveillance of the lower esophagus. An ultrathin version of this same endoscope technology provides a 1.2-mm guidewire with imaging capability and cannula-style tools are proposed for image-guided biopsy. Advanced 3D cell visualization techniques are described for increasing the sensitivity of early cancer diagnosis from hematoxylin-stained cells sampled from the pancreatic and biliary ducts.  Summary The scanning fiber endoscope technology is being demonstrated as a platform technology on which future clinical protocols will be developed for cancer surveillance. In the esophagus, the tethered-capsule endoscope with enhanced spectral imaging can be used without sedation which lowers the cost and reduces barriers for esophageal cancer screening and surveillance. In the pancreatic and biliary ducts, the SFE technology with cannula tools can provide high quality image guidance for biopsy while being of a smaller size and greater flexibility than current endoscope technology. Finally, the anticipated increase in sensitivity from 3D cytological analysis of cell samples from these small ducts should provide the necessary clinical tools required for a successful endoscopic cancer surveillance program of the pancreas and bile ducts.  Figures Figure 1 SFE images during in vivo imaging in a pig bile duct using ERCP procedure, top-left shows the 4.2-mm working channel and guidewire and top-right shows a SFE image frame. Photograph of SFE probe with 9-mm rigid tip length and 1.2-mm overall diameter is the lower image. Reprinted from [ 7 ] Seibel, E.J., Melville, C.D., Johnston, R.S., et al., Bile duct imaging with ultrathin laser scanning catheterscope in a swine model, Gastrointest Endosc 2008;67(5):AB133–134, with permission from Elsevier. Figure 2 Photograph of TCE probe with comparison ibuprofen gel capsule (Advil, Wyeth) alongside for size comparison. Photo credit is to RobWatters/The Daily of the University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Figure 3 TCE images showing video frame in normal operation (top-left) and subsequent video frames captured with Enhanced Spectral Imaging (ESI) feature applied (top-right). TCE w/ESI is demonstrated with increased magnification within the previous field of view (bottom-left), and in a new region of the human cheek (bottom-right). Figure 4 TCE video frame acquired and digitally stored during human subjects examination of the lower esophagus. Normal TCE contrast is displayed on the left, and the same TCE video frame is postprocessed with enhanced spectral imaging (right). Figure 5 Photographic demonstration of tip bending in a 1.5 mm diameter SFE probe during manufacture. Figure 6 Cannula-style tools of brush and needle depicted around a future 1-mm SFE probe as a steerable guidewire with eyes. Figure 7 Cell-CT instrument and transmission images of human pancreatic cancer cell (PaTu1, alcohol fixed, hematoxylin stained) shown in grayscale in series of different rotational perspectives. Same cell is visualized using Volview software with thresholding set to opacify the irregular nuclear envelope (blue) and highlight chromatin-dense bodies within slice of nucleus (red). 