Investigating the Roles of Mitochondrial and Cytosolic Malic Enzyme in Insulin Secretion Glucose homeostasis depends upon the appropriate release of insulin from pancreatic islet ? -cells. Postpandrial changes in circulating nutrient concentrations are coupled with graded release of stored insulin pools by the proportional changes in mitochondrial metabolism. The corresponding increased synthesis rates of both ATP and of anaplerotic metabolites have been shown to be mediators for nutrient-stimulated insulin secretion. Anaplerosis leads to the export of malate or citrate from the mitochondria, both of which can be recycled through metabolic pathways to reenter the Kreb's cycle. These metabolic cycles have the net effect of either transferring mitochondrial reducing equivalents to the cytosol, or of efficiently providing pyruvate to facilitate responsive changes in the Kreb's cycle flux in proportion to increased availability of glutamate and anaplerotic flux through glutamate dehydrogenase. Here, we describe siRNA knock-down and isotopic labeling strategies to evaluate the role of cytosolic and mitochondrial isoforms of malic enzyme in facilitating malate–pyruvate cycling in the context of fuel-stimulated insulin secretion.  3. siRNA Knock-Down of ME1 and ME2 in INS-1 832/13 <italic>?</italic>-Cells In order to assess the relevance of ME1 and ME2 for nutrient-stimulated insulin secretion from pancreatic islet ? -cells, we used the strategy of effectively blocking or “knocking-down” gene expression with double stranded siRNA sequences. Because of the low mRNA expression levels of ME3, we focused only on ME1 and ME2 in our studies; however, a similar strategy could be followed to assess the role of ME3. The key to RNA interference is the double stranded RNA configuration where nonendogenous dsRNA is recognized by the cell initiating a cascade of events which ultimately leads to silencing of endogenous RNA that is homologous to the dsRNA. siRNA 21-mer duplexes, consisting of a sense strand and its complementary antisense strand, are characterized by a 2-nucleotide dithymidine overhang at each 3? terminus and 5? phosphate groups. siRNAs are assembled into ribonuclease induced silencing complexes (RISC) which then unwind the siRNA to form single stranded RNA (ssRNA). The unwinding of the double stranded siRNA requires ATP and it is this configuration that activates the RISC complex which then seeks out homologous mRNA targets. Once this occurs, the RISC complex cleaves the mRNA, exonucleases degrade the sequence and the message is silenced ( Bernstein et al ., 2001 ; Dalmay et al ., 2000 ; Hammond et al ., 2001 ). We chose two siRNA sequences for each malic enzyme isoform targeting two distinct locations on the gene to rule out any off pathway effects of RNA interference. 3.1. ME1 and ME2 siRNA design The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) provides a database where specific sequences for a particular gene in an organism can be searched in order to serve as DNA target sequences for siRNA construction. The selected nucleotide sequence can then be analyzed using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) program in order to verify that it is not homologous to any other gene in the genome except for the target gene under investigation. Commercially available custom 21-mer siRNA sequences can be purchased through various vendors and designed using the specific requirements for each vendor's design tools. We found that the siRNAs from Qiagen were very successful for transfection and decreased mRNA expression and function of ME1 and ME2. The siRNA duplex consists of the sense strand and its complementary antisense strand to provide a 2-nucleotide dithymidine overhang at each 3? terminus. The DNA target sequences for ME1 (a and b) and ME2 (a and b) are as follows: ME1a: AACCAGGAGATCCAGGTCCTT and ME1b: AAGCCAAGAGGCCTCTTTATC, ME2a: AACGGCTTGCTAGTTAAGGGC and ME2b: AAAGCCATGGCCGCTATCAAC. The 19-base pair siRNA consisting of dsRNA for each target sequence are as follows: ME1a: (CCAGGAGAUCCAGGUCCUU)d(TT)(AAGGACCUGGAUCUCCUGG)d(TT) ME1b: (GCCAAGAGGCCUCUUUAUC)d(TT)(GAUAAAGAGGCCUCUUGGC)d(TT) ME2a: (CGGCUUGCUAGUUAAGGGC)d(TT)(GCCCUUAACUAGCAAGCCG)d(TT) ME2b: (AGCCAUGGCCGCUAUCAAC)d(TT)(GUUGAUAGCGGCCAUGGCU)d(TT) The duplexes are resuspended and annealed as per manufacturer's recommendation and require a simple preparation of heating to 90 °C in a water bath for 1 min to disrupt any hairpins that may have formed during synthesis and then cooling to 37 °C for 1 h to allow the RNA to reanneal into an uninterrupted double stranded complimentary sequence configuration. 3.2. siRNA transfection optimization in INS-1 832/13 <italic>?</italic>-cells Success in transfection of mammalian cells either in stable cell cultures or primary cell lines requires consideration of multiple interacting factors. Although stable cell cultures tend to transfect at a much higher efficiency than primary cells, optimization of the conditions for effective siRNA gene silencing requires an iterative approach. In addition to the cell type, other factors such as passage number, confluence, transfection reagent, and siRNA concentration can influence the effectiveness of siRNA transfection and function in the stable cell line. Positive and negative siRNA controls are useful for optimizing transfection efficiency for each particular cell model. Fluorescent labeled nonspecific siRNAs are commercially available and function as both a positive control and negative control (Qiagen). The fluorescent labeled siRNA functions as a positive control for transfection efficiency since siRNA incorporation into a cell can be visualized using fluorescence microscopy or quantified using fluorescence spectroscopy. The nonspecific siRNA sequence functions as a negative control to ensure the absence of nonspecific knock-down of the target gene, since the siRNA duplex has been created and tested to have no sequence homology to a functional mammalian gene. Once transfection efficiency is optimized for siRNA concentration and incorporation into the cell using control siRNAs, it is then necessary to transfect multiple siRNA sequences corresponding to various locations of the selected gene to test for mRNA down-regulation or “knock-down” and the effect, if any, on protein expression. It is also important to note that even with successful knock-down of mRNA expression, the effects upon the translation and function of the protein should be determined. It is also essential to monitor the duration of transfection with regard to protein turnover since rates of protein turnover vary for different proteins ( McManus and Sharp, 2002 ). INS-1 832/13 cells, like many other mammalian cell lines, can incorporate siRNAs through lipid-mediated transfection (Qiagen RNAifect). This method requires specially designed lipophilic reagents which carry the siRNAs across the lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane and into the cell. 3.3. Protocol for experimental siRNA KD of ME1 and ME2 in INS-1 832/13 <italic>?</italic>-cells INS-1 cells are grown in 6-well plates until they reach 50% for transfection. Plates are set up so that independent experiments evaluating ME1 and ME2 functional assays such as glucose and amino acid stimulated insulin secretion or enzyme activity assays, as well as, RNA extraction for mRNA expression can be performed simultaneously on the same passage of cells to ensure that siRNA knock down of message translates to functional down regulation of the ME1 and ME2 proteins. The transfection mixture is prepared based on optimization of the manufacturer's suggested protocol in 1 ml of serum-free OptiMEM with Glutamax (Gibco (Invitrogen), Carlsbad, California) transfection media and then placed on the cells. This will vary from cell type to cell type. In our hands, a 1:5 ratio of siRNA to RNAifect reagent (Qiagen) where 6 ? l (1.8 ?g) of 20 ?M siRNA is brought up to 100 ? l with EC transfection buffer provided in the kit and 9 ? l of transfection reagent is applied to each well of a 6-well plate in 1 ml OptiMEM. The cells are incubated in the mixture at 37 °C for 6–15 h and then replenished with nutrient-rich RPMI media. The transfected cells are incubated for an additional 48 h and glucose/amino acid stimulation and RNA extraction for mRNA expression is performed.  3.1. ME1 and ME2 siRNA design The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) provides a database where specific sequences for a particular gene in an organism can be searched in order to serve as DNA target sequences for siRNA construction. The selected nucleotide sequence can then be analyzed using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) program in order to verify that it is not homologous to any other gene in the genome except for the target gene under investigation. Commercially available custom 21-mer siRNA sequences can be purchased through various vendors and designed using the specific requirements for each vendor's design tools. We found that the siRNAs from Qiagen were very successful for transfection and decreased mRNA expression and function of ME1 and ME2. The siRNA duplex consists of the sense strand and its complementary antisense strand to provide a 2-nucleotide dithymidine overhang at each 3? terminus. The DNA target sequences for ME1 (a and b) and ME2 (a and b) are as follows: ME1a: AACCAGGAGATCCAGGTCCTT and ME1b: AAGCCAAGAGGCCTCTTTATC, ME2a: AACGGCTTGCTAGTTAAGGGC and ME2b: AAAGCCATGGCCGCTATCAAC. The 19-base pair siRNA consisting of dsRNA for each target sequence are as follows: ME1a: (CCAGGAGAUCCAGGUCCUU)d(TT)(AAGGACCUGGAUCUCCUGG)d(TT) ME1b: (GCCAAGAGGCCUCUUUAUC)d(TT)(GAUAAAGAGGCCUCUUGGC)d(TT) ME2a: (CGGCUUGCUAGUUAAGGGC)d(TT)(GCCCUUAACUAGCAAGCCG)d(TT) ME2b: (AGCCAUGGCCGCUAUCAAC)d(TT)(GUUGAUAGCGGCCAUGGCU)d(TT) The duplexes are resuspended and annealed as per manufacturer's recommendation and require a simple preparation of heating to 90 °C in a water bath for 1 min to disrupt any hairpins that may have formed during synthesis and then cooling to 37 °C for 1 h to allow the RNA to reanneal into an uninterrupted double stranded complimentary sequence configuration.  3.2. siRNA transfection optimization in INS-1 832/13 <italic>?</italic>-cells Success in transfection of mammalian cells either in stable cell cultures or primary cell lines requires consideration of multiple interacting factors. Although stable cell cultures tend to transfect at a much higher efficiency than primary cells, optimization of the conditions for effective siRNA gene silencing requires an iterative approach. In addition to the cell type, other factors such as passage number, confluence, transfection reagent, and siRNA concentration can influence the effectiveness of siRNA transfection and function in the stable cell line. Positive and negative siRNA controls are useful for optimizing transfection efficiency for each particular cell model. Fluorescent labeled nonspecific siRNAs are commercially available and function as both a positive control and negative control (Qiagen). The fluorescent labeled siRNA functions as a positive control for transfection efficiency since siRNA incorporation into a cell can be visualized using fluorescence microscopy or quantified using fluorescence spectroscopy. The nonspecific siRNA sequence functions as a negative control to ensure the absence of nonspecific knock-down of the target gene, since the siRNA duplex has been created and tested to have no sequence homology to a functional mammalian gene. Once transfection efficiency is optimized for siRNA concentration and incorporation into the cell using control siRNAs, it is then necessary to transfect multiple siRNA sequences corresponding to various locations of the selected gene to test for mRNA down-regulation or “knock-down” and the effect, if any, on protein expression. It is also important to note that even with successful knock-down of mRNA expression, the effects upon the translation and function of the protein should be determined. It is also essential to monitor the duration of transfection with regard to protein turnover since rates of protein turnover vary for different proteins ( McManus and Sharp, 2002 ). INS-1 832/13 cells, like many other mammalian cell lines, can incorporate siRNAs through lipid-mediated transfection (Qiagen RNAifect). This method requires specially designed lipophilic reagents which carry the siRNAs across the lipid bilayer of the plasma membrane and into the cell.  3.3. Protocol for experimental siRNA KD of ME1 and ME2 in INS-1 832/13 <italic>?</italic>-cells INS-1 cells are grown in 6-well plates until they reach 50% for transfection. Plates are set up so that independent experiments evaluating ME1 and ME2 functional assays such as glucose and amino acid stimulated insulin secretion or enzyme activity assays, as well as, RNA extraction for mRNA expression can be performed simultaneously on the same passage of cells to ensure that siRNA knock down of message translates to functional down regulation of the ME1 and ME2 proteins. The transfection mixture is prepared based on optimization of the manufacturer's suggested protocol in 1 ml of serum-free OptiMEM with Glutamax (Gibco (Invitrogen), Carlsbad, California) transfection media and then placed on the cells. This will vary from cell type to cell type. In our hands, a 1:5 ratio of siRNA to RNAifect reagent (Qiagen) where 6 ? l (1.8 ?g) of 20 ?M siRNA is brought up to 100 ? l with EC transfection buffer provided in the kit and 9 ? l of transfection reagent is applied to each well of a 6-well plate in 1 ml OptiMEM. The cells are incubated in the mixture at 37 °C for 6–15 h and then replenished with nutrient-rich RPMI media. The transfected cells are incubated for an additional 48 h and glucose/amino acid stimulation and RNA extraction for mRNA expression is performed.  4. Enzymatic Assays to Determine Activity of Cytosolic and Mitochondrial Malic Enzymes In addition to assessing the effectiveness of siRNA to reduce mRNA expression levels, relative enzyme activity levels were used to confirm changes in protein levels. Cytosolic malic enzyme is NADP+-dependent and can be determined in the whole cell lysate without interference from malate dehydrogenase which uses NAD+ for oxidation of malate to oxaloacetate. In contrast, a similar approach to measure the activity of mitochondrial malic enzyme by following the rate of reduction of NAD+ in the presence of malate is confounded by the presence and high activity of MDH in both the cytosol and mitochondria. Previously, this problem has been resolved by purification of mitochondrial malic enzyme on an affinity column. Our concern that differences in recovery may mask differences in activity, prompted us to develop an alternate isotopic-labeling approach that would allow us to measure mitochondrial malic enzyme activity in intact isolated mitochondria. The rationale for these experiments is that in the absence of PEPCK activity, the only mechanism for the appearance of uniformly 13C-labeled pyruvate ([13C3]pyruvate) when incubating mitochondria with either uniformly 13C-labeled fumarate ([13C4]fumarate or glutamate ([13C5]glutamate) is by the activity of the mitochondrial isoforms of malic enzyme. To evaluate any contribution of PEPCK activity, we include phenylalanine (1 m M final concentration) to inhibit pyruvate kinase (PK) activity and conversion of PEP to pyruvate. 4.1. Cytosolic malic enzyme activity assay The assay to determine cytosolic enzyme activity consisted of extraction of whole cell lysate, incubation of the cell lysate in the presence of malate and NADP+, monitoring the reduction of NADP+ spectrophotometrically, and normalizing to total cellular protein. We describe the protocol for the assay in INS-1 cells; however, the methodology can be readily used for determining malic enzyme activity in the extracts of isolated islets. The method as described requires ?1–2 mg total cell protein in a volume of 6 ml. 4.1.1. Extraction of whole cell lysate INS-1 cells are cultured in 6-well plates until they reach 80–90% confluence, typically, ?5.0 × 105 cells per well of a 6-well plate are extracted. Protein concentrations for each well range between 200 and 400 ?g. On the day of extraction, cells are placed on ice, washed with ice-cold PBS then lysed using 1 ml of ice-cold 0.1% triton per well. The cells remain on the ice for roughly 15–30 min and wells are then scraped using a plastic cell lifter (Corning Incorporated, Corning, New York), mixed by pipetting and transferred into 1.7 ml plastic tubes on ice. 4.1.2. Malic Enzyme 1 assay reaction mixture stock components All stocks are prepared prior to the experiment and stored as separate solutions at room temperature unless otherwise indicated. The assay components include; 250 m M Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 50 m M MnCl2, 40 m M NH4Cl, 1 M KCl, and 20 m M NADP+ which must be prepared fresh and immediately placed on ice. Since NADP+ powder is hydroscopic, the chemical was brought to room temperature prior to weighing in order to ensure an accurate concentration. One hundred millimolar of the enzyme reaction substrate, l -malate, is prepared, brought to pH 7.4 and stored at 4 °C. On the day of the experiment, the enzyme assay reagent mixture is prepared as described in Table 24.1 . A 150- ? l aliquot of this reaction mixture is placed into each well of a 96-well clear flat bottom plate compatible for spectrophotometric analysis on a 96-well plate reader. (We used NUNC (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Rockford, Illinois, Immuno MicroWell 96-well plates and a Dynex, Chantilly, Virginia, MRX Revalation Plate Reader.) Test and control wells are set up in duplicate for each cell sample where 50 ? l of H2O is placed in test wells; 75 ? l of H2O is placed in control wells. Twenty-five microliters of the enzyme substrate l -malate is added to the test wells only. The final concentrations of the assay components in each well are as follows: ?100 m M (93 m M ) Tris/HCl, ?1 m M (0.93) MnCl2, ?1 m M (0.93) NH4Cl, ?100 m M KCl, ?1 m M (0.93) NADP+, and 10 m M l -malate. The reaction plate is then brought to room temperature on bench-top. Twenty-five microliters of the cell lysate samples are then added to each of the test and control wells using a multidispensing pipette (Rainin, Oakland, California, EPD-3 PLUS) where the control wells are seeded first to avoid cross contamination of the substrate. The plate is mixed by shaking briefly and immediately read at 340 nm for 40 min with data collected every minute beginning immediately after an initial 5 s shaking step. The optical densities (OD) for each minute of data collection can then be plotted and slopes determined for cytosolic malic enzyme 1 activity in both test and control wells where control wells are subtracted from the test wells and data are then normalized to whole cell protein concentration. Activity = ?OD/min/mg protein. If desired, this can be expressed in terms of reduction rates of NAD+ or NADP+ with a suitable standard curve. For the purposes of these experiments, the relative changes in ME activity in control and siRNA-treated cells, as assessed by DOD, are sufficient to evaluate the relation between changes in mRNA expression and enzyme activity. 4.1.2.1. Protein assay Protein concentrations in the whole cell lysates are assayed using the Micro BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, Illinois) following the manufacturer's protocol and measured at an absorbance of 595 nm. The standard curves are made from 1:2 serial dilutions of the 2 mg/ml BSA standard provided in the kit with final concentrations ranging from 20 to 0.625 ? g/ml. 4.2. Mitochondrial malic enzyme activity assay The assay to determine mitochondrial enzyme activity consisted of extraction and purification of intact viable mitochondria, incubation of the mitochondria in the presence of [U-13C]-labeled substrates, fumarate or glutamate, followed by extraction of the mitochondrial metabolites and analysis by LC/MS/MS to determine the 13C-enrichment of pyruvate and other Kreb's cycle intermediates. We describe the protocol for the assay in INS-1 cells; however, the methodology can be readily used for determining malic enzyme activity in the extracts of isolated islets. The method as described requires ?1.5 mg mitochondrial protein to perform the kinetic analysis using LC/MS/MS to determine the time course of 13C incorporation into pyruvate. 4.2.1. Isolation of mitochondria About 48–72 h prior to isolation of the mitochondria, INS-1 cells are seeded at a density of ? 1.0 × 107 cells/plate into 150 cm2 cell culture dishes. Each dish yields ?0.5 mg mitochondrial protein. Two dishes are needed for the LC/MS/MS kinetic studies. The cells should be cultured in RPMI-1640 complete media with 11.1 m M d -glucose supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum, 10 m M HEPES, 2 m M l -glutamine, 1 m M sodium pyruvate, 50 ?M BME, 10,000 U/ml penicillin, and 10 mg/ml streptomycin. After 2-days culture in 5% CO2 at 37 °C, the cell density should be ?90% confluent, and ready for isolation of the mitochondria. Mitochondria are isolated under conditions to preserve function but to minimize enzymatic activity. All media, isolation buffers, centrifuge tubes, and centrifuges should be pre-cooled to between 0 and 4 °C. Fifteen milliliters of mitochondrial extraction buffer is needed for extraction of mitochondria from three 150 cm2 plates (5 ml/plate). The plates are placed on ice and the growth medium is removed by aspiration. The cells in each plate are then quickly washed with 5 ml of ice-cold Phosphate Buffered Saline, PBS. The PBS is immediately removed by aspiration and replaced with 5 ml of ice-cold isotonic mitochondrial extraction buffer containing 65 m M sucrose, 215 m M d -mannitol, 5 m M HEPES, 3 m M MgCl2, 5 m M KH2PO4, and 5 m M KHCO3. The mitochondrial extraction buffer should be prepared fresh on the day of the extraction, as detailed in Table 24.2 . The adherent cells are quickly scraped from the plates using a sturdy cell lifter (Corning), and the cell suspensions are transferred into one 15-ml conical centrifuge tubes for three plates. The cell suspensions are centrifuged at a low speed of ?100 rcf for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant is then removed by aspiration, and the cell pellet is gently resuspended in ice-cold mitochondrial buffer (1 ml/culture plate) until a homogeneous mixture is obtained. Transfer 3 ml of the cell suspension to a pre-cooled (4 °C) 5-ml glass-teflon Potter Elvehjem homogenizer, and homogenize with the vertical passing of 50 strokes between teflon pestle and glass vial/mortar. We found that to obtain a cleaner mitochondrial preparation with minimal cytosolic contamination, it is best to resuspend the cell pellet in 1 ml/culture plate, and do multiple rounds of douncing rather than to concentrate the cell pellet with less volume per culture plate. The homogenate is then split into 1.7-ml microcentrifuge tubes (1 ml/tube), and the sheered cells are centrifuged for 3.5 min at 1800 rcf at 4 °C to pellet the nucleus, sheered plasma membrane, and other cellular fragments. The supernatant, containing the mitochondria, is transferred to new 1.7-ml tube and placed on ice while additional mitochondria trapped in the pellet are harvested two more times to yield the maximum amount of mitochondria as follows. The pellet is resuspended in 0.5 ml of mitochondrial extraction buffer and centrifuged for 3.5 min at 1800 rcf at 4 °C. The supernatant, with the mitochondria, is again transferred to a new tube and kept on ice. The process is repeated once more. The supernatants from the second and third spins are combined with the first mitochondrial supernatant in a 1.7-ml tube. (The pellet containing the membrane fragments can now be discarded.) The mitochondria are then pelleted by centrifugation of all the supernatant tubes for 5 min at a higher speed of 10,800 rcf at 4 °C. Carefully aspirate the supernatant from the yellowish mitochondrial pellet. At higher speeds, you may see a white fluffy band above the pellet. If this occurs, remove the white band with the rest of the supernatant by aspiration. The mitochondrial pellet from one tube is resuspended in 1.0 ml of extraction buffer and transferred to the next tube containing the second mitochondria pellet, and then resuspended to obtain one homogeneous suspension of mitochondria. The mitochondria are pelleted with a final high-speed centrifugation for 5 min at 4 °C. Aspirate the supernatant and resuspend the pellet in 300 ? l of the mitochondrial extraction buffer for the kinetic labeling experiments for assessment of mitochondrial malic enzyme activity. A 30- ? l aliquot of the mitochondrial suspension is taken for protein analysis by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, reagent). 4.2.1.1. Protein Assay Protein concentrations of the mitochondrial suspension are assayed at this point to determine the dilution needed to achieve a concentration of 1 mg protein/ml. The Bradford method (Bio-Rad protein reagent) must be used as sucrose interferes with the micro BCA assay. Protein assays are performed following manufacturers protocol measuring absorbance at 595 nm with a standard curve from 40 to 1.2 ? g/ml. 4.2.1.2. Cytochrome c assay Preliminary experiments should be performed to assess the integrity of the mitochondria isolated from the cell lysate as described above. The cytochrome c oxidase assay kit (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) based on cytochrome c oxidase enzyme (EC 1.9.3.1) assay allows for the detection of intact mitochondria by assessing outer membrane integrity via cytochrome c. Pure fractions of intact mitochondria are assayed following the manufacturer's protocol at 550 nm where changes in absorption of cytochrome c when reduced and then reoxidized determines cytochrome c activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions containing intact mitochondria will yield a positive change in absorption. A positive control is included in the assay kit. Negative controls include pure cytosolic fractions from the isolation and lysed mitochondria subjected to brief sonication. 4.2.1.3. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase assay In order to be sure that the mitochondria fraction from the isolation is not contaminated with cytosolic components, both the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions from the isolation were saved and assayed for ? -glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.8) activity, following the manufacturer's (Sigma Aldrich) recommendation monitoring the change in absorption at 340 nm to determine glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions, free of cytosolic contamination, should have no activity as evidenced by no change in absorption. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity should only be evident in the cytosolic fraction from the supernatants saved from the high-speed spins. 4.2.2. Kinetic analysis of mitochondrial malic enzyme activity To validate the activity of mitochondrial malic enzyme, we use electrospray tandem mass spectroscopy (LC/MS/MS) to measure the appearance of [13C3]pyruvate when freshly isolated mitochondria are incubated with NAD+, ADP+, and either [13C4]fumarate or [13C5]glutamate with leucine. A 96-well format with eight time points and four mitochondrial dilutions is used to obtain the time course of [13C3]pyruvate synthesis. In order to collect aliquots at the timed intervals, we make the following preparations. First prepare eight identical 1.7-ml tubes prepared as listed in Table 24.3 . Next prepare two sequential 1:5 dilutions of the undiluted mitochondrial suspension (?1.5 mg mitochondrial protein in 300 ? l prepared from three confluent 150 cm2 dishes) that was prepared as described above in Section 4.2.1. For the 1:5 mitochondrial dilution, 150 ? l of undiluted mitochondria plus 600 ? l mitochondrial buffer is prepared. For the 1:25 mitochondrial dilution, 150 ? l of 1:5 diluted mitochondria plus 600 ml mitochondrial buffer is prepared. Place the eight previously prepared 1.7 ml tubes with the enzyme assay reagent mixtures ( Table 24.3 ) in a 37 °C water bath for 3–5 min with the lids open (be sure that no water splashes in). Have a 96-well plate on ice ready and labeled so that each column corresponds to a time point and each row corresponds to the incubation tube. Add 150 ? l of 1 m M acetic acid to all 96 wells to immediately quench the reaction once an incubated aliquot is taken. Prior to adding the mitochondria, take 50 ? l from each 1.7 ml tube and place in the corresponding 0 min column of the 96-well plate. Add 50 ? l of the mitochondria to each tube, using the undiluted and each dilution sample for two replicate tubes (e.g., undiluted mitochondria in tubes 1 and 2, 1:5 diluted mitochondria in tubes 3 and 4, 1:25 diluted mitochondria in tubes 5 and 6). Immediately mix by pipetting and collect 50 ? l from each tube in the same order as mitochondria samples were added. This will be time 0.5 min and spike into appropriate well in the 96-well plate. Follow this procedure for all of the sample tubes for each of the remaining time-points: 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 30, and 60 min. 4.2.2.1. Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry for determining <sup>13</sup>C-enrichment of Kreb's cycle intermediates and pyruvate The samples are then thawed and transferred to 96-well filter plates, the supernatent is collected by centrifugation through the filter, and analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) for 13C-enrichment of pyruvate, malate, citrate, and glutamate. In our laboratory, LC/MS/MS analyses of metabolites are performed on an Applied Biosystems API4000 QTrap interfaced to a Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan, HPLC (LC-20AD, SIL-20AC, CTO-20A). Metabolites were eluted from a Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, Aclaim Polar Advantage (C16, 5 ?m, 120 Å, 4.5 × 250 mm) column (40 °C) with acetonitrile:water buffered with 2 m M ammonium acetate using a linear gradient from 5% to 95% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 600 ? l/min. Metabolite concentrations and enrichments are determined by electrospray ionization monitoring of the positive product ion transition pairs of pyruvate (87.0/32.0), citrate (191.0/87.0), succinate (117.0/73.0), glutamate (146.0/128.0), and malate (133.0/71.0). Isotopic labeling is monitored with incremental increases in the masses of the parent and daughter ions to account for the ensemble of potential isotopic isomers. To monitor the synthesis rate of [U-13C]pyruvate from [U-13C]fumarate, the transition pair for m + 3 pyruvate of 90.0/32.0 is shown in Fig. 24.3 .  4.1. Cytosolic malic enzyme activity assay The assay to determine cytosolic enzyme activity consisted of extraction of whole cell lysate, incubation of the cell lysate in the presence of malate and NADP+, monitoring the reduction of NADP+ spectrophotometrically, and normalizing to total cellular protein. We describe the protocol for the assay in INS-1 cells; however, the methodology can be readily used for determining malic enzyme activity in the extracts of isolated islets. The method as described requires ?1–2 mg total cell protein in a volume of 6 ml. 4.1.1. Extraction of whole cell lysate INS-1 cells are cultured in 6-well plates until they reach 80–90% confluence, typically, ?5.0 × 105 cells per well of a 6-well plate are extracted. Protein concentrations for each well range between 200 and 400 ?g. On the day of extraction, cells are placed on ice, washed with ice-cold PBS then lysed using 1 ml of ice-cold 0.1% triton per well. The cells remain on the ice for roughly 15–30 min and wells are then scraped using a plastic cell lifter (Corning Incorporated, Corning, New York), mixed by pipetting and transferred into 1.7 ml plastic tubes on ice. 4.1.2. Malic Enzyme 1 assay reaction mixture stock components All stocks are prepared prior to the experiment and stored as separate solutions at room temperature unless otherwise indicated. The assay components include; 250 m M Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 50 m M MnCl2, 40 m M NH4Cl, 1 M KCl, and 20 m M NADP+ which must be prepared fresh and immediately placed on ice. Since NADP+ powder is hydroscopic, the chemical was brought to room temperature prior to weighing in order to ensure an accurate concentration. One hundred millimolar of the enzyme reaction substrate, l -malate, is prepared, brought to pH 7.4 and stored at 4 °C. On the day of the experiment, the enzyme assay reagent mixture is prepared as described in Table 24.1 . A 150- ? l aliquot of this reaction mixture is placed into each well of a 96-well clear flat bottom plate compatible for spectrophotometric analysis on a 96-well plate reader. (We used NUNC (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Rockford, Illinois, Immuno MicroWell 96-well plates and a Dynex, Chantilly, Virginia, MRX Revalation Plate Reader.) Test and control wells are set up in duplicate for each cell sample where 50 ? l of H2O is placed in test wells; 75 ? l of H2O is placed in control wells. Twenty-five microliters of the enzyme substrate l -malate is added to the test wells only. The final concentrations of the assay components in each well are as follows: ?100 m M (93 m M ) Tris/HCl, ?1 m M (0.93) MnCl2, ?1 m M (0.93) NH4Cl, ?100 m M KCl, ?1 m M (0.93) NADP+, and 10 m M l -malate. The reaction plate is then brought to room temperature on bench-top. Twenty-five microliters of the cell lysate samples are then added to each of the test and control wells using a multidispensing pipette (Rainin, Oakland, California, EPD-3 PLUS) where the control wells are seeded first to avoid cross contamination of the substrate. The plate is mixed by shaking briefly and immediately read at 340 nm for 40 min with data collected every minute beginning immediately after an initial 5 s shaking step. The optical densities (OD) for each minute of data collection can then be plotted and slopes determined for cytosolic malic enzyme 1 activity in both test and control wells where control wells are subtracted from the test wells and data are then normalized to whole cell protein concentration. Activity = ?OD/min/mg protein. If desired, this can be expressed in terms of reduction rates of NAD+ or NADP+ with a suitable standard curve. For the purposes of these experiments, the relative changes in ME activity in control and siRNA-treated cells, as assessed by DOD, are sufficient to evaluate the relation between changes in mRNA expression and enzyme activity. 4.1.2.1. Protein assay Protein concentrations in the whole cell lysates are assayed using the Micro BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, Illinois) following the manufacturer's protocol and measured at an absorbance of 595 nm. The standard curves are made from 1:2 serial dilutions of the 2 mg/ml BSA standard provided in the kit with final concentrations ranging from 20 to 0.625 ? g/ml.  4.1.1. Extraction of whole cell lysate INS-1 cells are cultured in 6-well plates until they reach 80–90% confluence, typically, ?5.0 × 105 cells per well of a 6-well plate are extracted. Protein concentrations for each well range between 200 and 400 ?g. On the day of extraction, cells are placed on ice, washed with ice-cold PBS then lysed using 1 ml of ice-cold 0.1% triton per well. The cells remain on the ice for roughly 15–30 min and wells are then scraped using a plastic cell lifter (Corning Incorporated, Corning, New York), mixed by pipetting and transferred into 1.7 ml plastic tubes on ice.  4.1.2. Malic Enzyme 1 assay reaction mixture stock components All stocks are prepared prior to the experiment and stored as separate solutions at room temperature unless otherwise indicated. The assay components include; 250 m M Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 50 m M MnCl2, 40 m M NH4Cl, 1 M KCl, and 20 m M NADP+ which must be prepared fresh and immediately placed on ice. Since NADP+ powder is hydroscopic, the chemical was brought to room temperature prior to weighing in order to ensure an accurate concentration. One hundred millimolar of the enzyme reaction substrate, l -malate, is prepared, brought to pH 7.4 and stored at 4 °C. On the day of the experiment, the enzyme assay reagent mixture is prepared as described in Table 24.1 . A 150- ? l aliquot of this reaction mixture is placed into each well of a 96-well clear flat bottom plate compatible for spectrophotometric analysis on a 96-well plate reader. (We used NUNC (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Rockford, Illinois, Immuno MicroWell 96-well plates and a Dynex, Chantilly, Virginia, MRX Revalation Plate Reader.) Test and control wells are set up in duplicate for each cell sample where 50 ? l of H2O is placed in test wells; 75 ? l of H2O is placed in control wells. Twenty-five microliters of the enzyme substrate l -malate is added to the test wells only. The final concentrations of the assay components in each well are as follows: ?100 m M (93 m M ) Tris/HCl, ?1 m M (0.93) MnCl2, ?1 m M (0.93) NH4Cl, ?100 m M KCl, ?1 m M (0.93) NADP+, and 10 m M l -malate. The reaction plate is then brought to room temperature on bench-top. Twenty-five microliters of the cell lysate samples are then added to each of the test and control wells using a multidispensing pipette (Rainin, Oakland, California, EPD-3 PLUS) where the control wells are seeded first to avoid cross contamination of the substrate. The plate is mixed by shaking briefly and immediately read at 340 nm for 40 min with data collected every minute beginning immediately after an initial 5 s shaking step. The optical densities (OD) for each minute of data collection can then be plotted and slopes determined for cytosolic malic enzyme 1 activity in both test and control wells where control wells are subtracted from the test wells and data are then normalized to whole cell protein concentration. Activity = ?OD/min/mg protein. If desired, this can be expressed in terms of reduction rates of NAD+ or NADP+ with a suitable standard curve. For the purposes of these experiments, the relative changes in ME activity in control and siRNA-treated cells, as assessed by DOD, are sufficient to evaluate the relation between changes in mRNA expression and enzyme activity. 4.1.2.1. Protein assay Protein concentrations in the whole cell lysates are assayed using the Micro BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, Illinois) following the manufacturer's protocol and measured at an absorbance of 595 nm. The standard curves are made from 1:2 serial dilutions of the 2 mg/ml BSA standard provided in the kit with final concentrations ranging from 20 to 0.625 ? g/ml.  4.1.2.1. Protein assay Protein concentrations in the whole cell lysates are assayed using the Micro BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, Illinois) following the manufacturer's protocol and measured at an absorbance of 595 nm. The standard curves are made from 1:2 serial dilutions of the 2 mg/ml BSA standard provided in the kit with final concentrations ranging from 20 to 0.625 ? g/ml.  4.2. Mitochondrial malic enzyme activity assay The assay to determine mitochondrial enzyme activity consisted of extraction and purification of intact viable mitochondria, incubation of the mitochondria in the presence of [U-13C]-labeled substrates, fumarate or glutamate, followed by extraction of the mitochondrial metabolites and analysis by LC/MS/MS to determine the 13C-enrichment of pyruvate and other Kreb's cycle intermediates. We describe the protocol for the assay in INS-1 cells; however, the methodology can be readily used for determining malic enzyme activity in the extracts of isolated islets. The method as described requires ?1.5 mg mitochondrial protein to perform the kinetic analysis using LC/MS/MS to determine the time course of 13C incorporation into pyruvate. 4.2.1. Isolation of mitochondria About 48–72 h prior to isolation of the mitochondria, INS-1 cells are seeded at a density of ? 1.0 × 107 cells/plate into 150 cm2 cell culture dishes. Each dish yields ?0.5 mg mitochondrial protein. Two dishes are needed for the LC/MS/MS kinetic studies. The cells should be cultured in RPMI-1640 complete media with 11.1 m M d -glucose supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum, 10 m M HEPES, 2 m M l -glutamine, 1 m M sodium pyruvate, 50 ?M BME, 10,000 U/ml penicillin, and 10 mg/ml streptomycin. After 2-days culture in 5% CO2 at 37 °C, the cell density should be ?90% confluent, and ready for isolation of the mitochondria. Mitochondria are isolated under conditions to preserve function but to minimize enzymatic activity. All media, isolation buffers, centrifuge tubes, and centrifuges should be pre-cooled to between 0 and 4 °C. Fifteen milliliters of mitochondrial extraction buffer is needed for extraction of mitochondria from three 150 cm2 plates (5 ml/plate). The plates are placed on ice and the growth medium is removed by aspiration. The cells in each plate are then quickly washed with 5 ml of ice-cold Phosphate Buffered Saline, PBS. The PBS is immediately removed by aspiration and replaced with 5 ml of ice-cold isotonic mitochondrial extraction buffer containing 65 m M sucrose, 215 m M d -mannitol, 5 m M HEPES, 3 m M MgCl2, 5 m M KH2PO4, and 5 m M KHCO3. The mitochondrial extraction buffer should be prepared fresh on the day of the extraction, as detailed in Table 24.2 . The adherent cells are quickly scraped from the plates using a sturdy cell lifter (Corning), and the cell suspensions are transferred into one 15-ml conical centrifuge tubes for three plates. The cell suspensions are centrifuged at a low speed of ?100 rcf for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant is then removed by aspiration, and the cell pellet is gently resuspended in ice-cold mitochondrial buffer (1 ml/culture plate) until a homogeneous mixture is obtained. Transfer 3 ml of the cell suspension to a pre-cooled (4 °C) 5-ml glass-teflon Potter Elvehjem homogenizer, and homogenize with the vertical passing of 50 strokes between teflon pestle and glass vial/mortar. We found that to obtain a cleaner mitochondrial preparation with minimal cytosolic contamination, it is best to resuspend the cell pellet in 1 ml/culture plate, and do multiple rounds of douncing rather than to concentrate the cell pellet with less volume per culture plate. The homogenate is then split into 1.7-ml microcentrifuge tubes (1 ml/tube), and the sheered cells are centrifuged for 3.5 min at 1800 rcf at 4 °C to pellet the nucleus, sheered plasma membrane, and other cellular fragments. The supernatant, containing the mitochondria, is transferred to new 1.7-ml tube and placed on ice while additional mitochondria trapped in the pellet are harvested two more times to yield the maximum amount of mitochondria as follows. The pellet is resuspended in 0.5 ml of mitochondrial extraction buffer and centrifuged for 3.5 min at 1800 rcf at 4 °C. The supernatant, with the mitochondria, is again transferred to a new tube and kept on ice. The process is repeated once more. The supernatants from the second and third spins are combined with the first mitochondrial supernatant in a 1.7-ml tube. (The pellet containing the membrane fragments can now be discarded.) The mitochondria are then pelleted by centrifugation of all the supernatant tubes for 5 min at a higher speed of 10,800 rcf at 4 °C. Carefully aspirate the supernatant from the yellowish mitochondrial pellet. At higher speeds, you may see a white fluffy band above the pellet. If this occurs, remove the white band with the rest of the supernatant by aspiration. The mitochondrial pellet from one tube is resuspended in 1.0 ml of extraction buffer and transferred to the next tube containing the second mitochondria pellet, and then resuspended to obtain one homogeneous suspension of mitochondria. The mitochondria are pelleted with a final high-speed centrifugation for 5 min at 4 °C. Aspirate the supernatant and resuspend the pellet in 300 ? l of the mitochondrial extraction buffer for the kinetic labeling experiments for assessment of mitochondrial malic enzyme activity. A 30- ? l aliquot of the mitochondrial suspension is taken for protein analysis by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, reagent). 4.2.1.1. Protein Assay Protein concentrations of the mitochondrial suspension are assayed at this point to determine the dilution needed to achieve a concentration of 1 mg protein/ml. The Bradford method (Bio-Rad protein reagent) must be used as sucrose interferes with the micro BCA assay. Protein assays are performed following manufacturers protocol measuring absorbance at 595 nm with a standard curve from 40 to 1.2 ? g/ml. 4.2.1.2. Cytochrome c assay Preliminary experiments should be performed to assess the integrity of the mitochondria isolated from the cell lysate as described above. The cytochrome c oxidase assay kit (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) based on cytochrome c oxidase enzyme (EC 1.9.3.1) assay allows for the detection of intact mitochondria by assessing outer membrane integrity via cytochrome c. Pure fractions of intact mitochondria are assayed following the manufacturer's protocol at 550 nm where changes in absorption of cytochrome c when reduced and then reoxidized determines cytochrome c activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions containing intact mitochondria will yield a positive change in absorption. A positive control is included in the assay kit. Negative controls include pure cytosolic fractions from the isolation and lysed mitochondria subjected to brief sonication. 4.2.1.3. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase assay In order to be sure that the mitochondria fraction from the isolation is not contaminated with cytosolic components, both the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions from the isolation were saved and assayed for ? -glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.8) activity, following the manufacturer's (Sigma Aldrich) recommendation monitoring the change in absorption at 340 nm to determine glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions, free of cytosolic contamination, should have no activity as evidenced by no change in absorption. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity should only be evident in the cytosolic fraction from the supernatants saved from the high-speed spins. 4.2.2. Kinetic analysis of mitochondrial malic enzyme activity To validate the activity of mitochondrial malic enzyme, we use electrospray tandem mass spectroscopy (LC/MS/MS) to measure the appearance of [13C3]pyruvate when freshly isolated mitochondria are incubated with NAD+, ADP+, and either [13C4]fumarate or [13C5]glutamate with leucine. A 96-well format with eight time points and four mitochondrial dilutions is used to obtain the time course of [13C3]pyruvate synthesis. In order to collect aliquots at the timed intervals, we make the following preparations. First prepare eight identical 1.7-ml tubes prepared as listed in Table 24.3 . Next prepare two sequential 1:5 dilutions of the undiluted mitochondrial suspension (?1.5 mg mitochondrial protein in 300 ? l prepared from three confluent 150 cm2 dishes) that was prepared as described above in Section 4.2.1. For the 1:5 mitochondrial dilution, 150 ? l of undiluted mitochondria plus 600 ? l mitochondrial buffer is prepared. For the 1:25 mitochondrial dilution, 150 ? l of 1:5 diluted mitochondria plus 600 ml mitochondrial buffer is prepared. Place the eight previously prepared 1.7 ml tubes with the enzyme assay reagent mixtures ( Table 24.3 ) in a 37 °C water bath for 3–5 min with the lids open (be sure that no water splashes in). Have a 96-well plate on ice ready and labeled so that each column corresponds to a time point and each row corresponds to the incubation tube. Add 150 ? l of 1 m M acetic acid to all 96 wells to immediately quench the reaction once an incubated aliquot is taken. Prior to adding the mitochondria, take 50 ? l from each 1.7 ml tube and place in the corresponding 0 min column of the 96-well plate. Add 50 ? l of the mitochondria to each tube, using the undiluted and each dilution sample for two replicate tubes (e.g., undiluted mitochondria in tubes 1 and 2, 1:5 diluted mitochondria in tubes 3 and 4, 1:25 diluted mitochondria in tubes 5 and 6). Immediately mix by pipetting and collect 50 ? l from each tube in the same order as mitochondria samples were added. This will be time 0.5 min and spike into appropriate well in the 96-well plate. Follow this procedure for all of the sample tubes for each of the remaining time-points: 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 30, and 60 min. 4.2.2.1. Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry for determining <sup>13</sup>C-enrichment of Kreb's cycle intermediates and pyruvate The samples are then thawed and transferred to 96-well filter plates, the supernatent is collected by centrifugation through the filter, and analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) for 13C-enrichment of pyruvate, malate, citrate, and glutamate. In our laboratory, LC/MS/MS analyses of metabolites are performed on an Applied Biosystems API4000 QTrap interfaced to a Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan, HPLC (LC-20AD, SIL-20AC, CTO-20A). Metabolites were eluted from a Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, Aclaim Polar Advantage (C16, 5 ?m, 120 Å, 4.5 × 250 mm) column (40 °C) with acetonitrile:water buffered with 2 m M ammonium acetate using a linear gradient from 5% to 95% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 600 ? l/min. Metabolite concentrations and enrichments are determined by electrospray ionization monitoring of the positive product ion transition pairs of pyruvate (87.0/32.0), citrate (191.0/87.0), succinate (117.0/73.0), glutamate (146.0/128.0), and malate (133.0/71.0). Isotopic labeling is monitored with incremental increases in the masses of the parent and daughter ions to account for the ensemble of potential isotopic isomers. To monitor the synthesis rate of [U-13C]pyruvate from [U-13C]fumarate, the transition pair for m + 3 pyruvate of 90.0/32.0 is shown in Fig. 24.3 .  4.2.1. Isolation of mitochondria About 48–72 h prior to isolation of the mitochondria, INS-1 cells are seeded at a density of ? 1.0 × 107 cells/plate into 150 cm2 cell culture dishes. Each dish yields ?0.5 mg mitochondrial protein. Two dishes are needed for the LC/MS/MS kinetic studies. The cells should be cultured in RPMI-1640 complete media with 11.1 m M d -glucose supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum, 10 m M HEPES, 2 m M l -glutamine, 1 m M sodium pyruvate, 50 ?M BME, 10,000 U/ml penicillin, and 10 mg/ml streptomycin. After 2-days culture in 5% CO2 at 37 °C, the cell density should be ?90% confluent, and ready for isolation of the mitochondria. Mitochondria are isolated under conditions to preserve function but to minimize enzymatic activity. All media, isolation buffers, centrifuge tubes, and centrifuges should be pre-cooled to between 0 and 4 °C. Fifteen milliliters of mitochondrial extraction buffer is needed for extraction of mitochondria from three 150 cm2 plates (5 ml/plate). The plates are placed on ice and the growth medium is removed by aspiration. The cells in each plate are then quickly washed with 5 ml of ice-cold Phosphate Buffered Saline, PBS. The PBS is immediately removed by aspiration and replaced with 5 ml of ice-cold isotonic mitochondrial extraction buffer containing 65 m M sucrose, 215 m M d -mannitol, 5 m M HEPES, 3 m M MgCl2, 5 m M KH2PO4, and 5 m M KHCO3. The mitochondrial extraction buffer should be prepared fresh on the day of the extraction, as detailed in Table 24.2 . The adherent cells are quickly scraped from the plates using a sturdy cell lifter (Corning), and the cell suspensions are transferred into one 15-ml conical centrifuge tubes for three plates. The cell suspensions are centrifuged at a low speed of ?100 rcf for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant is then removed by aspiration, and the cell pellet is gently resuspended in ice-cold mitochondrial buffer (1 ml/culture plate) until a homogeneous mixture is obtained. Transfer 3 ml of the cell suspension to a pre-cooled (4 °C) 5-ml glass-teflon Potter Elvehjem homogenizer, and homogenize with the vertical passing of 50 strokes between teflon pestle and glass vial/mortar. We found that to obtain a cleaner mitochondrial preparation with minimal cytosolic contamination, it is best to resuspend the cell pellet in 1 ml/culture plate, and do multiple rounds of douncing rather than to concentrate the cell pellet with less volume per culture plate. The homogenate is then split into 1.7-ml microcentrifuge tubes (1 ml/tube), and the sheered cells are centrifuged for 3.5 min at 1800 rcf at 4 °C to pellet the nucleus, sheered plasma membrane, and other cellular fragments. The supernatant, containing the mitochondria, is transferred to new 1.7-ml tube and placed on ice while additional mitochondria trapped in the pellet are harvested two more times to yield the maximum amount of mitochondria as follows. The pellet is resuspended in 0.5 ml of mitochondrial extraction buffer and centrifuged for 3.5 min at 1800 rcf at 4 °C. The supernatant, with the mitochondria, is again transferred to a new tube and kept on ice. The process is repeated once more. The supernatants from the second and third spins are combined with the first mitochondrial supernatant in a 1.7-ml tube. (The pellet containing the membrane fragments can now be discarded.) The mitochondria are then pelleted by centrifugation of all the supernatant tubes for 5 min at a higher speed of 10,800 rcf at 4 °C. Carefully aspirate the supernatant from the yellowish mitochondrial pellet. At higher speeds, you may see a white fluffy band above the pellet. If this occurs, remove the white band with the rest of the supernatant by aspiration. The mitochondrial pellet from one tube is resuspended in 1.0 ml of extraction buffer and transferred to the next tube containing the second mitochondria pellet, and then resuspended to obtain one homogeneous suspension of mitochondria. The mitochondria are pelleted with a final high-speed centrifugation for 5 min at 4 °C. Aspirate the supernatant and resuspend the pellet in 300 ? l of the mitochondrial extraction buffer for the kinetic labeling experiments for assessment of mitochondrial malic enzyme activity. A 30- ? l aliquot of the mitochondrial suspension is taken for protein analysis by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, reagent). 4.2.1.1. Protein Assay Protein concentrations of the mitochondrial suspension are assayed at this point to determine the dilution needed to achieve a concentration of 1 mg protein/ml. The Bradford method (Bio-Rad protein reagent) must be used as sucrose interferes with the micro BCA assay. Protein assays are performed following manufacturers protocol measuring absorbance at 595 nm with a standard curve from 40 to 1.2 ? g/ml. 4.2.1.2. Cytochrome c assay Preliminary experiments should be performed to assess the integrity of the mitochondria isolated from the cell lysate as described above. The cytochrome c oxidase assay kit (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) based on cytochrome c oxidase enzyme (EC 1.9.3.1) assay allows for the detection of intact mitochondria by assessing outer membrane integrity via cytochrome c. Pure fractions of intact mitochondria are assayed following the manufacturer's protocol at 550 nm where changes in absorption of cytochrome c when reduced and then reoxidized determines cytochrome c activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions containing intact mitochondria will yield a positive change in absorption. A positive control is included in the assay kit. Negative controls include pure cytosolic fractions from the isolation and lysed mitochondria subjected to brief sonication. 4.2.1.3. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase assay In order to be sure that the mitochondria fraction from the isolation is not contaminated with cytosolic components, both the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions from the isolation were saved and assayed for ? -glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.8) activity, following the manufacturer's (Sigma Aldrich) recommendation monitoring the change in absorption at 340 nm to determine glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions, free of cytosolic contamination, should have no activity as evidenced by no change in absorption. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity should only be evident in the cytosolic fraction from the supernatants saved from the high-speed spins.  4.2.1.1. Protein Assay Protein concentrations of the mitochondrial suspension are assayed at this point to determine the dilution needed to achieve a concentration of 1 mg protein/ml. The Bradford method (Bio-Rad protein reagent) must be used as sucrose interferes with the micro BCA assay. Protein assays are performed following manufacturers protocol measuring absorbance at 595 nm with a standard curve from 40 to 1.2 ? g/ml.  4.2.1.2. Cytochrome c assay Preliminary experiments should be performed to assess the integrity of the mitochondria isolated from the cell lysate as described above. The cytochrome c oxidase assay kit (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) based on cytochrome c oxidase enzyme (EC 1.9.3.1) assay allows for the detection of intact mitochondria by assessing outer membrane integrity via cytochrome c. Pure fractions of intact mitochondria are assayed following the manufacturer's protocol at 550 nm where changes in absorption of cytochrome c when reduced and then reoxidized determines cytochrome c activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions containing intact mitochondria will yield a positive change in absorption. A positive control is included in the assay kit. Negative controls include pure cytosolic fractions from the isolation and lysed mitochondria subjected to brief sonication.  4.2.1.3. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase assay In order to be sure that the mitochondria fraction from the isolation is not contaminated with cytosolic components, both the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions from the isolation were saved and assayed for ? -glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.8) activity, following the manufacturer's (Sigma Aldrich) recommendation monitoring the change in absorption at 340 nm to determine glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity. Pure mitochondrial fractions, free of cytosolic contamination, should have no activity as evidenced by no change in absorption. Glycerol-3-P dehydrogenase activity should only be evident in the cytosolic fraction from the supernatants saved from the high-speed spins.  4.2.2. Kinetic analysis of mitochondrial malic enzyme activity To validate the activity of mitochondrial malic enzyme, we use electrospray tandem mass spectroscopy (LC/MS/MS) to measure the appearance of [13C3]pyruvate when freshly isolated mitochondria are incubated with NAD+, ADP+, and either [13C4]fumarate or [13C5]glutamate with leucine. A 96-well format with eight time points and four mitochondrial dilutions is used to obtain the time course of [13C3]pyruvate synthesis. In order to collect aliquots at the timed intervals, we make the following preparations. First prepare eight identical 1.7-ml tubes prepared as listed in Table 24.3 . Next prepare two sequential 1:5 dilutions of the undiluted mitochondrial suspension (?1.5 mg mitochondrial protein in 300 ? l prepared from three confluent 150 cm2 dishes) that was prepared as described above in Section 4.2.1. For the 1:5 mitochondrial dilution, 150 ? l of undiluted mitochondria plus 600 ? l mitochondrial buffer is prepared. For the 1:25 mitochondrial dilution, 150 ? l of 1:5 diluted mitochondria plus 600 ml mitochondrial buffer is prepared. Place the eight previously prepared 1.7 ml tubes with the enzyme assay reagent mixtures ( Table 24.3 ) in a 37 °C water bath for 3–5 min with the lids open (be sure that no water splashes in). Have a 96-well plate on ice ready and labeled so that each column corresponds to a time point and each row corresponds to the incubation tube. Add 150 ? l of 1 m M acetic acid to all 96 wells to immediately quench the reaction once an incubated aliquot is taken. Prior to adding the mitochondria, take 50 ? l from each 1.7 ml tube and place in the corresponding 0 min column of the 96-well plate. Add 50 ? l of the mitochondria to each tube, using the undiluted and each dilution sample for two replicate tubes (e.g., undiluted mitochondria in tubes 1 and 2, 1:5 diluted mitochondria in tubes 3 and 4, 1:25 diluted mitochondria in tubes 5 and 6). Immediately mix by pipetting and collect 50 ? l from each tube in the same order as mitochondria samples were added. This will be time 0.5 min and spike into appropriate well in the 96-well plate. Follow this procedure for all of the sample tubes for each of the remaining time-points: 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 30, and 60 min. 4.2.2.1. Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry for determining <sup>13</sup>C-enrichment of Kreb's cycle intermediates and pyruvate The samples are then thawed and transferred to 96-well filter plates, the supernatent is collected by centrifugation through the filter, and analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) for 13C-enrichment of pyruvate, malate, citrate, and glutamate. In our laboratory, LC/MS/MS analyses of metabolites are performed on an Applied Biosystems API4000 QTrap interfaced to a Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan, HPLC (LC-20AD, SIL-20AC, CTO-20A). Metabolites were eluted from a Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, Aclaim Polar Advantage (C16, 5 ?m, 120 Å, 4.5 × 250 mm) column (40 °C) with acetonitrile:water buffered with 2 m M ammonium acetate using a linear gradient from 5% to 95% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 600 ? l/min. Metabolite concentrations and enrichments are determined by electrospray ionization monitoring of the positive product ion transition pairs of pyruvate (87.0/32.0), citrate (191.0/87.0), succinate (117.0/73.0), glutamate (146.0/128.0), and malate (133.0/71.0). Isotopic labeling is monitored with incremental increases in the masses of the parent and daughter ions to account for the ensemble of potential isotopic isomers. To monitor the synthesis rate of [U-13C]pyruvate from [U-13C]fumarate, the transition pair for m + 3 pyruvate of 90.0/32.0 is shown in Fig. 24.3 .  4.2.2.1. Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry for determining <sup>13</sup>C-enrichment of Kreb's cycle intermediates and pyruvate The samples are then thawed and transferred to 96-well filter plates, the supernatent is collected by centrifugation through the filter, and analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) for 13C-enrichment of pyruvate, malate, citrate, and glutamate. In our laboratory, LC/MS/MS analyses of metabolites are performed on an Applied Biosystems API4000 QTrap interfaced to a Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan, HPLC (LC-20AD, SIL-20AC, CTO-20A). Metabolites were eluted from a Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, Aclaim Polar Advantage (C16, 5 ?m, 120 Å, 4.5 × 250 mm) column (40 °C) with acetonitrile:water buffered with 2 m M ammonium acetate using a linear gradient from 5% to 95% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 600 ? l/min. Metabolite concentrations and enrichments are determined by electrospray ionization monitoring of the positive product ion transition pairs of pyruvate (87.0/32.0), citrate (191.0/87.0), succinate (117.0/73.0), glutamate (146.0/128.0), and malate (133.0/71.0). Isotopic labeling is monitored with incremental increases in the masses of the parent and daughter ions to account for the ensemble of potential isotopic isomers. To monitor the synthesis rate of [U-13C]pyruvate from [U-13C]fumarate, the transition pair for m + 3 pyruvate of 90.0/32.0 is shown in Fig. 24.3 .  5. Calculating Relative Rates of Anaplerotic Pathways from <sup>13</sup>C-Glutamate Isotopomer Distribution The NMR 13C-isotopomer and modeling approach that we used has the advantage that a comprehensive picture of the entry into the Kreb's cycle of multiple substrates through multiple pathways can be determined in a single experiment. The metabolism of [U-13C]glucose results in labeling of Kreb's cycle intermediates that provides an experimentally convenient means of simultaneously quantifying relative flux rates through multiple pathways from a single isotopic tracer input. From the NMR analysis of the molecular distribution of 13C-label within glutamate, the contributions of glucose (through PDH) and fatty acids (by ? -oxidation) into acetyl CoA are calculated. The analysis also provides the relative flux rates of substrates entering through several anaplerotic entry points including glucose through PC, and glutamate through glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) when glutamine plus leucine are supplied as secretagogues ( Fig. 24.4 ). Metabolism of [U-13C]glucose results in labeling of Kreb's cycle intermediates that are determined by relative rates of PC and PDH, as well as the entry of other metabolites into the cycle. PDH flux initially labels both Glu 4 and 5 (Glu4 + 5). Further turns of the Kreb's cycle randomize the doubly labeled isotopomer to either Glu4 + 5 or Glu1 + 2. When PDH is the only entry point for Kreb's cycle flux, the mixture of glutamate iso-topomers quickly reaches a steady-state distribution of glutamate labeled in all five carbons. In contrast, PC flux of [U-13C]pyruvate (with unlabeled acetyl-CoA), initially labels Glu2 + 3 and Glu1 + 2 + 3. At steady-state, ?70% of the isotopomers consist of Glu1 + 2, Glu2 + 3, and Glu1 +2 + 3. Because of these differences in steady-state isotopomer distributions, the proportion of PC to PDH flux can be readily determined from the glutamate isotopomer distribution. Furthermore, the isotopomer distribution also provides a measure of the pathways and relative flux rates of unlabeled substrates (fat, other three carbon precursors, or GDH) contributing to Kreb's cycle flux. The relative rates of labeled and unlabeled substrates are calculated as the product of the precursor enrichment and the relative rates for each step as determined by the program “tcacalc” ( Malloy et al ., 1990 ). 5.1. <sup>13</sup>C-labeling of cells for isotopomer studies of anaplerotic pathways INS-1 cells (+/? siRNA KD of malic enzyme), at 80% confluence, are pre-incubated for 2 h at low glucose (2 m M) in KRB to establish basal conditions. The cells are then washed to remove unlabeled glucose, and then incubated for 2 h in DMEM, or KRB, with [U-13C]glucose (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Miamisburg, Ohio, 99% 13C, 2.5 m M or 15 m M), alone or supplemented with 4 m M glutamine and 10 m M leucine (singly or in combination). At the end of the 2 h isotopic labeling period, the media is removed and frozen for later analysis. The monolayer of cells is quenched with ice-cold water, quickly scraped with a cell lifter, and transferred to a 50 ml conical tube with a 200 ml aliquot saved for protein and insulin assays. The remainder of the supernatant (and media) is frozen on dry ice, lyophilized, and redissolved in 400 ? l D20 for NMR analysis. 5.2. <sup>13</sup>C NMR analysis of the <sup>13</sup>C isotopic isomers of glutamate The 13C positional isotopomer distribution of glutamate is determined by 13C NMR spectroscopy. In our laboratory, we used an AVANCE 500-MHz spectrometer (Bruker Instruments, Inc. Billerica, Massachusetts). Spectra were acquired with TR = 0.5 s, NS = 10,000, 16 K data, and Waltz-16 broadband proton decoupling. Correction factors for differences in T1 relaxation times should be determined from fully relaxed spectra of standard solutions ( Cline et al ., 2004 ). An example of the 13C NMR spectrum of glutamate isotopomers that are generated by INS-1 cells after incubation with 15 m M [U-13C6]glucose in KRB is shown in Fig. 24.5 . The isotopic isomers are best identified from the 13C–13C J -coupling constants, and quantified by integration of line fitting (NUTS, Acorn, Inc) to the glutamate resonances at C2 (?55 ppm), C3 (?28 ppm), and C4 (?34 ppm). 5.2.1. Analysis of glutamate 3 The 13C isotopic isomers determined from analysis of C3 are glutamate triply labeled at C2–C3–C4 (triplet), glutamate doubly labeled at C2–C3 or C3–C4 (doublet). The center resonance of C3 is the sum of the C2–C3–C4 isotopomer, and glutamate labeled at C3, but not C2 or C3. The triplet at C3 is due to the similarity of the coupling constants of 35 Hz for both C2–C3 and C3–C4. 5.2.2. Analysis of glutamate 4 In contrast to the triplet seen at glutamate C3 (for C2–C3–C4), when glutamate is triply labeled at C3–C4–C5, the differences in the coupling constants of 35 Hz for C3–C4, and 51 Hz for C4–C5, results in a quartet. From the coupling constant of 51 Hz, it can be determined that only the doubly labeled isotopomer, glutamate C4–C5, is present. The doubly labeled isotopomer, glutamate C3–C4 (J = 35 Hz) is undetectable in this spectrum. 5.2.3. Analysis of glutamate 2 Glutamate 2 is interpreted in the same way as glutamate 4. In contrast to the spectrum of glutamate 4, both of the doubly labeled isotopomers C2–C3 ( J = 35 Hz), and C1–C2 ( J = 50 Hz) can be observed. 5.3. Calculation of metabolic fluxes with tcacalc Steady-state flux rates, relative to Kreb's cycle flux, are calculated from the isotopomers of glutamate observed at carbon positions 2, 3, and 4 in the 13C NMR spectra, and modeled using the program tcacalc ( Malloy et al ., 1990 ), and is available for download from the UTSW Medical Center Rogers NMR Center ( http://www4.utsouthwestern.edu/rogersnmr/software.htm ). Using the nomenclature adopted for tcacalc ( Fig. 24.4 ), the model provides the best fit to our NMR data by calculating the relative fluxes of acetyl-CoA synthetase (ACS), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), pyruvate carboxylase (PC), pyruvate kinase (PK), anaplerosis leading to succinyl-CoA (YS), and enrichments of “lactate” and “fat.” Fat includes all metabolite inputs into acetyl-CoA other than glucose (e.g., leucine). All flux rates are referenced to a citrate synthase (CS) flux of 1, and is equivalent to Kreb's cycle flux. CS flux is modeled as the sum of PDH flux of labeled and unlabeled pyruvate, and of ACS flux, as presented in Fig. 24.4 . YS represents unidirectional anaplerotic flux of substrates that lead to succinyl-CoA. As originally designed, YS represents flux of proprionate into the Kreb's cycle. In our experiments with glutamine plus leucine as the secretagogues, YS represents the rate of synthesis of ? -ketoglutarate from glutamate ( Figs. 24.1 and 24.4 : GDH). An example input file with initial parameters and sequential addition of the pathways of pdh, pk, and ys, used to calculate fluxes is as follows: fat12 0.5 0.1 LAC123 0.5 0.1 YPC 0.7 0.2 Add pdh 0.3 0.2 Add pk 0.3 0.2 Add ys 0.5 0.1 An example of a data file with fractional isotopomer distribution determined from the 13C NMR spectrum of INS-1 cells incubated for 2 h in KRB with 15 m M glucose is CO Created using tcasim and altered to have 3% error CO FAT2 0.30 FAT12 0.40 YS 0.05 AS3 0.50 CYCLES 35.00 GLU2S 0.039 GLU2D23 0.333 GLU2D12 0.096 GLU2Q 0.531 GLU3S 0.037 GLU3D 0.232 GLU3T 0.730 GLU4S 0.000 GLU4D34 0.000 GLU4D45 0.319 GLU4Q 0.680 Define C3C4 GLU3F/GLU4F 0.804 Define C2C4 GLU2F/GLU4F 0.753 The above input file represents the fractional area for the multiplets at each of carbon resonances. Using these inputs, tcacalc calculated the following fluxes: ACS 0.857 Fat0 0.123 Fat12 0.877 LDH 0.593 Lac0 0.008 Lac123 0.992 PDH 0.143 YPC 1.230 YS 0.379 ASO 1.000 PK 0.780 From which we calculated the following Kreb's cycle parameters: Relative flux rates: Acetyl-CoA entry: ACS + PDH = 1.00 Relative flux rates: Anaplerotic entry: YPC + YS = 1.61 Acetyl-CoA from [U-13C]glucose: ACS × Fat12 + PDH × Lac123 = 0.89 Acetyl-CoA from other sources: ACS × Fat0 + PDH × Lac0 = 0.11 The relative rates of labeled and unlabeled substrates can be calculated as the product of the precursor enrichment and the relative rates. Anaplerotic flux from [U-13C]glc: YPC × Lac123 = 1.22 Anaplerotic flux from unlabeled pyr: YPC × Lac0 = 0.01 Anaplerotic flux from glutamate: YS × ASO = 0.38 The percent anaplerosis to total Kreb's cycle flux can be calculated as: % Anaplerosis : 100 × ( PC + YS ) / ( PC + YS + PDH + ACS ) = 62 % Although open to interpretation, Lu et al. (2002) proposed that an index of pyruvate cycling can be calculated as the average of the flux rates of PC and of PK. Pyruvate cycling: (PC + PK)/2 = 1.01.  5.1. <sup>13</sup>C-labeling of cells for isotopomer studies of anaplerotic pathways INS-1 cells (+/? siRNA KD of malic enzyme), at 80% confluence, are pre-incubated for 2 h at low glucose (2 m M) in KRB to establish basal conditions. The cells are then washed to remove unlabeled glucose, and then incubated for 2 h in DMEM, or KRB, with [U-13C]glucose (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Miamisburg, Ohio, 99% 13C, 2.5 m M or 15 m M), alone or supplemented with 4 m M glutamine and 10 m M leucine (singly or in combination). At the end of the 2 h isotopic labeling period, the media is removed and frozen for later analysis. The monolayer of cells is quenched with ice-cold water, quickly scraped with a cell lifter, and transferred to a 50 ml conical tube with a 200 ml aliquot saved for protein and insulin assays. The remainder of the supernatant (and media) is frozen on dry ice, lyophilized, and redissolved in 400 ? l D20 for NMR analysis.  5.2. <sup>13</sup>C NMR analysis of the <sup>13</sup>C isotopic isomers of glutamate The 13C positional isotopomer distribution of glutamate is determined by 13C NMR spectroscopy. In our laboratory, we used an AVANCE 500-MHz spectrometer (Bruker Instruments, Inc. Billerica, Massachusetts). Spectra were acquired with TR = 0.5 s, NS = 10,000, 16 K data, and Waltz-16 broadband proton decoupling. Correction factors for differences in T1 relaxation times should be determined from fully relaxed spectra of standard solutions ( Cline et al ., 2004 ). An example of the 13C NMR spectrum of glutamate isotopomers that are generated by INS-1 cells after incubation with 15 m M [U-13C6]glucose in KRB is shown in Fig. 24.5 . The isotopic isomers are best identified from the 13C–13C J -coupling constants, and quantified by integration of line fitting (NUTS, Acorn, Inc) to the glutamate resonances at C2 (?55 ppm), C3 (?28 ppm), and C4 (?34 ppm). 5.2.1. Analysis of glutamate 3 The 13C isotopic isomers determined from analysis of C3 are glutamate triply labeled at C2–C3–C4 (triplet), glutamate doubly labeled at C2–C3 or C3–C4 (doublet). The center resonance of C3 is the sum of the C2–C3–C4 isotopomer, and glutamate labeled at C3, but not C2 or C3. The triplet at C3 is due to the similarity of the coupling constants of 35 Hz for both C2–C3 and C3–C4. 5.2.2. Analysis of glutamate 4 In contrast to the triplet seen at glutamate C3 (for C2–C3–C4), when glutamate is triply labeled at C3–C4–C5, the differences in the coupling constants of 35 Hz for C3–C4, and 51 Hz for C4–C5, results in a quartet. From the coupling constant of 51 Hz, it can be determined that only the doubly labeled isotopomer, glutamate C4–C5, is present. The doubly labeled isotopomer, glutamate C3–C4 (J = 35 Hz) is undetectable in this spectrum. 5.2.3. Analysis of glutamate 2 Glutamate 2 is interpreted in the same way as glutamate 4. In contrast to the spectrum of glutamate 4, both of the doubly labeled isotopomers C2–C3 ( J = 35 Hz), and C1–C2 ( J = 50 Hz) can be observed.  5.2.1. Analysis of glutamate 3 The 13C isotopic isomers determined from analysis of C3 are glutamate triply labeled at C2–C3–C4 (triplet), glutamate doubly labeled at C2–C3 or C3–C4 (doublet). The center resonance of C3 is the sum of the C2–C3–C4 isotopomer, and glutamate labeled at C3, but not C2 or C3. The triplet at C3 is due to the similarity of the coupling constants of 35 Hz for both C2–C3 and C3–C4.  5.2.2. Analysis of glutamate 4 In contrast to the triplet seen at glutamate C3 (for C2–C3–C4), when glutamate is triply labeled at C3–C4–C5, the differences in the coupling constants of 35 Hz for C3–C4, and 51 Hz for C4–C5, results in a quartet. From the coupling constant of 51 Hz, it can be determined that only the doubly labeled isotopomer, glutamate C4–C5, is present. The doubly labeled isotopomer, glutamate C3–C4 (J = 35 Hz) is undetectable in this spectrum.  5.2.3. Analysis of glutamate 2 Glutamate 2 is interpreted in the same way as glutamate 4. In contrast to the spectrum of glutamate 4, both of the doubly labeled isotopomers C2–C3 ( J = 35 Hz), and C1–C2 ( J = 50 Hz) can be observed.  5.3. Calculation of metabolic fluxes with tcacalc Steady-state flux rates, relative to Kreb's cycle flux, are calculated from the isotopomers of glutamate observed at carbon positions 2, 3, and 4 in the 13C NMR spectra, and modeled using the program tcacalc ( Malloy et al ., 1990 ), and is available for download from the UTSW Medical Center Rogers NMR Center ( http://www4.utsouthwestern.edu/rogersnmr/software.htm ). Using the nomenclature adopted for tcacalc ( Fig. 24.4 ), the model provides the best fit to our NMR data by calculating the relative fluxes of acetyl-CoA synthetase (ACS), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), pyruvate carboxylase (PC), pyruvate kinase (PK), anaplerosis leading to succinyl-CoA (YS), and enrichments of “lactate” and “fat.” Fat includes all metabolite inputs into acetyl-CoA other than glucose (e.g., leucine). All flux rates are referenced to a citrate synthase (CS) flux of 1, and is equivalent to Kreb's cycle flux. CS flux is modeled as the sum of PDH flux of labeled and unlabeled pyruvate, and of ACS flux, as presented in Fig. 24.4 . YS represents unidirectional anaplerotic flux of substrates that lead to succinyl-CoA. As originally designed, YS represents flux of proprionate into the Kreb's cycle. In our experiments with glutamine plus leucine as the secretagogues, YS represents the rate of synthesis of ? -ketoglutarate from glutamate ( Figs. 24.1 and 24.4 : GDH). An example input file with initial parameters and sequential addition of the pathways of pdh, pk, and ys, used to calculate fluxes is as follows: fat12 0.5 0.1 LAC123 0.5 0.1 YPC 0.7 0.2 Add pdh 0.3 0.2 Add pk 0.3 0.2 Add ys 0.5 0.1 An example of a data file with fractional isotopomer distribution determined from the 13C NMR spectrum of INS-1 cells incubated for 2 h in KRB with 15 m M glucose is CO Created using tcasim and altered to have 3% error CO FAT2 0.30 FAT12 0.40 YS 0.05 AS3 0.50 CYCLES 35.00 GLU2S 0.039 GLU2D23 0.333 GLU2D12 0.096 GLU2Q 0.531 GLU3S 0.037 GLU3D 0.232 GLU3T 0.730 GLU4S 0.000 GLU4D34 0.000 GLU4D45 0.319 GLU4Q 0.680 Define C3C4 GLU3F/GLU4F 0.804 Define C2C4 GLU2F/GLU4F 0.753 The above input file represents the fractional area for the multiplets at each of carbon resonances. Using these inputs, tcacalc calculated the following fluxes: ACS 0.857 Fat0 0.123 Fat12 0.877 LDH 0.593 Lac0 0.008 Lac123 0.992 PDH 0.143 YPC 1.230 YS 0.379 ASO 1.000 PK 0.780 From which we calculated the following Kreb's cycle parameters: Relative flux rates: Acetyl-CoA entry: ACS + PDH = 1.00 Relative flux rates: Anaplerotic entry: YPC + YS = 1.61 Acetyl-CoA from [U-13C]glucose: ACS × Fat12 + PDH × Lac123 = 0.89 Acetyl-CoA from other sources: ACS × Fat0 + PDH × Lac0 = 0.11 The relative rates of labeled and unlabeled substrates can be calculated as the product of the precursor enrichment and the relative rates. Anaplerotic flux from [U-13C]glc: YPC × Lac123 = 1.22 Anaplerotic flux from unlabeled pyr: YPC × Lac0 = 0.01 Anaplerotic flux from glutamate: YS × ASO = 0.38 The percent anaplerosis to total Kreb's cycle flux can be calculated as: % Anaplerosis : 100 × ( PC + YS ) / ( PC + YS + PDH + ACS ) = 62 % Although open to interpretation, Lu et al. (2002) proposed that an index of pyruvate cycling can be calculated as the average of the flux rates of PC and of PK. Pyruvate cycling: (PC + PK)/2 = 1.01.  6. Discussion The pancreatic islet ? -cell is uniquely specialized to tightly couple its metabolism and rates of insulin secretion with the levels of circulating nutrient fuels. Unlike other metabolically responsive cells, such as myocytes and hepatocytes, ? -cells cannot accommodate increased glycolytic flux by storing the excess glucose as glycogen or eliminate it as lactate. Without an increase in energy demand that matches the increased glycolytic flux, feedback inhibition would limit the ability of the metabolic responsiveness of the cell. Substrate cycling, mediated by malic enzyme, provides a mechanism to allow glycolytic and mitochondrial fluxes to increase in direct proportion to circulating concentrations of glucose and other fuel secretagogues. We have used tcacalc to evaluate changes in the flux through glycolytic and Kreb's cycle pathways that are believed to play a role in the coupling of metabolism with insulin exocytosis. It should be noted though, that tcacalc represents a simplified model of metabolism within the ? -cell, and has limited adaptability to incorporate the numerous intertwined pathways and substrate cycles that serve to modulate nutrient-stimulated insulin secretion. A pressing need exists to develop modeling programs that have the flexibility to include new pathways as they are revealed, and to be able to incorporate the wealth of data available from both NMR isotopomer and mass spectrometric isotopolog analysis. For example, substrate cycling of the anaplerotic metabolites malate and citrate is modeled by tcacalc based on the assumption that the average of unidirectional fluxes through PK and PC into the Kreb's cycle is a valid approach for calculating a cycling flux mediated by malic enzyme. Our use of siRNA to alter the activity of malic enzyme was undertaken to directly test the validity of this assumption, and the inference that the rate of insulin secretion was influenced by malate/citrate/pyruvate cycling, as opposed to PC flux per se . Our approach rests on the premise that malic enzyme exerts measurable control over the rate of these substrate cycles, and that this cycle is tied to the regulation of insulin secretion. Our results, as well as others, indicate that both the cytosolic and mitochondrial isoforms of malic enzyme exert metabolic control over the rate of pyruvate cycling in the rat insulinoma INS-1 832/13 cell line. However, recent results suggest that this may not be true in the context of the rat or mouse islets. These seemingly contradictory results highlight the need for a rigorous study of pyruvate cycling using metabolic control analysis. A low control coefficient for malic enzyme would result in little observable effect unless the activity of malic enzyme was virtually eliminated. In most cases, siRNA KD of malic enzyme is not absolute and a significant level of enzyme activity remains. Thus, one would observe little effect upon glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, despite the necessary involvement of malic enzyme and malate/pyruvate cycling in the coupling of metabolism with secretion. In conclusion, the redundancy of several complementary substrate cycles, the variance in their degree of metabolic control, and the species-dependency of expression and activity of malic enzyme in islet ? -cells, makes it imperative to evaluate the role of malic enzyme in fuel-stimulated insulin secretion in human islet ? -cells. 