Developing vaccines against minor capsid antigen L2 to prevent papillomavirus infection A subset of human papillomavirus (HPV) genotypes is responsible for ~5% of all cancer deaths globally, and uterine cervical carcinoma accounts for the majority of these cases. Their impact is greatest for women who do not have access to effective secondary preventive measures, and consequently over 80% of cervical cancer deaths worldwide occur in Developing nations. The understanding that persistent infection by this ‘oncogenic’ subset of HPV genotypes is necessary for the development of cervical carcinoma has driven the development of preventive vaccines. Two preventive vaccines comprising recombinant HPV L1 virus-like particles (VLPs) have been licensed. However, the current cost of these vaccines precludes global delivery, and they target only two of the ~15 known oncogenic HPV types, although ~70% of cervical cancer cases are attributed to these two types and there is evidence for some degree of cross-protection against other closely related types. A possible approach to broader immunity at lower cost is to consider vaccination against L2. L2 vaccines can be produced inexpensively and they also have the promise of conferring much broader cross-type protective immunity than observed with L1 VLP immunization. However, L2 vaccine development lags behind L1 VLP vaccines and several technical hurdles remain.  CLINICAL TRIAL DATA Several L2-based vaccines have been tested in patients. The promising immunogenicity of the HPV16 L2 108-120 peptide vaccine upon intranasal administration in pre-clinical studies led to a placebo-controlled phase I trial ( 58 ). Kawana et al. tested intranasal inoculation with placebo (n=3), 0.1 mg (n=5) or 0.5 mg (n=5) of HPV16 L2 108-120 peptide at weeks 0, 4, and 12 ( 60 ). The immunization caused no serious local or systemic reactions, but the serum antibody response was very weak. Four of the five patients vaccinated with 0.5 mg of peptide generated detectable HPV16 and HPV52 neutralizing antibody titers, whereas this did not occur in the low dose or placebo cohorts ( 60 ). It is likely that the immune response to such L2 protective epitopes after intra-nasal inoculation would be greatly improved by coupling to KLH or using the synthetic lipopeptide approach with an appropriately broadly reactive HLA class II epitope ( 66 , 115 , 116 ). Two vaccines comprising L2 fused to early viral oncogenes and expressed in bacteria have been tested in patients; TA-CIN is a single fusion protein comprising full length HPV16 L2, E7 and E6, and TA-GW is a single fusion protein comprising HPV6 L2 and E7. Each has potential as a candidate preventive and therapeutic HPV vaccine as they contain capsid antigen and the early viral oncogenes respectively. Both TA-CIN and TA-GW were produced by expression in bacteria and purified under denaturing conditions. A placebo-controlled, double-blinded phase I dose escalation study provided preliminary evidence that three immunizations with 533 ?g of TA-CIN without an adjuvant is well-tolerated and immunogenic in healthy volunteers ( 117 ). However, this vaccination regimen produced only low titers of L2-specific cross-neutralizing antibodies and weak E6/E7-specific interferon ? and proliferative T cell responses and required high doses of antigen ( 117 , 118 ). In phase II studies in 29 predominantly HPV16+ high grade vaginal or vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN or VIN) patients, vaccination with TA-CIN followed by a boost with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing E6 and E7 of both HPV16 and HPV18 (TA-HPV) failed to induce an improved rate of lesion regression as compared to earlier studies utilizing TA-HPV alone in 30 VIN patients ( 82 , 119 ). Switching the order of vaccination did not provide improved responses ( 81 , 82 ). The weak antibody and T cell responses to vaccination with TA-CIN protein alone strongly suggested the need to formulate TA-CIN with a potent adjuvant. Studies in primates and mice suggest that the saponin-based adjuvant GPI-0100 greatly enhances the responses to TA-CIN ( 67 ). In mice this combination of TA-CIN in GPI-0100 protects against experimental skin infection with HPV16 pseudovirions and challenge with HPV16 E6/E7-transformed tumor challenge ( 67 ). TA-GW was administered at 0, 3, 30 or 300 ?g in 1.2 mg of alum to healthy males in a phase I, randomized placebo controlled dose escalation trial ( 120 ) and the vaccination was well tolerated. Robust antibody responses were consistently triggered with only the 30 and 300 ug doses. Antigen-specific T cell proliferation and the production of IL5 and interferon gamma were also observed ( 120 ). This led to a Phase IIa open-label study in which 27 genital wart patients received 3 immunizations with TA-GW in alum over 4 weeks ( 121 ). The TA-GW vaccine was again well-tolerated. All of the patients generated specific serum IgG antibody responses, predominantly IgG1, against L2E7 after vaccination, and 19/25 made L2E7-specific T cell proliferative responses, producing both interferon gamma and IL5. Five of the 27 subjects completely cleared warts within 8 weeks, and the remainder were offered conventional therapy ( 121 ). Recurrence of warts was not seen in any of the 13 persons whose warts cleared by vaccine alone or with conventional therapy. These findings led to a large randomized controlled efficacy trial in patients with genital warts. In this trial the L2-E7 antigen was formulated in the AS02A adjuvant which contains the TLR4 agonist monophosphoryl lipid A, the saponin-based adjuvant QS21, and an oil-in-water emulsion ( 80 ). AS02A has been shown to induce high antibody titers, a strong CD4+ cell response, and cytotoxic T lymphocyte activity in humans and has an acceptable safety profile. Two placebo-controlled substudies were also performed to evaluate the value of the TA-GW in AS02A adjuvant when administered in addition to standard therapy. Unfortunately, there was no evidence for benefit of vaccination upon time to recurrence ( 80 ). There have been no studies addressing the value of vaccination with TA-GW for prevention of acquisition of HPV6 or HPV11 infection or genital warts to date. Studies to date generally suggest that vaccination with L1 VLPs or L2 does not influence pre-existing infection ( 23 , 72 , 79 , 80 , 83 ), although there are exceptions ( 54 , 78 , 122 ). The lack of an obvious therapeutic effect likely reflects the absence of detectable capsid gene expression in HPV-infected basal cells. However, these cells do express E6 and E7 and thus E6 and E7-specific T cell responses could potentially eliminate HPV infection and disease. However, vaccination of women with persistent HPV16+ high grade VIN/VAIN with TA-CIN (without adjuvant) in prime boost combinations with recombinant vaccinia virus expressing HPV16/18 E6 and E7 (TA-HPV) failed to enhance the rate of disease clearance ( 81 , 82 , 119 ). Similarly, vaccination with HPV6 L2-E7 in ASO2 adjuvant had no impact on pre-existing genital warts ( 80 ). These outcomes may reflect induction of an ineffective type of immune response, a failure of the observed E6/E7-specific T cell responses to traffic to the site of the lesion, or their suppression within the lesion microenvironment, or some combination of these issues ( 118 , 123 ). Vaccination using TA-CIN without adjuvant has not been demonstrated to impact the clinical course of pre-existing lesions in randomized trials. However, it is possible that the induction of E6/E7-specific T cells responses prior to HPV infection could prevent the onset of disease from new infections or possibly the reactivation of previously subclinical disease. In the prophylactic setting, issues of tolerance and immune suppression within the lesion microenvironment might be reduced or negated. Indeed, preventive vaccination with TA-CIN+GPI-0100 completely protected mice from TC-1 tumor challenge, whereas vaccination with TA-CIN alone was poorly effective ( 67 ). Furthermore, the GPI-0100 adjuvant dramatically boosted the E7-specific IFN-? secreting CD8+ T cell response in mice as compared to vaccination with TA-CIN alone ( 67 ). Vaccination of macaques induced systemic E6 and E7-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses. Thus it is possible that any protective efficacy against HPV16-related disease by TA-CIN vaccination via the induction of L2-specific neutralizing antibody could potentially be augmented by HPV16 E6/E7-specific T cell responses.  DISCUSSION Here we have attempted to lay out the case that second generation preventive HPV vaccines are needed. The principle arguments are that the licensed HPV vaccines are too expensive for global implementation and that they are not targeted against all medically relevant HPV genotypes. Cost is particularly significant since over 80% of cervical cancer cases occur in Developing countries that currently also lack comprehensive cytologic screening and secondary prevention programs ( 38 ). In Developed nations, expensive national screening programs have impacted the incidence of cervical cancer. Unfortunately, despite these efforts significant numbers of cases still occur, particularly in poor and marginalized populations who may not access the costly licensed vaccines. In addition, because the licensed vaccines only target a subset of oncogenic HPV genotypes, it is likely that the current screening programs will remain in place. Thus the cost of vaccination will be borne in addition to the costs of the screening programs. Further, the reduction in disease burden by implementation of the licensed HPV vaccines will dramatically reduce the predictive value and cost effectiveness of cytologic screening. How might these issues be addressed? It is unlikely that the licensed HPV vaccines can be produced sustainably at the costs required for global implementation without a switch to local production, and this has intellectual property issues. Local production by companies in Developing countries can achieve dramatic cost savings following the model of numerous childhood immunizations, e.g. the robust biotechnology sectors in India and China. Furthermore, new vaccines would increase the competition and help drive down costs. The production of multiple L1 VLP types in insect cells or even yeast, and formulation of all of these components is complex. It is likely that the production in bacteria of a single polypeptide, as with an L2 fusion protein, could be substantially less expensive to manufacture than a polyvalent L1 VLP vaccine prepared in eukaryotic cells. Indeed, licensed vaccines contain two or four L1 VLP types and eight or nine type vaccines are being tested. Thus if an L2 vaccine were proven effective in people for broad protection against oncogenic and other HPV types, its simpler manufacturing process could make local production of such a vaccine highly feasible. This might achieve the goal of producing an HPV vaccine at sustainable prices in emerging countries and lead to more global implementation of cervical cancer prevention. Broad and long lasting protection against all oncogenic types could also eliminate the need for cytologic screening programs in Developed nations, and L2 vaccines might also prevent the morbidity and costs associated with other non-malignant HPV disease. Unlike genital HPV infection, non-genital HPV infection is typically not transmitted sexually and frequently occurs in children. If future clinical testing of an L2-based vaccine demonstrated protection against infection at non-genital cutaneous sites, in addition to protection against genital HPV infection, it might provide a rationale for administration with other childhood vaccines. This could remove both the logistical challenges of vaccinating adolescents and the theoretical issue that vaccination of adolescents against HPV might influence their sexual behavior.  DISCUSSION Here we have attempted to lay out the case that second generation preventive HPV vaccines are needed. The principle arguments are that the licensed HPV vaccines are too expensive for global implementation and that they are not targeted against all medically relevant HPV genotypes. Cost is particularly significant since over 80% of cervical cancer cases occur in Developing countries that currently also lack comprehensive cytologic screening and secondary prevention programs ( 38 ). In Developed nations, expensive national screening programs have impacted the incidence of cervical cancer. Unfortunately, despite these efforts significant numbers of cases still occur, particularly in poor and marginalized populations who may not access the costly licensed vaccines. In addition, because the licensed vaccines only target a subset of oncogenic HPV genotypes, it is likely that the current screening programs will remain in place. Thus the cost of vaccination will be borne in addition to the costs of the screening programs. Further, the reduction in disease burden by implementation of the licensed HPV vaccines will dramatically reduce the predictive value and cost effectiveness of cytologic screening. How might these issues be addressed? It is unlikely that the licensed HPV vaccines can be produced sustainably at the costs required for global implementation without a switch to local production, and this has intellectual property issues. Local production by companies in Developing countries can achieve dramatic cost savings following the model of numerous childhood immunizations, e.g. the robust biotechnology sectors in India and China. Furthermore, new vaccines would increase the competition and help drive down costs. The production of multiple L1 VLP types in insect cells or even yeast, and formulation of all of these components is complex. It is likely that the production in bacteria of a single polypeptide, as with an L2 fusion protein, could be substantially less expensive to manufacture than a polyvalent L1 VLP vaccine prepared in eukaryotic cells. Indeed, licensed vaccines contain two or four L1 VLP types and eight or nine type vaccines are being tested. Thus if an L2 vaccine were proven effective in people for broad protection against oncogenic and other HPV types, its simpler manufacturing process could make local production of such a vaccine highly feasible. This might achieve the goal of producing an HPV vaccine at sustainable prices in emerging countries and lead to more global implementation of cervical cancer prevention. Broad and long lasting protection against all oncogenic types could also eliminate the need for cytologic screening programs in Developed nations, and L2 vaccines might also prevent the morbidity and costs associated with other non-malignant HPV disease. Unlike genital HPV infection, non-genital HPV infection is typically not transmitted sexually and frequently occurs in children. If future clinical testing of an L2-based vaccine demonstrated protection against infection at non-genital cutaneous sites, in addition to protection against genital HPV infection, it might provide a rationale for administration with other childhood vaccines. This could remove both the logistical challenges of vaccinating adolescents and the theoretical issue that vaccination of adolescents against HPV might influence their sexual behavior. 