Activator Protein-1 Has an Essential Role in Pancreatic Cancer Cells and Is Regulated by a Novel Akt-Mediated Mechanism Activator protein-1 (AP-1) regulates the expression of several genes involved in human tumorigenesis. However, there is little known about this transcription factor in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. We recently found high levels of AP-1-binding activities and multiple AP-1/DNA complexes containing c-Jun, JunD, Fra1, and Fra2 in pancreatic cancer cells. Transient transfection assays indicated that AP-1 was functional and capable of transactivating its gene targets. Furthermore, a c-Jun transactivation mutant inhibited anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent proliferation, suggesting that AP-1 had an essential role in pancreatic cancer cells. Our study also uncovered a novel mechanism by which protein kinase Akt controls c-Jun activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Indeed, distinct from its known ability to induce c-fos and fra1 and to stabilize c-Jun, Akt appeared to directly regulate the transcriptional activity of c-Jun independently of the phosphorylation sites targeted by c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (Ser63/Ser73) and glycogen synthase kinase-3 (Thr239). Our data also suggest that growth factors might use this Akt-regulated mechanism to potently induce c-Jun targets such as cyclin D1. Collectively, our findings indicate that AP-1 has an important function in pancreatic cancer cells and provide evidence for a previously unknown Akt-mediated mechanism of c-Jun activation.  Introduction Signaling pathways and their transcription factor targets are dysregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC; ref. 1 ). The persistent activation of transcription factors such as nuclear factor-?B (NF-?B) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) is a hallmark of cancer. Unlike NF-?B, which has been extensively studied ( 2 - 5 ), little is known about AP-1 in PDACs. Dimeric complexes of the Jun (c-Jun, JunB, and JunD), Fos (c-Fos, Fra1, Fra2, and FosB), Maf, and ATF transcription factor families are referred to as AP-1 and each complex may be functionally distinct in determining the specificity of the genes regulated ( 6 , 7 ). AP-1 complexes bind to palindromic DNA sequences defined as TPA response elements (TRE) or cyclic AMP response elements in the promoters and enhancers of c-jun and other target genes ( 8 , 9 ). AP-1 has a prominent role in both normal development and cellular transformation ( 9 ). Indeed, the genetic deletion of c jun, junB , or fra1 leads to embryonic lethality in mice because of abnormal organogenesis, and c-Fos and c-Jun, first identified as viral oncoproteins, have been implicated in bone, skin, and liver tumorigenesis as well ( 8 , 9 ). Furthermore, c-Jun is over-expressed in Hodgkin's and anaplastic large cell lymphoma and can augment oncogenic Ras-mediated cell transformation ( 1 , 10 ). Both c-Jun and c-Fos might be overexpressed in PDACs because of an epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor-mediated autocrine pathway ( 11 - 15 ). In contrast to c-Fos, FosB, and c-Jun, the AP-1 proteins Fra1, Fra2, JunB, and JunD have poor transactivation potential and either weak or no transforming activity. However, Fra1 and Fra2 overexpression in mice induced tumors in various organs including the pancreas, suggesting that they dimerized with AP-1 proteins that have more potent transactivation domains (TAD; ref. 9 ). Whereas JunB and c-Jun have overlapping developmental functions, JunB antagonizes the tumorigenic potential of c-Jun and may be a tumor suppressor ( 7 , 9 ). In one study, Rap1, a Ras antagonist, increased transforming growth factor-? type II receptor expression through a JunB-dependent mechanism to reduce the tumorigenicity of pancreatic cancer cells ( 16 ). The ability of c-Jun to regulate cellular proliferation, survival, and apoptosis might be the basis for its contrasting roles in development and tumorigenesis. Thus, c-Jun?/? mouse fibroblasts are proliferation defective and liver regeneration is impaired without c-Jun ( 17 , 18 ). Although considered essential for cell survival in the livers of c-Jun?/? fetal mice, c-Jun is also required for apoptosis ( 18 - 21 ). The ability of c-Jun to induce apoptosis mediators such as FasL and Bim and to transcriptionally repress tumor suppressors such as p53 might explain these opposing roles ( 7 ). AP-1 activity is regulated not only by dimer composition but also by other mechanisms. Indeed, interactions with NF-?B ( 22 ) and the mitogen-activated protein kinase or phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathways ( 23 , 24 ) could be critical for AP-1 function in pancreatic cancer cells. Compared with the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), which regulates c-Jun transcriptional activity through phosphorylation of Ser63 and Ser73 ( 25 ), PI3K and its protein kinase mediator Akt might regulate AP-1 at multiple levels. There is evidence that Akt induces c-fos and fra1 expression and that it might suppress the phosphorylation of c-Jun (Thr239) by glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) to stabilize it ( 26 - 32 ). Feedback loops could also be involved because c-Jun, through Ras stimulation or suppression of the PI3K antagonist Pten, can activate Akt and promote proliferation and survival in cells ( 33 , 34 ). Although Akt and JNK may interact through the ASK, POSH, and JIP1 proteins, they appear to use distinct mechanisms to regulate c-Jun. In comparison with JNK ( 35 ), it is not known if Akt is also involved in regulating AP-1 in pancreatic cancer cells. We have previously shown that PI3K and Akt are activated in pancreatic cancer cells because of aberrant Pten expression and insulin receptor substrate-1-mediated signaling ( 5 , 36 ). In this study, we investigated the possibility that AP-1 is also activated in these cells and that it is regulated by the PI3K signaling pathway. Our results suggest that various AP-1 proteins are expressed in pancreatic cancer cells, c-Jun is essential for their proliferation, and Akt signaling regulates c-Jun transcriptional activity independently of Ser63/Ser73 and Thr239, the phosphorylation sites regulated by JNK and GSK-3, respectively.  Materials and Methods Cell Lines and Reagents AsPC-1, BxPC-3, Capan-1, Panc-1, and MiaPaCa-2 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured as recommended. Panc-28, Panc-48, and Panc-3 cells were generously provided by Dr. Paul Chiao (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center) and maintained under standard culture conditions in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. HEK293 and HepG2 cells were gifts from Dr. Warren S-L. Liao (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center) and were also cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with serum. IL-1, tumor necrosis factor, insulin-like growth factor, EGF, and PDGF-BB were purchased from PeproTech. Antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Bio-technology [JNK, cyclin D1, p50/NF-?B, p65/RelA/NF-?B, Akt1/2, HA tag, c-Fos (sc-52X, sc-7202X, and sc-447X), c-Jun, phospho-Ser63-c-Jun, FosB, Fra1, Fra2, JunB, JunD, ATF2, and phospho-Thr71-ATF2], Cell Signaling (phospho-Ser473-Akt), and Sigma (actin). The PI3K (LY294002) and JNK (SP600125) inhibitors were purchased from Biomol. The c-Jun?/? MEFs have been described elsewhere ( 34 ). Site-Directed Mutagenesis and DNA Constructs Bam HI and Not I were used to excise Pten cDNA from pBluescript-Pten, and the fragment was ligated into the Bam HI and Not I sites of pCMV-FLAG2. The GAL4-JunD TAD, GAL4-c-Fos TAD, GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223), GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-193), GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193), GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) S63/73AA, full-length HA-c-Jun, full-length HA-c-Jun S63/73AA, ?73 Col/luc, and ?60 Col/luc constructs have all been described elsewhere ( 46 - 48 ). HA-c-Jun (T239A) and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA;T239A) were generated from HA-c-Jun and HA-c-Jun S63/73AA, respectively, using the QuickChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Stratagene). HA-c-Jun (T239A) was excised from SR? ( Hin dIII and Bgl II), blunt-ended, and ligated into the Sna BI site of the retroviral vector pMX ( 49 ). HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA;T239A) was also cloned into the pMX vector but after excision with Hin dIII and Not I. All other DNA constructs described were gifts. Each construct was confirmed by restriction mapping and DNA sequencing. Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays Pancreatic cancer or hepatoma cell lines were serum starved for 16 h and then either left untreated or stimulated (for 30 min) with 10% serum or 1 nmol/L IL-1. Cells were then lysed for nuclear extract preparation as described previously ( 50 ). Next, 2.5 ?g nuclear extracts were incubated with radiolabeled AP-1/TRE or a NF-?B-binding probe (gift from Dr. Warren S-L. Liao) for 15 min at room temperature. For the supershift assays, antibodies were added to the incubation mixtures for 5 min before the addition of radiolabeled probe. Protein-DNA complexes were resolved on 5% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels and visualized by autoradiography. Immunoblotting Serum-starved (16 h) pancreatic cancer cells were washed with ice-cold PBS before the preparation of whole-cell or nuclear extracts as described previously ( 5 , 50 ). Proteins, after resolution by SDS-PAGE, were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and probed by Western blotting with specific antibodies. Specific bands were detected by electrochemiluminescence (GE Healthcare). Transient Transfections and Reporter Assays Cells were cultured overnight in 12-well plates and then transiently transfected with equal amounts of DNA to include an (AP-1)4/luciferase reporter or a collagenase/luciferase reporter with (?73 Col/luc) or without (?60 Col/luc) an AP-1-binding site by using Lipofectamine Plus (Invitrogen). Where indicated, cells were cotransfected with Pten, Akt-AAA, c-Jun, and/or other expression plasmids or their vector controls. Sixteen to 24 h after transfection, cells were serum starved overnight and either harvested right away or stimulated with IL-1 (1 nmol/L) or PDGF (10 ng/ml). After IL-1 (24 h) or PDGF (12 h) treatment, cells were lysed and protein extracts were assayed for luciferase activity as described previously ( 5 , 50 ). A control reporter (pCMV-LacZ) was cotransfected in each case, and all values were normalized to ?-galactosidase activity (Galacto-Light Plus kit; Tropix). Stable Cell Lines Panc-28 and AsPC-1 cells were transfected with the pcDNA3.1 vector or with the pcDNA3.1-TAM67 plasmid (Fu-Gene reagent; Roche). Twenty-four hours later, transfected Panc-28 and AsPC-1 cells were selected with 50 and 1,200 ?g/mL G418, respectively. Drug-resistant colonies were expanded, pooled, and used for the proliferation assays. Other stable transfectants were generated as described previously ( 49 ). Proliferation Assays Serum-induced proliferation of control or TAM67-expressing pancreatic cancer cells or c-Jun?/? MEFs expressing vector, HA-c-Jun (T239A), or HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA;T239A) was investigated as described ( 5 ). Briefly, cells (5 × 103 per well) were seeded overnight in 96-well plates, and after crystal violet staining, their absorbance was determined in a Packard plate reader (540 nm).  Cell Lines and Reagents AsPC-1, BxPC-3, Capan-1, Panc-1, and MiaPaCa-2 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and cultured as recommended. Panc-28, Panc-48, and Panc-3 cells were generously provided by Dr. Paul Chiao (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center) and maintained under standard culture conditions in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. HEK293 and HepG2 cells were gifts from Dr. Warren S-L. Liao (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center) and were also cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with serum. IL-1, tumor necrosis factor, insulin-like growth factor, EGF, and PDGF-BB were purchased from PeproTech. Antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Bio-technology [JNK, cyclin D1, p50/NF-?B, p65/RelA/NF-?B, Akt1/2, HA tag, c-Fos (sc-52X, sc-7202X, and sc-447X), c-Jun, phospho-Ser63-c-Jun, FosB, Fra1, Fra2, JunB, JunD, ATF2, and phospho-Thr71-ATF2], Cell Signaling (phospho-Ser473-Akt), and Sigma (actin). The PI3K (LY294002) and JNK (SP600125) inhibitors were purchased from Biomol. The c-Jun?/? MEFs have been described elsewhere ( 34 ).  Site-Directed Mutagenesis and DNA Constructs Bam HI and Not I were used to excise Pten cDNA from pBluescript-Pten, and the fragment was ligated into the Bam HI and Not I sites of pCMV-FLAG2. The GAL4-JunD TAD, GAL4-c-Fos TAD, GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223), GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-193), GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193), GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) S63/73AA, full-length HA-c-Jun, full-length HA-c-Jun S63/73AA, ?73 Col/luc, and ?60 Col/luc constructs have all been described elsewhere ( 46 - 48 ). HA-c-Jun (T239A) and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA;T239A) were generated from HA-c-Jun and HA-c-Jun S63/73AA, respectively, using the QuickChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Stratagene). HA-c-Jun (T239A) was excised from SR? ( Hin dIII and Bgl II), blunt-ended, and ligated into the Sna BI site of the retroviral vector pMX ( 49 ). HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA;T239A) was also cloned into the pMX vector but after excision with Hin dIII and Not I. All other DNA constructs described were gifts. Each construct was confirmed by restriction mapping and DNA sequencing.  Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays Pancreatic cancer or hepatoma cell lines were serum starved for 16 h and then either left untreated or stimulated (for 30 min) with 10% serum or 1 nmol/L IL-1. Cells were then lysed for nuclear extract preparation as described previously ( 50 ). Next, 2.5 ?g nuclear extracts were incubated with radiolabeled AP-1/TRE or a NF-?B-binding probe (gift from Dr. Warren S-L. Liao) for 15 min at room temperature. For the supershift assays, antibodies were added to the incubation mixtures for 5 min before the addition of radiolabeled probe. Protein-DNA complexes were resolved on 5% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels and visualized by autoradiography.  Immunoblotting Serum-starved (16 h) pancreatic cancer cells were washed with ice-cold PBS before the preparation of whole-cell or nuclear extracts as described previously ( 5 , 50 ). Proteins, after resolution by SDS-PAGE, were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and probed by Western blotting with specific antibodies. Specific bands were detected by electrochemiluminescence (GE Healthcare).  Transient Transfections and Reporter Assays Cells were cultured overnight in 12-well plates and then transiently transfected with equal amounts of DNA to include an (AP-1)4/luciferase reporter or a collagenase/luciferase reporter with (?73 Col/luc) or without (?60 Col/luc) an AP-1-binding site by using Lipofectamine Plus (Invitrogen). Where indicated, cells were cotransfected with Pten, Akt-AAA, c-Jun, and/or other expression plasmids or their vector controls. Sixteen to 24 h after transfection, cells were serum starved overnight and either harvested right away or stimulated with IL-1 (1 nmol/L) or PDGF (10 ng/ml). After IL-1 (24 h) or PDGF (12 h) treatment, cells were lysed and protein extracts were assayed for luciferase activity as described previously ( 5 , 50 ). A control reporter (pCMV-LacZ) was cotransfected in each case, and all values were normalized to ?-galactosidase activity (Galacto-Light Plus kit; Tropix).  Stable Cell Lines Panc-28 and AsPC-1 cells were transfected with the pcDNA3.1 vector or with the pcDNA3.1-TAM67 plasmid (Fu-Gene reagent; Roche). Twenty-four hours later, transfected Panc-28 and AsPC-1 cells were selected with 50 and 1,200 ?g/mL G418, respectively. Drug-resistant colonies were expanded, pooled, and used for the proliferation assays. Other stable transfectants were generated as described previously ( 49 ).  Proliferation Assays Serum-induced proliferation of control or TAM67-expressing pancreatic cancer cells or c-Jun?/? MEFs expressing vector, HA-c-Jun (T239A), or HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA;T239A) was investigated as described ( 5 ). Briefly, cells (5 × 103 per well) were seeded overnight in 96-well plates, and after crystal violet staining, their absorbance was determined in a Packard plate reader (540 nm).  Supplementary Material Supplementary data  Results AP-1 Is Activated in Pancreatic Cancer Cells By using gel mobility shift assays, we detected high constitutive AP-1 DNA/TRE-binding activities in all the pancreatic cancer cell lines and in one hepatoma cell line (HepG2) examined ( Fig. 1A ). This high basal AP-1 activity could not be further induced by serum or interleukin (IL)-1 stimulation. Competition experiments indicated that this DNA binding was specific because it was strongly inhibited by unlabeled oligonucleotides with an intact AP-1-binding site ( Fig. 1A ). As reported by others ( 2 ), NF-?B was also activated in various pancreatic cancer cell lines but, in contrast to AP-1, could be induced further by IL-1 treatment ( Supplementary Fig. S1A ). Transient transfection assays showed that an AP-1-dependent reporter gene was induced in pancreatic cancer cells, which suggested that AP-1 was functional and capable of inducing gene expression ( Fig. 1B ). In contrast to its DNA-binding activity, the transcriptional activity of AP-1 varied significantly between pancreatic cancer cell lines. AP-1 Expression and Composition of the DNA-Binding Complexes in Pancreatic Cancer Cells We next investigated the expression of individual AP-1 proteins of the Jun, Fos, and ATF subfamilies and assessed their contribution to AP-1 DNA-binding activity. We found that c-Jun, JunB, JunD, c-Fos, FosB, Fra1, Fra2, and ATF2 were expressed in all eight serum-starved pancreatic cancer cell lines examined ( Fig. 1C ). However, the expression of c-Jun, c-Fos, Fra1, and Fra2 varied the most among the cell lines. FosB was also differentially expressed, and a smaller polypeptide, possibly its splice variant known as ?FosB, was additionally detected with the anti-FosB antibody. Furthermore, c-Jun (Ser63) and ATF2 (Thr71) were phosphorylated on residues critical for their transcriptional activities and regulated by JNK. Our results also show that JNK is activated and responsible for c-Jun phosphorylation in pancreatic cancer cells ( Supplementary Fig. S1B ). In our investigation of the composition of the AP-1/DNA complexes detected earlier, for which we used specific antibodies and performed gel mobility shift assays, we detected the presence of c-Jun, JunD, Fra1, and Fra2 in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). The AP-1 complexes could also be supershifted with antibodies that specifically recognized phospho-c-Jun (Ser63). Two different c-Fos antibodies, which specifically shifted IL-1-induced AP-1 bands in U251 cells (data not shown), failed to recognize the protein/DNA complexes in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). Thus, c-Fos did not appear to contribute to the AP-1-binding activity in pancreatic cancer cells. In addition to c-Fos, ATF2 and FosB also seemed to be absent from the AP-1/DNA complexes. A nonspecific antibody that recognized NF-?B (p50 NF-?B) did not alter the mobility of the AP-1/DNA complexes ( Fig. 1D ). c-Jun Is Required for Pancreatic Cancer Cell Proliferation Panc-28 cells expressed the highest levels of c-Jun among pancreatic cancer cell lines ( Fig. 1C ) and were stably transfected with its dominant-negative transactivation mutant (TAM67). Compared with control cells, the expression of endogenous c-Jun in Panc-28-TAM67 cells was reduced by >80% ( Fig. 2A , inset ). This most likely occurred because c-Jun-ATF2 heterodimers positively regulate c-Jun expression ( 7 ), and TAM67 effectively antagonized the transcriptional activity, expression, and function of endogenous c-Jun by disrupting these and other AP-1 complexes. Corresponding to a reduction in c-Jun expression, the serum-induced proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 cells in anchorage-dependent conditions was potently inhibited. Indeed, although they seemed morphologically unaltered (data not shown), Panc-28-TAM67 cells proliferated very slowly compared with vector control cells ( Fig. 2A ). Furthermore, whereas control cells grew robustly and formed numerous colonies in soft agar (were anchorage independent), the proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 was strongly inhibited, and no colonies were seen even after 6 weeks ( Fig. 2B ). Stable expression of TAM67 inhibited AsPC-1 cells ( Fig. 2B ) as well suggesting that c-Jun and AP-1 are critical mediators of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation. PI3K/Akt Signaling Is Essential for AP-1-Dependent Gene Expression in Pancreatic Cancer Cells There is evidence that Akt induces c-fos and fra1 expression and represses GSK-3 and its ability to decrease the stability and DNA-binding activity of c-Jun through phosphorylation (Thr239; refs. 26 - 32 ). When we stably expressed a dominant-negative mutant (Akt-AAA), the expression levels of all three proteins (c-Fos, c-Jun, and Fra1) were strongly inhibited, suggesting that they were regulated by Akt in pancreatic cancer cells as well ( Fig. 3A ). Using two different reporter genes, we further investigated whether PI3K/Akt signaling was indeed required for AP-1 activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Consistent with the data shown in Fig. 1B , a collagenase promoter/luciferase gene (?73 Col/luc) containing an AP-1-binding sequence (TRE) was potently induced in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 3B ). An intact TRE was essential for the induction because, in its absence, the reporter (?60 Col/luc) was poorly induced. The induction of both ?73 Col/luc and a second AP-1 reporter, when cotransfected with the PI3K antagonist Pten or the Akt mutant (Akt-AAA), was inhibited by >90%, which indicated that PI3K signaling was indeed essential for AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells ( Fig. 3B and C ). Akt Regulates the Transcriptional Activity of c-Jun/AP-1 through a Novel JNK- and GSK-3-Independent Mechanism Akt regulated AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells presumably due to its role in the repression of GSK-3 and its ability to antagonize the stability and/or DNA-binding activity of c-Jun ( Fig. 3 ). Taken together with previous reports, our data also suggested that Akt regulated AP-1 function through the induction of the c-fos and fra1 promoters ( Fig. 3A ). It is conceivable, however, that Akt, like JNK, might directly regulate the transactivation potential of AP-1 proteins as well. To investigate this exciting possibility, we employed the GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter system. Constructs expressing the TAD of individual AP-1 proteins fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain were cotransfected into pancreatic cancer cells with a GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter and various Akt expression vectors. All five GAL4-AP-1 constructs transactivated the luciferase reporter in Panc-28 cells. To our surprise, the Akt-AAA mutant significantly inhibited (by >50%) GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-inducible luciferase activity, and constitutively activated Akt (gag-Akt) induced it further ( Fig. 4A ), suggesting that Akt can indeed regulate the transcriptional activity of c-Jun. gag-Akt and Akt-AAA had smaller effects on the transcriptional activity of GAL4-ATF2 TAD and only marginally affected c-Fos, Fra1, and JunD; this suggested that Akt mainly regulated c-Jun among AP-1 proteins ( Fig. 4A ). Similar results were observed with other pancreatic cancer cell lines as well (data not shown). To identify the mechanism by which Akt may regulate c-Jun transcriptional activity, we examined GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) and its deletion constructs GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-193) and GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193). As observed earlier, gag-Akt induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223), and Akt-AAA inhibited it ( Fig. 4B ). Interestingly, when 30 COOH-terminal amino acids were deleted from the TAD, c-Jun transcriptional activity was more potently induced by gag-Akt. Gag-Akt was, however, unable to induce GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193), suggesting that the NH2 terminus (amino acids 1-90) was essential to the mechanism and that the JNK-regulated sites (Ser63/Ser73) could be involved. To investigate this possibility further, we examined the effect of gag-Akt and Akt-AAA on GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, a GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) construct that had Ser63 and Ser73 mutated to alanine ( Fig. 4C ). Whereas GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) was induced (3.5-fold) by IL-1, a potent inducer of JNK and c-Jun, GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, as expected, was not. To our surprise, however, gag-Akt powerfully induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA (>6-fold), which suggested that the JNK-regulated sites are dispensable for the Akt-mediated mechanism and, in fact, are inhibitory. Other constitutively activated forms of Akt such as CAAX-Akt also induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA in both pancreatic and nonpancreatic cells ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Furthermore, endogenous c-Jun was not in any way required because Akt induced the GAL4 constructs in c-Jun?/? mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF) as well ( Fig. 4D ). Consistent with their ability to strongly activate Akt, growth factors potently induced c-Jun activity in a JNK-independent ( Fig. 5A ) but Akt-dependent manner in both c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 5B ) and pancreatic cancer cells (data not shown). To investigate the ability of growth factors to induce cyclin D1, a well-known c-Jun target gene ( 7 ), we transfected c-Jun?/? MEFs with vector, full-length wild-type HA-c-Jun, or full-length HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) and then stimulated them with EGF or platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Both growth factors were able to induce cyclin D1 in vector-transfected control cells, which suggested that they had induced it by a c-Jun-independent mechanism ( Fig. 5C ). However, the ability of EGF and PDGF to induce cyclin D1 was significantly augmented in the HA-c-Jun-transfected and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA)-transfected MEFs. Consistent with the GAL4 assay data, c-Jun lacking intact JNK sites was able to synergize with EGF and PDGF and induce cyclin D1 even more potently than the wild-type c-Jun ( Fig. 5C ). Although weakly, both HA-c-Jun and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) were also able to increase basal cyclin D1 levels by themselves (0 h). Figure 5C provides additional evidence for a JNK-independent mechanism as the underlying basis for the ability of growth factors to activate, or synergize with, c-Jun. Whether this activation/synergy was only due to Akt stimulation by growth factors and the resultant inhibition of GSK-3 and its ability to phosphorylate Thr239 or, as indicated by our GAL4 assays, also involved a novel mechanism, was however unclear. To investigate this further, we generated c-Jun retroviral constructs (pMX vector) that contained inactivating mutations in the JNK sites (S63/73AA) and/or a mutation that mimicked GSK-3 inhibition (T239A). Because endogenous c-Jun, which is expressed at high levels, and these exogenous mutants are likely to interfere with each other and make interpretation more difficult in pancreatic cancer cells, these constructs were expressed in c-Jun?/? MEFs instead. Compared with control vector and the wild-type c-Jun, both mutants sharply increased cyclin D1 expression in c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 6A ). However, c-Jun mutated at both JNK and GSK-3 sites (S63/73AA;T239A) induced a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun (T239A) mutated at the GSK-3 site alone ( Fig. 6A and B ). On PDGF stimulation, cyclin D1 was induced even further in T239A and S63/73AA;T239A c-Jun-expressing cells, strongly supporting the possibility that the JNK-independent mechanism was novel and distinct from the one involving Thr239 ( Fig. 6B ). Because both constitutive and PDGF-induced cyclin D1 expression were significantly reduced by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002, this mechanism was most probably Akt mediated. Interestingly, c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A also increased phospho-Akt levels, a fact that might explain its ability to induce a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun T239A in unstimulated cells ( Fig. 6B ). As reported previously for wild-type c-Jun ( 34 ), it is possible that c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A, even more effectively than c-Jun T239A, repressed Pten and activated Akt in these cells. That c-Jun is capable of transactivating c-Jun/AP-1/TRE-dependent gene expression by a novel JNK-independent, Akt-mediated mechanism was also supported by transient transfection assays with a collagenase promoter/luciferase reporter ( Supplementary Fig. S1C ). Consistent with their cyclin D1 levels, cells expressing c-Jun T239A and c-Jun S63/73AA; T239A proliferated at a significantly higher rate than control cells ( Fig. 6C ).  Results AP-1 Is Activated in Pancreatic Cancer Cells By using gel mobility shift assays, we detected high constitutive AP-1 DNA/TRE-binding activities in all the pancreatic cancer cell lines and in one hepatoma cell line (HepG2) examined ( Fig. 1A ). This high basal AP-1 activity could not be further induced by serum or interleukin (IL)-1 stimulation. Competition experiments indicated that this DNA binding was specific because it was strongly inhibited by unlabeled oligonucleotides with an intact AP-1-binding site ( Fig. 1A ). As reported by others ( 2 ), NF-?B was also activated in various pancreatic cancer cell lines but, in contrast to AP-1, could be induced further by IL-1 treatment ( Supplementary Fig. S1A ). Transient transfection assays showed that an AP-1-dependent reporter gene was induced in pancreatic cancer cells, which suggested that AP-1 was functional and capable of inducing gene expression ( Fig. 1B ). In contrast to its DNA-binding activity, the transcriptional activity of AP-1 varied significantly between pancreatic cancer cell lines. AP-1 Expression and Composition of the DNA-Binding Complexes in Pancreatic Cancer Cells We next investigated the expression of individual AP-1 proteins of the Jun, Fos, and ATF subfamilies and assessed their contribution to AP-1 DNA-binding activity. We found that c-Jun, JunB, JunD, c-Fos, FosB, Fra1, Fra2, and ATF2 were expressed in all eight serum-starved pancreatic cancer cell lines examined ( Fig. 1C ). However, the expression of c-Jun, c-Fos, Fra1, and Fra2 varied the most among the cell lines. FosB was also differentially expressed, and a smaller polypeptide, possibly its splice variant known as ?FosB, was additionally detected with the anti-FosB antibody. Furthermore, c-Jun (Ser63) and ATF2 (Thr71) were phosphorylated on residues critical for their transcriptional activities and regulated by JNK. Our results also show that JNK is activated and responsible for c-Jun phosphorylation in pancreatic cancer cells ( Supplementary Fig. S1B ). In our investigation of the composition of the AP-1/DNA complexes detected earlier, for which we used specific antibodies and performed gel mobility shift assays, we detected the presence of c-Jun, JunD, Fra1, and Fra2 in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). The AP-1 complexes could also be supershifted with antibodies that specifically recognized phospho-c-Jun (Ser63). Two different c-Fos antibodies, which specifically shifted IL-1-induced AP-1 bands in U251 cells (data not shown), failed to recognize the protein/DNA complexes in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). Thus, c-Fos did not appear to contribute to the AP-1-binding activity in pancreatic cancer cells. In addition to c-Fos, ATF2 and FosB also seemed to be absent from the AP-1/DNA complexes. A nonspecific antibody that recognized NF-?B (p50 NF-?B) did not alter the mobility of the AP-1/DNA complexes ( Fig. 1D ). c-Jun Is Required for Pancreatic Cancer Cell Proliferation Panc-28 cells expressed the highest levels of c-Jun among pancreatic cancer cell lines ( Fig. 1C ) and were stably transfected with its dominant-negative transactivation mutant (TAM67). Compared with control cells, the expression of endogenous c-Jun in Panc-28-TAM67 cells was reduced by >80% ( Fig. 2A , inset ). This most likely occurred because c-Jun-ATF2 heterodimers positively regulate c-Jun expression ( 7 ), and TAM67 effectively antagonized the transcriptional activity, expression, and function of endogenous c-Jun by disrupting these and other AP-1 complexes. Corresponding to a reduction in c-Jun expression, the serum-induced proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 cells in anchorage-dependent conditions was potently inhibited. Indeed, although they seemed morphologically unaltered (data not shown), Panc-28-TAM67 cells proliferated very slowly compared with vector control cells ( Fig. 2A ). Furthermore, whereas control cells grew robustly and formed numerous colonies in soft agar (were anchorage independent), the proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 was strongly inhibited, and no colonies were seen even after 6 weeks ( Fig. 2B ). Stable expression of TAM67 inhibited AsPC-1 cells ( Fig. 2B ) as well suggesting that c-Jun and AP-1 are critical mediators of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation. PI3K/Akt Signaling Is Essential for AP-1-Dependent Gene Expression in Pancreatic Cancer Cells There is evidence that Akt induces c-fos and fra1 expression and represses GSK-3 and its ability to decrease the stability and DNA-binding activity of c-Jun through phosphorylation (Thr239; refs. 26 - 32 ). When we stably expressed a dominant-negative mutant (Akt-AAA), the expression levels of all three proteins (c-Fos, c-Jun, and Fra1) were strongly inhibited, suggesting that they were regulated by Akt in pancreatic cancer cells as well ( Fig. 3A ). Using two different reporter genes, we further investigated whether PI3K/Akt signaling was indeed required for AP-1 activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Consistent with the data shown in Fig. 1B , a collagenase promoter/luciferase gene (?73 Col/luc) containing an AP-1-binding sequence (TRE) was potently induced in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 3B ). An intact TRE was essential for the induction because, in its absence, the reporter (?60 Col/luc) was poorly induced. The induction of both ?73 Col/luc and a second AP-1 reporter, when cotransfected with the PI3K antagonist Pten or the Akt mutant (Akt-AAA), was inhibited by >90%, which indicated that PI3K signaling was indeed essential for AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells ( Fig. 3B and C ). Akt Regulates the Transcriptional Activity of c-Jun/AP-1 through a Novel JNK- and GSK-3-Independent Mechanism Akt regulated AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells presumably due to its role in the repression of GSK-3 and its ability to antagonize the stability and/or DNA-binding activity of c-Jun ( Fig. 3 ). Taken together with previous reports, our data also suggested that Akt regulated AP-1 function through the induction of the c-fos and fra1 promoters ( Fig. 3A ). It is conceivable, however, that Akt, like JNK, might directly regulate the transactivation potential of AP-1 proteins as well. To investigate this exciting possibility, we employed the GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter system. Constructs expressing the TAD of individual AP-1 proteins fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain were cotransfected into pancreatic cancer cells with a GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter and various Akt expression vectors. All five GAL4-AP-1 constructs transactivated the luciferase reporter in Panc-28 cells. To our surprise, the Akt-AAA mutant significantly inhibited (by >50%) GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-inducible luciferase activity, and constitutively activated Akt (gag-Akt) induced it further ( Fig. 4A ), suggesting that Akt can indeed regulate the transcriptional activity of c-Jun. gag-Akt and Akt-AAA had smaller effects on the transcriptional activity of GAL4-ATF2 TAD and only marginally affected c-Fos, Fra1, and JunD; this suggested that Akt mainly regulated c-Jun among AP-1 proteins ( Fig. 4A ). Similar results were observed with other pancreatic cancer cell lines as well (data not shown). To identify the mechanism by which Akt may regulate c-Jun transcriptional activity, we examined GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) and its deletion constructs GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-193) and GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193). As observed earlier, gag-Akt induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223), and Akt-AAA inhibited it ( Fig. 4B ). Interestingly, when 30 COOH-terminal amino acids were deleted from the TAD, c-Jun transcriptional activity was more potently induced by gag-Akt. Gag-Akt was, however, unable to induce GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193), suggesting that the NH2 terminus (amino acids 1-90) was essential to the mechanism and that the JNK-regulated sites (Ser63/Ser73) could be involved. To investigate this possibility further, we examined the effect of gag-Akt and Akt-AAA on GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, a GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) construct that had Ser63 and Ser73 mutated to alanine ( Fig. 4C ). Whereas GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) was induced (3.5-fold) by IL-1, a potent inducer of JNK and c-Jun, GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, as expected, was not. To our surprise, however, gag-Akt powerfully induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA (>6-fold), which suggested that the JNK-regulated sites are dispensable for the Akt-mediated mechanism and, in fact, are inhibitory. Other constitutively activated forms of Akt such as CAAX-Akt also induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA in both pancreatic and nonpancreatic cells ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Furthermore, endogenous c-Jun was not in any way required because Akt induced the GAL4 constructs in c-Jun?/? mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF) as well ( Fig. 4D ). Consistent with their ability to strongly activate Akt, growth factors potently induced c-Jun activity in a JNK-independent ( Fig. 5A ) but Akt-dependent manner in both c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 5B ) and pancreatic cancer cells (data not shown). To investigate the ability of growth factors to induce cyclin D1, a well-known c-Jun target gene ( 7 ), we transfected c-Jun?/? MEFs with vector, full-length wild-type HA-c-Jun, or full-length HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) and then stimulated them with EGF or platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Both growth factors were able to induce cyclin D1 in vector-transfected control cells, which suggested that they had induced it by a c-Jun-independent mechanism ( Fig. 5C ). However, the ability of EGF and PDGF to induce cyclin D1 was significantly augmented in the HA-c-Jun-transfected and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA)-transfected MEFs. Consistent with the GAL4 assay data, c-Jun lacking intact JNK sites was able to synergize with EGF and PDGF and induce cyclin D1 even more potently than the wild-type c-Jun ( Fig. 5C ). Although weakly, both HA-c-Jun and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) were also able to increase basal cyclin D1 levels by themselves (0 h). Figure 5C provides additional evidence for a JNK-independent mechanism as the underlying basis for the ability of growth factors to activate, or synergize with, c-Jun. Whether this activation/synergy was only due to Akt stimulation by growth factors and the resultant inhibition of GSK-3 and its ability to phosphorylate Thr239 or, as indicated by our GAL4 assays, also involved a novel mechanism, was however unclear. To investigate this further, we generated c-Jun retroviral constructs (pMX vector) that contained inactivating mutations in the JNK sites (S63/73AA) and/or a mutation that mimicked GSK-3 inhibition (T239A). Because endogenous c-Jun, which is expressed at high levels, and these exogenous mutants are likely to interfere with each other and make interpretation more difficult in pancreatic cancer cells, these constructs were expressed in c-Jun?/? MEFs instead. Compared with control vector and the wild-type c-Jun, both mutants sharply increased cyclin D1 expression in c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 6A ). However, c-Jun mutated at both JNK and GSK-3 sites (S63/73AA;T239A) induced a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun (T239A) mutated at the GSK-3 site alone ( Fig. 6A and B ). On PDGF stimulation, cyclin D1 was induced even further in T239A and S63/73AA;T239A c-Jun-expressing cells, strongly supporting the possibility that the JNK-independent mechanism was novel and distinct from the one involving Thr239 ( Fig. 6B ). Because both constitutive and PDGF-induced cyclin D1 expression were significantly reduced by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002, this mechanism was most probably Akt mediated. Interestingly, c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A also increased phospho-Akt levels, a fact that might explain its ability to induce a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun T239A in unstimulated cells ( Fig. 6B ). As reported previously for wild-type c-Jun ( 34 ), it is possible that c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A, even more effectively than c-Jun T239A, repressed Pten and activated Akt in these cells. That c-Jun is capable of transactivating c-Jun/AP-1/TRE-dependent gene expression by a novel JNK-independent, Akt-mediated mechanism was also supported by transient transfection assays with a collagenase promoter/luciferase reporter ( Supplementary Fig. S1C ). Consistent with their cyclin D1 levels, cells expressing c-Jun T239A and c-Jun S63/73AA; T239A proliferated at a significantly higher rate than control cells ( Fig. 6C ).  AP-1 Is Activated in Pancreatic Cancer Cells By using gel mobility shift assays, we detected high constitutive AP-1 DNA/TRE-binding activities in all the pancreatic cancer cell lines and in one hepatoma cell line (HepG2) examined ( Fig. 1A ). This high basal AP-1 activity could not be further induced by serum or interleukin (IL)-1 stimulation. Competition experiments indicated that this DNA binding was specific because it was strongly inhibited by unlabeled oligonucleotides with an intact AP-1-binding site ( Fig. 1A ). As reported by others ( 2 ), NF-?B was also activated in various pancreatic cancer cell lines but, in contrast to AP-1, could be induced further by IL-1 treatment ( Supplementary Fig. S1A ). Transient transfection assays showed that an AP-1-dependent reporter gene was induced in pancreatic cancer cells, which suggested that AP-1 was functional and capable of inducing gene expression ( Fig. 1B ). In contrast to its DNA-binding activity, the transcriptional activity of AP-1 varied significantly between pancreatic cancer cell lines.  AP-1 Is Activated in Pancreatic Cancer Cells By using gel mobility shift assays, we detected high constitutive AP-1 DNA/TRE-binding activities in all the pancreatic cancer cell lines and in one hepatoma cell line (HepG2) examined ( Fig. 1A ). This high basal AP-1 activity could not be further induced by serum or interleukin (IL)-1 stimulation. Competition experiments indicated that this DNA binding was specific because it was strongly inhibited by unlabeled oligonucleotides with an intact AP-1-binding site ( Fig. 1A ). As reported by others ( 2 ), NF-?B was also activated in various pancreatic cancer cell lines but, in contrast to AP-1, could be induced further by IL-1 treatment ( Supplementary Fig. S1A ). Transient transfection assays showed that an AP-1-dependent reporter gene was induced in pancreatic cancer cells, which suggested that AP-1 was functional and capable of inducing gene expression ( Fig. 1B ). In contrast to its DNA-binding activity, the transcriptional activity of AP-1 varied significantly between pancreatic cancer cell lines.  AP-1 Expression and Composition of the DNA-Binding Complexes in Pancreatic Cancer Cells We next investigated the expression of individual AP-1 proteins of the Jun, Fos, and ATF subfamilies and assessed their contribution to AP-1 DNA-binding activity. We found that c-Jun, JunB, JunD, c-Fos, FosB, Fra1, Fra2, and ATF2 were expressed in all eight serum-starved pancreatic cancer cell lines examined ( Fig. 1C ). However, the expression of c-Jun, c-Fos, Fra1, and Fra2 varied the most among the cell lines. FosB was also differentially expressed, and a smaller polypeptide, possibly its splice variant known as ?FosB, was additionally detected with the anti-FosB antibody. Furthermore, c-Jun (Ser63) and ATF2 (Thr71) were phosphorylated on residues critical for their transcriptional activities and regulated by JNK. Our results also show that JNK is activated and responsible for c-Jun phosphorylation in pancreatic cancer cells ( Supplementary Fig. S1B ). In our investigation of the composition of the AP-1/DNA complexes detected earlier, for which we used specific antibodies and performed gel mobility shift assays, we detected the presence of c-Jun, JunD, Fra1, and Fra2 in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). The AP-1 complexes could also be supershifted with antibodies that specifically recognized phospho-c-Jun (Ser63). Two different c-Fos antibodies, which specifically shifted IL-1-induced AP-1 bands in U251 cells (data not shown), failed to recognize the protein/DNA complexes in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). Thus, c-Fos did not appear to contribute to the AP-1-binding activity in pancreatic cancer cells. In addition to c-Fos, ATF2 and FosB also seemed to be absent from the AP-1/DNA complexes. A nonspecific antibody that recognized NF-?B (p50 NF-?B) did not alter the mobility of the AP-1/DNA complexes ( Fig. 1D ).  AP-1 Expression and Composition of the DNA-Binding Complexes in Pancreatic Cancer Cells We next investigated the expression of individual AP-1 proteins of the Jun, Fos, and ATF subfamilies and assessed their contribution to AP-1 DNA-binding activity. We found that c-Jun, JunB, JunD, c-Fos, FosB, Fra1, Fra2, and ATF2 were expressed in all eight serum-starved pancreatic cancer cell lines examined ( Fig. 1C ). However, the expression of c-Jun, c-Fos, Fra1, and Fra2 varied the most among the cell lines. FosB was also differentially expressed, and a smaller polypeptide, possibly its splice variant known as ?FosB, was additionally detected with the anti-FosB antibody. Furthermore, c-Jun (Ser63) and ATF2 (Thr71) were phosphorylated on residues critical for their transcriptional activities and regulated by JNK. Our results also show that JNK is activated and responsible for c-Jun phosphorylation in pancreatic cancer cells ( Supplementary Fig. S1B ). In our investigation of the composition of the AP-1/DNA complexes detected earlier, for which we used specific antibodies and performed gel mobility shift assays, we detected the presence of c-Jun, JunD, Fra1, and Fra2 in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). The AP-1 complexes could also be supershifted with antibodies that specifically recognized phospho-c-Jun (Ser63). Two different c-Fos antibodies, which specifically shifted IL-1-induced AP-1 bands in U251 cells (data not shown), failed to recognize the protein/DNA complexes in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 1D ). Thus, c-Fos did not appear to contribute to the AP-1-binding activity in pancreatic cancer cells. In addition to c-Fos, ATF2 and FosB also seemed to be absent from the AP-1/DNA complexes. A nonspecific antibody that recognized NF-?B (p50 NF-?B) did not alter the mobility of the AP-1/DNA complexes ( Fig. 1D ).  c-Jun Is Required for Pancreatic Cancer Cell Proliferation Panc-28 cells expressed the highest levels of c-Jun among pancreatic cancer cell lines ( Fig. 1C ) and were stably transfected with its dominant-negative transactivation mutant (TAM67). Compared with control cells, the expression of endogenous c-Jun in Panc-28-TAM67 cells was reduced by >80% ( Fig. 2A , inset ). This most likely occurred because c-Jun-ATF2 heterodimers positively regulate c-Jun expression ( 7 ), and TAM67 effectively antagonized the transcriptional activity, expression, and function of endogenous c-Jun by disrupting these and other AP-1 complexes. Corresponding to a reduction in c-Jun expression, the serum-induced proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 cells in anchorage-dependent conditions was potently inhibited. Indeed, although they seemed morphologically unaltered (data not shown), Panc-28-TAM67 cells proliferated very slowly compared with vector control cells ( Fig. 2A ). Furthermore, whereas control cells grew robustly and formed numerous colonies in soft agar (were anchorage independent), the proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 was strongly inhibited, and no colonies were seen even after 6 weeks ( Fig. 2B ). Stable expression of TAM67 inhibited AsPC-1 cells ( Fig. 2B ) as well suggesting that c-Jun and AP-1 are critical mediators of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation.  c-Jun Is Required for Pancreatic Cancer Cell Proliferation Panc-28 cells expressed the highest levels of c-Jun among pancreatic cancer cell lines ( Fig. 1C ) and were stably transfected with its dominant-negative transactivation mutant (TAM67). Compared with control cells, the expression of endogenous c-Jun in Panc-28-TAM67 cells was reduced by >80% ( Fig. 2A , inset ). This most likely occurred because c-Jun-ATF2 heterodimers positively regulate c-Jun expression ( 7 ), and TAM67 effectively antagonized the transcriptional activity, expression, and function of endogenous c-Jun by disrupting these and other AP-1 complexes. Corresponding to a reduction in c-Jun expression, the serum-induced proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 cells in anchorage-dependent conditions was potently inhibited. Indeed, although they seemed morphologically unaltered (data not shown), Panc-28-TAM67 cells proliferated very slowly compared with vector control cells ( Fig. 2A ). Furthermore, whereas control cells grew robustly and formed numerous colonies in soft agar (were anchorage independent), the proliferation of Panc-28-TAM67 was strongly inhibited, and no colonies were seen even after 6 weeks ( Fig. 2B ). Stable expression of TAM67 inhibited AsPC-1 cells ( Fig. 2B ) as well suggesting that c-Jun and AP-1 are critical mediators of pancreatic cancer cell proliferation.  PI3K/Akt Signaling Is Essential for AP-1-Dependent Gene Expression in Pancreatic Cancer Cells There is evidence that Akt induces c-fos and fra1 expression and represses GSK-3 and its ability to decrease the stability and DNA-binding activity of c-Jun through phosphorylation (Thr239; refs. 26 - 32 ). When we stably expressed a dominant-negative mutant (Akt-AAA), the expression levels of all three proteins (c-Fos, c-Jun, and Fra1) were strongly inhibited, suggesting that they were regulated by Akt in pancreatic cancer cells as well ( Fig. 3A ). Using two different reporter genes, we further investigated whether PI3K/Akt signaling was indeed required for AP-1 activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Consistent with the data shown in Fig. 1B , a collagenase promoter/luciferase gene (?73 Col/luc) containing an AP-1-binding sequence (TRE) was potently induced in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 3B ). An intact TRE was essential for the induction because, in its absence, the reporter (?60 Col/luc) was poorly induced. The induction of both ?73 Col/luc and a second AP-1 reporter, when cotransfected with the PI3K antagonist Pten or the Akt mutant (Akt-AAA), was inhibited by >90%, which indicated that PI3K signaling was indeed essential for AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells ( Fig. 3B and C ).  PI3K/Akt Signaling Is Essential for AP-1-Dependent Gene Expression in Pancreatic Cancer Cells There is evidence that Akt induces c-fos and fra1 expression and represses GSK-3 and its ability to decrease the stability and DNA-binding activity of c-Jun through phosphorylation (Thr239; refs. 26 - 32 ). When we stably expressed a dominant-negative mutant (Akt-AAA), the expression levels of all three proteins (c-Fos, c-Jun, and Fra1) were strongly inhibited, suggesting that they were regulated by Akt in pancreatic cancer cells as well ( Fig. 3A ). Using two different reporter genes, we further investigated whether PI3K/Akt signaling was indeed required for AP-1 activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Consistent with the data shown in Fig. 1B , a collagenase promoter/luciferase gene (?73 Col/luc) containing an AP-1-binding sequence (TRE) was potently induced in Panc-28 cells ( Fig. 3B ). An intact TRE was essential for the induction because, in its absence, the reporter (?60 Col/luc) was poorly induced. The induction of both ?73 Col/luc and a second AP-1 reporter, when cotransfected with the PI3K antagonist Pten or the Akt mutant (Akt-AAA), was inhibited by >90%, which indicated that PI3K signaling was indeed essential for AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells ( Fig. 3B and C ).  Akt Regulates the Transcriptional Activity of c-Jun/AP-1 through a Novel JNK- and GSK-3-Independent Mechanism Akt regulated AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells presumably due to its role in the repression of GSK-3 and its ability to antagonize the stability and/or DNA-binding activity of c-Jun ( Fig. 3 ). Taken together with previous reports, our data also suggested that Akt regulated AP-1 function through the induction of the c-fos and fra1 promoters ( Fig. 3A ). It is conceivable, however, that Akt, like JNK, might directly regulate the transactivation potential of AP-1 proteins as well. To investigate this exciting possibility, we employed the GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter system. Constructs expressing the TAD of individual AP-1 proteins fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain were cotransfected into pancreatic cancer cells with a GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter and various Akt expression vectors. All five GAL4-AP-1 constructs transactivated the luciferase reporter in Panc-28 cells. To our surprise, the Akt-AAA mutant significantly inhibited (by >50%) GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-inducible luciferase activity, and constitutively activated Akt (gag-Akt) induced it further ( Fig. 4A ), suggesting that Akt can indeed regulate the transcriptional activity of c-Jun. gag-Akt and Akt-AAA had smaller effects on the transcriptional activity of GAL4-ATF2 TAD and only marginally affected c-Fos, Fra1, and JunD; this suggested that Akt mainly regulated c-Jun among AP-1 proteins ( Fig. 4A ). Similar results were observed with other pancreatic cancer cell lines as well (data not shown). To identify the mechanism by which Akt may regulate c-Jun transcriptional activity, we examined GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) and its deletion constructs GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-193) and GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193). As observed earlier, gag-Akt induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223), and Akt-AAA inhibited it ( Fig. 4B ). Interestingly, when 30 COOH-terminal amino acids were deleted from the TAD, c-Jun transcriptional activity was more potently induced by gag-Akt. Gag-Akt was, however, unable to induce GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193), suggesting that the NH2 terminus (amino acids 1-90) was essential to the mechanism and that the JNK-regulated sites (Ser63/Ser73) could be involved. To investigate this possibility further, we examined the effect of gag-Akt and Akt-AAA on GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, a GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) construct that had Ser63 and Ser73 mutated to alanine ( Fig. 4C ). Whereas GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) was induced (3.5-fold) by IL-1, a potent inducer of JNK and c-Jun, GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, as expected, was not. To our surprise, however, gag-Akt powerfully induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA (>6-fold), which suggested that the JNK-regulated sites are dispensable for the Akt-mediated mechanism and, in fact, are inhibitory. Other constitutively activated forms of Akt such as CAAX-Akt also induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA in both pancreatic and nonpancreatic cells ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Furthermore, endogenous c-Jun was not in any way required because Akt induced the GAL4 constructs in c-Jun?/? mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF) as well ( Fig. 4D ). Consistent with their ability to strongly activate Akt, growth factors potently induced c-Jun activity in a JNK-independent ( Fig. 5A ) but Akt-dependent manner in both c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 5B ) and pancreatic cancer cells (data not shown). To investigate the ability of growth factors to induce cyclin D1, a well-known c-Jun target gene ( 7 ), we transfected c-Jun?/? MEFs with vector, full-length wild-type HA-c-Jun, or full-length HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) and then stimulated them with EGF or platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Both growth factors were able to induce cyclin D1 in vector-transfected control cells, which suggested that they had induced it by a c-Jun-independent mechanism ( Fig. 5C ). However, the ability of EGF and PDGF to induce cyclin D1 was significantly augmented in the HA-c-Jun-transfected and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA)-transfected MEFs. Consistent with the GAL4 assay data, c-Jun lacking intact JNK sites was able to synergize with EGF and PDGF and induce cyclin D1 even more potently than the wild-type c-Jun ( Fig. 5C ). Although weakly, both HA-c-Jun and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) were also able to increase basal cyclin D1 levels by themselves (0 h). Figure 5C provides additional evidence for a JNK-independent mechanism as the underlying basis for the ability of growth factors to activate, or synergize with, c-Jun. Whether this activation/synergy was only due to Akt stimulation by growth factors and the resultant inhibition of GSK-3 and its ability to phosphorylate Thr239 or, as indicated by our GAL4 assays, also involved a novel mechanism, was however unclear. To investigate this further, we generated c-Jun retroviral constructs (pMX vector) that contained inactivating mutations in the JNK sites (S63/73AA) and/or a mutation that mimicked GSK-3 inhibition (T239A). Because endogenous c-Jun, which is expressed at high levels, and these exogenous mutants are likely to interfere with each other and make interpretation more difficult in pancreatic cancer cells, these constructs were expressed in c-Jun?/? MEFs instead. Compared with control vector and the wild-type c-Jun, both mutants sharply increased cyclin D1 expression in c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 6A ). However, c-Jun mutated at both JNK and GSK-3 sites (S63/73AA;T239A) induced a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun (T239A) mutated at the GSK-3 site alone ( Fig. 6A and B ). On PDGF stimulation, cyclin D1 was induced even further in T239A and S63/73AA;T239A c-Jun-expressing cells, strongly supporting the possibility that the JNK-independent mechanism was novel and distinct from the one involving Thr239 ( Fig. 6B ). Because both constitutive and PDGF-induced cyclin D1 expression were significantly reduced by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002, this mechanism was most probably Akt mediated. Interestingly, c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A also increased phospho-Akt levels, a fact that might explain its ability to induce a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun T239A in unstimulated cells ( Fig. 6B ). As reported previously for wild-type c-Jun ( 34 ), it is possible that c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A, even more effectively than c-Jun T239A, repressed Pten and activated Akt in these cells. That c-Jun is capable of transactivating c-Jun/AP-1/TRE-dependent gene expression by a novel JNK-independent, Akt-mediated mechanism was also supported by transient transfection assays with a collagenase promoter/luciferase reporter ( Supplementary Fig. S1C ). Consistent with their cyclin D1 levels, cells expressing c-Jun T239A and c-Jun S63/73AA; T239A proliferated at a significantly higher rate than control cells ( Fig. 6C ).  Akt Regulates the Transcriptional Activity of c-Jun/AP-1 through a Novel JNK- and GSK-3-Independent Mechanism Akt regulated AP-1-dependent gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells presumably due to its role in the repression of GSK-3 and its ability to antagonize the stability and/or DNA-binding activity of c-Jun ( Fig. 3 ). Taken together with previous reports, our data also suggested that Akt regulated AP-1 function through the induction of the c-fos and fra1 promoters ( Fig. 3A ). It is conceivable, however, that Akt, like JNK, might directly regulate the transactivation potential of AP-1 proteins as well. To investigate this exciting possibility, we employed the GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter system. Constructs expressing the TAD of individual AP-1 proteins fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain were cotransfected into pancreatic cancer cells with a GAL4-dependent luciferase reporter and various Akt expression vectors. All five GAL4-AP-1 constructs transactivated the luciferase reporter in Panc-28 cells. To our surprise, the Akt-AAA mutant significantly inhibited (by >50%) GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-inducible luciferase activity, and constitutively activated Akt (gag-Akt) induced it further ( Fig. 4A ), suggesting that Akt can indeed regulate the transcriptional activity of c-Jun. gag-Akt and Akt-AAA had smaller effects on the transcriptional activity of GAL4-ATF2 TAD and only marginally affected c-Fos, Fra1, and JunD; this suggested that Akt mainly regulated c-Jun among AP-1 proteins ( Fig. 4A ). Similar results were observed with other pancreatic cancer cell lines as well (data not shown). To identify the mechanism by which Akt may regulate c-Jun transcriptional activity, we examined GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) and its deletion constructs GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-193) and GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193). As observed earlier, gag-Akt induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223), and Akt-AAA inhibited it ( Fig. 4B ). Interestingly, when 30 COOH-terminal amino acids were deleted from the TAD, c-Jun transcriptional activity was more potently induced by gag-Akt. Gag-Akt was, however, unable to induce GAL4-c-Jun TAD (91-193), suggesting that the NH2 terminus (amino acids 1-90) was essential to the mechanism and that the JNK-regulated sites (Ser63/Ser73) could be involved. To investigate this possibility further, we examined the effect of gag-Akt and Akt-AAA on GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, a GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) construct that had Ser63 and Ser73 mutated to alanine ( Fig. 4C ). Whereas GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223) was induced (3.5-fold) by IL-1, a potent inducer of JNK and c-Jun, GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA, as expected, was not. To our surprise, however, gag-Akt powerfully induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA (>6-fold), which suggested that the JNK-regulated sites are dispensable for the Akt-mediated mechanism and, in fact, are inhibitory. Other constitutively activated forms of Akt such as CAAX-Akt also induced GAL4-c-Jun TAD (1-223)-S63/73AA in both pancreatic and nonpancreatic cells ( Fig. 4D ; data not shown). Furthermore, endogenous c-Jun was not in any way required because Akt induced the GAL4 constructs in c-Jun?/? mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF) as well ( Fig. 4D ). Consistent with their ability to strongly activate Akt, growth factors potently induced c-Jun activity in a JNK-independent ( Fig. 5A ) but Akt-dependent manner in both c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 5B ) and pancreatic cancer cells (data not shown). To investigate the ability of growth factors to induce cyclin D1, a well-known c-Jun target gene ( 7 ), we transfected c-Jun?/? MEFs with vector, full-length wild-type HA-c-Jun, or full-length HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) and then stimulated them with EGF or platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). Both growth factors were able to induce cyclin D1 in vector-transfected control cells, which suggested that they had induced it by a c-Jun-independent mechanism ( Fig. 5C ). However, the ability of EGF and PDGF to induce cyclin D1 was significantly augmented in the HA-c-Jun-transfected and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA)-transfected MEFs. Consistent with the GAL4 assay data, c-Jun lacking intact JNK sites was able to synergize with EGF and PDGF and induce cyclin D1 even more potently than the wild-type c-Jun ( Fig. 5C ). Although weakly, both HA-c-Jun and HA-c-Jun (S63/73AA) were also able to increase basal cyclin D1 levels by themselves (0 h). Figure 5C provides additional evidence for a JNK-independent mechanism as the underlying basis for the ability of growth factors to activate, or synergize with, c-Jun. Whether this activation/synergy was only due to Akt stimulation by growth factors and the resultant inhibition of GSK-3 and its ability to phosphorylate Thr239 or, as indicated by our GAL4 assays, also involved a novel mechanism, was however unclear. To investigate this further, we generated c-Jun retroviral constructs (pMX vector) that contained inactivating mutations in the JNK sites (S63/73AA) and/or a mutation that mimicked GSK-3 inhibition (T239A). Because endogenous c-Jun, which is expressed at high levels, and these exogenous mutants are likely to interfere with each other and make interpretation more difficult in pancreatic cancer cells, these constructs were expressed in c-Jun?/? MEFs instead. Compared with control vector and the wild-type c-Jun, both mutants sharply increased cyclin D1 expression in c-Jun?/? MEFs ( Fig. 6A ). However, c-Jun mutated at both JNK and GSK-3 sites (S63/73AA;T239A) induced a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun (T239A) mutated at the GSK-3 site alone ( Fig. 6A and B ). On PDGF stimulation, cyclin D1 was induced even further in T239A and S63/73AA;T239A c-Jun-expressing cells, strongly supporting the possibility that the JNK-independent mechanism was novel and distinct from the one involving Thr239 ( Fig. 6B ). Because both constitutive and PDGF-induced cyclin D1 expression were significantly reduced by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002, this mechanism was most probably Akt mediated. Interestingly, c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A also increased phospho-Akt levels, a fact that might explain its ability to induce a higher expression of cyclin D1 than c-Jun T239A in unstimulated cells ( Fig. 6B ). As reported previously for wild-type c-Jun ( 34 ), it is possible that c-Jun S63/73AA;T239A, even more effectively than c-Jun T239A, repressed Pten and activated Akt in these cells. That c-Jun is capable of transactivating c-Jun/AP-1/TRE-dependent gene expression by a novel JNK-independent, Akt-mediated mechanism was also supported by transient transfection assays with a collagenase promoter/luciferase reporter ( Supplementary Fig. S1C ). Consistent with their cyclin D1 levels, cells expressing c-Jun T239A and c-Jun S63/73AA; T239A proliferated at a significantly higher rate than control cells ( Fig. 6C ).  Discussion Our results indicated that all Jun and Fos proteins and ATF2 were expressed in pancreatic cancer cells and that both c-Jun (Ser63) and ATF2 (Thr71) were phosphorylated on sites known to be regulated by JNK. Although DNA-binding activity was equally high in all cell lines, an AP-1-dependent reporter gene was differentially induced, which suggested that the transcriptional activity of AP-1 was influenced by other factors. The higher reporter induction in Panc-1 cells, for example, could be due to the relatively low expression of JunB, an AP-1 protein that antagonizes c-Jun activity. Supershift assays with the consensus TRE sequence used as probe indicated that c-Fos, FosB, and ATF2 were not present in the AP-1/DNA complexes. Because c-Jun-ATF2 dimers bind to TRE poorly and to the cyclic AMP response element sequence preferentially, ATF2 was not expected to be part of these complexes. The absence of c-Fos, on the other hand, was intriguing because it was clearly expressed and because Jun-Fos heterodimers bind to TRE with a higher affinity than do the Jun-Jun homodimers. Our results are, however, consistent with other studies showing that c-Fos is indeed absent from AP-1/TRE complexes ( 37 ). The AP-1 dimer composition is a critical factor in the response of various cells to external stimuli and in the transformation process. JunD?/? MEFs, for example, undergo senescence and display increased sensitivity to death-promoting agents such as ultraviolet light and tumor necrosis factor-?. Furthermore, oncogenic Ras typically induces Fra1, Fra2, c-Jun, and JunB but not c-Fos or FosB, and Ras-mediated transformation is suppressed in cells lacking c-Jun ( 6 ). Because a large proportion of pancreatic tumors contain oncogenic Ras ( 1 ), AP-1 could be an important driver of pancreatic tumorigenesis. Our data confirm that c-Jun/AP-1 is essential for pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, consistent with previous studies in other cell types ( 7 ). For example, c-Jun might promote G1- to S-phase transition presumably by inducing cyclin D1 and repressing p21cip1 expression simultaneously. JunB would antagonize this function of c-Jun by repressing cyclin D1 and inducing p16INK4a. Although c-Jun can also regulate apoptosis, neither TAM67 nor a JNK inhibitor affected the viability of pancreatic cancer cells (data not shown). AP-1 activity is modulated not only by dimer composition but also by specific signaling events. Our results indicated that the PI3K pathway is essential for AP-1 activation. Additionally, they revealed a previously unknown Akt-mediated mechanism of AP-1 regulation that appeared distinct from its known ability to induce c-Fos, Fra1, and JNK and to increase, through GSK-3 inhibition, the stability and/or DNA-binding activity of c-Jun ( 26 - 32 ). Using the GAL4 system, we show that the constitutively activated forms of Akt (gag-Akt and CAAX-Akt) specifically induced the transactivation potential of c-Jun and that a dominant-negative mutant (Akt-AAA) inhibited it in pancreatic cancer cells and c-Jun?/? MEFs. Two structural determinants were identified in the TAD of c-Jun that affected its ability to be induced by activated Akt: an inhibitory COOH-terminal region (amino acids 193-223) and an essential NH2-terminal sequence (amino acids 1-90). It is conceivable that the COOH-terminal region is involved in the ability of Akt to regulate the transcriptional activity of c-Jun. The JNK-regulated Ser63 and Ser73 was not the reason why the NH2-terminal region was essential because, when they were mutated (S63/73AA), the transactivation potential of c-Jun was still inducible by Akt, in fact to a greater extent than the intact control. Thus, these data suggested that Ser63 and Ser73 and perhaps JNK were dispensable, but also that they could be antagonistic, to Akt function in c-Jun activation. As functional confirmation that the serines were inactivated, the wild-type but not the mutated (S63/73AA) TAD of c-Jun was induced by IL-1, a potent JNK activator. Because the TAD does not contain the GSK-3-regulated site (Thr239), Akt appeared to regulate c-Jun by a novel mechanism that was distinct from the one involving GSK-3. The c-Jun TAD was also strongly induced by growth factors in an Akt-dependent manner, suggesting that the Akt-regulated JNK-independent mechanism was physiologically relevant. We generated and employed specific c-Jun constructs that contained mutations in the JNK and/or GSK-3 regulated sites to provide further evidence that this mechanism is indeed novel and distinct from the one involving GSK-3 and Thr239. Although the phosphorylation of c-Jun by JNK is thought to be sufficient and essential for its transcriptional activity, JNK-independent mechanisms have been implicated in various activities, including DNA damage-induced neuronal apoptosis ( 38 ), COP9 signalosome-directed c-Jun activation/stabilization ( 39 ), MEF2C-mediated c-Jun induction ( 40 ), and calcium-regulated activation of c-Jun ( 41 , 42 ). c-Jun protein and transcriptional activity were up-regulated in Hodgkin's lymphoma cells without a concomitant increase in c-Jun phosphorylation by JNK ( 10 ), and mice expressing the c-Jun mutant (S63/73AA) were viable but susceptible to liver carcinogenesis ( 9 ). Moreover, protein kinases such as RSK-3 phosphorylate AP-1 complexes, but their effect on AP-1 activity is not well understood ( 6 ). Given our data, the mechanism underlying the ability of Akt and growth factors to induce the transcriptional activity of c-Jun might involve, among other things, the NH2-terminal region of c-Jun, its phosphorylation, and interactions with activators and repressors ( 39 , 43 , 44 ). Proteins such as CBP, Pdcd4 ( 45 ), and JNK itself, which bind to c-Jun in this NH2-terminal region and are pertinent to the JNK function, might oppose such an Akt-regulated mechanism and explain some of our data. Whether this novel Akt-mediated mechanism is pertinent only to the prosurvival activity of c-Jun and whether Akt and JNK recruit different c-Jun-interacting proteins, regulate different c-Jun targets, or differentially modulate the extent of c-Jun activation are exciting questions for future investigations.  Discussion Our results indicated that all Jun and Fos proteins and ATF2 were expressed in pancreatic cancer cells and that both c-Jun (Ser63) and ATF2 (Thr71) were phosphorylated on sites known to be regulated by JNK. Although DNA-binding activity was equally high in all cell lines, an AP-1-dependent reporter gene was differentially induced, which suggested that the transcriptional activity of AP-1 was influenced by other factors. The higher reporter induction in Panc-1 cells, for example, could be due to the relatively low expression of JunB, an AP-1 protein that antagonizes c-Jun activity. Supershift assays with the consensus TRE sequence used as probe indicated that c-Fos, FosB, and ATF2 were not present in the AP-1/DNA complexes. Because c-Jun-ATF2 dimers bind to TRE poorly and to the cyclic AMP response element sequence preferentially, ATF2 was not expected to be part of these complexes. The absence of c-Fos, on the other hand, was intriguing because it was clearly expressed and because Jun-Fos heterodimers bind to TRE with a higher affinity than do the Jun-Jun homodimers. Our results are, however, consistent with other studies showing that c-Fos is indeed absent from AP-1/TRE complexes ( 37 ). The AP-1 dimer composition is a critical factor in the response of various cells to external stimuli and in the transformation process. JunD?/? MEFs, for example, undergo senescence and display increased sensitivity to death-promoting agents such as ultraviolet light and tumor necrosis factor-?. Furthermore, oncogenic Ras typically induces Fra1, Fra2, c-Jun, and JunB but not c-Fos or FosB, and Ras-mediated transformation is suppressed in cells lacking c-Jun ( 6 ). Because a large proportion of pancreatic tumors contain oncogenic Ras ( 1 ), AP-1 could be an important driver of pancreatic tumorigenesis. Our data confirm that c-Jun/AP-1 is essential for pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, consistent with previous studies in other cell types ( 7 ). For example, c-Jun might promote G1- to S-phase transition presumably by inducing cyclin D1 and repressing p21cip1 expression simultaneously. JunB would antagonize this function of c-Jun by repressing cyclin D1 and inducing p16INK4a. Although c-Jun can also regulate apoptosis, neither TAM67 nor a JNK inhibitor affected the viability of pancreatic cancer cells (data not shown). AP-1 activity is modulated not only by dimer composition but also by specific signaling events. Our results indicated that the PI3K pathway is essential for AP-1 activation. Additionally, they revealed a previously unknown Akt-mediated mechanism of AP-1 regulation that appeared distinct from its known ability to induce c-Fos, Fra1, and JNK and to increase, through GSK-3 inhibition, the stability and/or DNA-binding activity of c-Jun ( 26 - 32 ). Using the GAL4 system, we show that the constitutively activated forms of Akt (gag-Akt and CAAX-Akt) specifically induced the transactivation potential of c-Jun and that a dominant-negative mutant (Akt-AAA) inhibited it in pancreatic cancer cells and c-Jun?/? MEFs. Two structural determinants were identified in the TAD of c-Jun that affected its ability to be induced by activated Akt: an inhibitory COOH-terminal region (amino acids 193-223) and an essential NH2-terminal sequence (amino acids 1-90). It is conceivable that the COOH-terminal region is involved in the ability of Akt to regulate the transcriptional activity of c-Jun. The JNK-regulated Ser63 and Ser73 was not the reason why the NH2-terminal region was essential because, when they were mutated (S63/73AA), the transactivation potential of c-Jun was still inducible by Akt, in fact to a greater extent than the intact control. Thus, these data suggested that Ser63 and Ser73 and perhaps JNK were dispensable, but also that they could be antagonistic, to Akt function in c-Jun activation. As functional confirmation that the serines were inactivated, the wild-type but not the mutated (S63/73AA) TAD of c-Jun was induced by IL-1, a potent JNK activator. Because the TAD does not contain the GSK-3-regulated site (Thr239), Akt appeared to regulate c-Jun by a novel mechanism that was distinct from the one involving GSK-3. The c-Jun TAD was also strongly induced by growth factors in an Akt-dependent manner, suggesting that the Akt-regulated JNK-independent mechanism was physiologically relevant. We generated and employed specific c-Jun constructs that contained mutations in the JNK and/or GSK-3 regulated sites to provide further evidence that this mechanism is indeed novel and distinct from the one involving GSK-3 and Thr239. Although the phosphorylation of c-Jun by JNK is thought to be sufficient and essential for its transcriptional activity, JNK-independent mechanisms have been implicated in various activities, including DNA damage-induced neuronal apoptosis ( 38 ), COP9 signalosome-directed c-Jun activation/stabilization ( 39 ), MEF2C-mediated c-Jun induction ( 40 ), and calcium-regulated activation of c-Jun ( 41 , 42 ). c-Jun protein and transcriptional activity were up-regulated in Hodgkin's lymphoma cells without a concomitant increase in c-Jun phosphorylation by JNK ( 10 ), and mice expressing the c-Jun mutant (S63/73AA) were viable but susceptible to liver carcinogenesis ( 9 ). Moreover, protein kinases such as RSK-3 phosphorylate AP-1 complexes, but their effect on AP-1 activity is not well understood ( 6 ). Given our data, the mechanism underlying the ability of Akt and growth factors to induce the transcriptional activity of c-Jun might involve, among other things, the NH2-terminal region of c-Jun, its phosphorylation, and interactions with activators and repressors ( 39 , 43 , 44 ). Proteins such as CBP, Pdcd4 ( 45 ), and JNK itself, which bind to c-Jun in this NH2-terminal region and are pertinent to the JNK function, might oppose such an Akt-regulated mechanism and explain some of our data. Whether this novel Akt-mediated mechanism is pertinent only to the prosurvival activity of c-Jun and whether Akt and JNK recruit different c-Jun-interacting proteins, regulate different c-Jun targets, or differentially modulate the extent of c-Jun activation are exciting questions for future investigations. 