Family history of hormonal cancers and colorectal cancer risk: A case-control study conducted in Ontario Aggregation of cancers among families with highly penetrant genetic mutations such as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is well-described. However, there is a paucity of data regarding familial aggregation of hormonal cancers (cancers of the breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate) and colorectal cancer (CRC) in the general population. We investigated the association between having a first-degree family history of breast, endometrial, ovarian, or prostate cancer and CRC risk. Population-based CRC cases and controls were recruited by the Ontario Familial Colorectal Cancer Registry (OFCCR). Logistic regression was conducted to obtain odds ratio (OR) estimates and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). First-degree family history of breast cancer was associated with a modest, borderline statistically significant increased CRC risk (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.2, 95% CI = 1.0, 1.5). The magnitude of CRC risk was greatest if more than one first-degree kin had breast cancer (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.7, 95% CI = 1.0, 2.0), as well as if the kin was diagnosed at >50 years of age (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 1.1, 1.8). Family history of ovarian cancer was associated with reduced CRC risk (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.6, 95% CI = 0.3, 1.0). While statistically significant increases in CRC risk were observed in the age-, sex-adjusted OR estimates for family history of endometrial and prostate cancers, the associations were no longer significant after multivariate-adjustment. In conclusion, individuals with a first-degree kin with breast cancer may have a modest increased risk for CRC compared to individuals without.  INTRODUCTION Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common type of cancer for men and women, and the second and third leading cause of cancer death for men and women, respectively, in Canada. 1 The modest five-year survival rate of CRC at 62% 1 emphasizes the importance of preventive measures such as screening and public education regarding CRC risk factors. The association between genetic factors and CRC has been well studied. However, while the association between rare, highly penetrant genetic conditions, such as familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), and CRC are well-established, 2 the possible association between other hereditary factors such as common, low penetrant genes and CRC risk remains unclear. 3 , 4 Similarly, while a family history of CRC is a known CRC risk factor, 5 – 12 the literature regarding CRC risk posed by a family history of other types of cancers remains inconclusive. Previous epidemiological studies have investigated the association between first-degree family history of various types of cancer and CRC risk. 6 , 10 – 21 Overall, the results of these studies have varied depending on the cancer type investigated. However, statistically significant associations were reported between increased colon cancer risk and a family history of breast, uterine, ovarian, and prostate cancer. 19 In addition, family histories of intestinal 15 and stomach 18 cancers have been associated with increased CRC risk. Given the growing evidence that sex hormones may play a role in CRC risk, 22 – 30 of particular interest in this current study was the possible association between a family history of hormonal cancers, namely breast, prostate, ovarian, and endometrial cancer, and CRC risk. We conducted a population-based case-control study investigating the association between having a first-degree family history of breast, endometrium, ovarian, or prostate cancer and CRC risk, utilizing the data collected by the OFCCR, 31 , 32 a population-based resource.  MATERIAL & METHODS The methods of the OFCCR have previously been described in detail. 31 , 32 A brief summary of the registry’s methods that are most relevant to the current study are as follows. Case and Control Selection Incident, pathology confirmed CRC cases (International Classification of Diseases, 9th revision (ICD-9) 33 codes 153.0, 153.1, 153.2, 153.3, 153.4, 153.5, 153.6, 153.7, 153.8, 153.9, 154.0, 154.1, 154.2, 154.3, 154.8) diagnosed from July 1, 1997 to June 30, 2000 were obtained from the Ontario Cancer Registry. These individuals were Ontario residents who were alive at diagnosis. Cases were mailed self-administered questionnaires in two stages. First, the Family History Questionnaire (FHQ) was mailed to all cases, then based on responses on the FHQ, cases were categorized into high, intermediate, and low familial CRC risk. Individuals were classified as high risk if they met the Amsterdam criteria for HNPCC, 34 and classified as intermediate risk if they met one of several criteria, two of which included: 1) Having two relatives with HNPCC cancers (including endometrial and ovarian cancers) and at least two of these three individuals being first-degree relatives; and 2) Having a family member with an HNPCC cancer diagnosed at ?35 years of age. In the second stage of questionnaire mailing, all high and intermediate risk cases and 25% of randomly selected low risk cases were re-contacted and mailed the Personal History Questionnaire (PHQ) and the Diet Questionnaire (DQ). Only cases who completed the PHQ were included since the many epidemiological factors (e.g., age, sex, and other confounding variables) that were necessary for analysis were collected using the PHQ. Of the 2124 cases mailed the PHQ, approximately 72% completed it. Among these cases, 25 were subsequently found to be mismatch repair (MMR) gene mutation carriers, and 1 case was a MutY human homologue (MYH) gene mutation carrier. These carriers were excluded from analyses as these mutations are part of known, highly penetrant genetic syndromes. In total, 1512 cases were included in this study, with 59% of them being female. The average age of cases was 61 years. Population-based controls were recruited to sex- and age-frequency match the cases within 5–10 year age groups using two methods: 1) Random-digit dialing; and 2) the Ministry of Finance Property Assessment Database. Controls were mailed all three questionnaires (FHQ, PHQ, DQ) at once. Questionnaires were mailed to 2745 controls, and of these, approximately 71% completed the PHQ. In total, 1953 controls were in this study, with 47% of them being female. The average age of controls was 59 years. Family History Family history for each cancer type was self-reported by the participants who completed the FHQ. However, for a very small number of deceased cases (n = 46), a proxy (e.g., a spouse or relative) completed the questionnaire. The FHQ asked if a first-degree kin ever had cancer or tumors, and if so, what type of cancer or tumor the kin had, the age of diagnosis, and the date of diagnosis. These four questions were asked regarding participants’ biological mother, father, siblings, and children. While information on cancer in other family members was also collected by the FHQ (using more general questions), only the first-degree family history was used in this study as it is the most reliable and consistently reported 35 – 39 and it was asked specifically for each first degree kin. Family history of cancer was defined in three different ways in our analyses, for a total of three exposure variables per cancer type. Note that these three variables are not independent. The three family history variables were: 1) Presence of first-degree family history of the specified cancer (Yes or No); 2) The number of first-degree kin with the specified cancer (None, 1 kin, or >1 kin); and 3) The age at which the first-degree kin was diagnosed with the specified cancer (No kin diagnosed, ?50 years of age, or >50 years of age). It was hypothesized that individuals with >1 kin with a family history of cancer, and those with kin diagnosed with cancer at ?50 years of age would have the greatest risk for CRC. Other Variables Information on many suspected or established CRC risk factors (potential confounding variables) was collected using the PHQ. The PHQ asked participants about their health (bowel screening; medication; menstruation, pregnancy, and menopause; diet; physical activity; alcohol consumption; smoking; weight and height; demographic information) and the DQ asked more detailed information about dietary intake. Statistical Analyses Multivariate unconditional logistic regression analysis was conducted to obtain odds ratio (OR) estimates for the association between CRC risk and each of the four family history variables (breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancer among first degree kin). Two multivariate logistic models were created for all family history cancer types: age-, sex-adjusted and multivariate-adjusted. In order to identify possible confounders that should be adjusted for in the multivariate models, 15 risk factors for CRC (family history of CRC, CRC screening, body mass index, use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, fiber intake, total fat intake, red meat consumption, fruit consumption, vegetable consumption, physical activity in 20s, and physical activity in 30/40s, number of first-degree relatives, and familial risk of CRC) were individually evaluated as potential confounders using the dichotomized definition (Yes/No) of breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancer family history and applying the 10% change in OR method. 40 The number of first-degree female relatives was tested as a potential confounder for family histories of breast, endometrial, and ovarian cancer, while the number of first-degree male relatives was tested as a potential confounder for family history of prostate cancer. Use of post-menopausal hormone replacement therapy and oral contraceptives were tested as potential confounders in a female only subset of the dataset. All potential confounders excluding number of first-degree relatives (all, females, and males), fiber intake, total fat intake, and familial risk of CRC, were defined and categorized as in our previous paper. 41 The three first-degree relative variables, fiber intake, and total fat intake were treated as categorical variables based on tertile distributions among controls, while familial risk of CRC was dichotomized into high/intermediate and low/sporadic risk categories. Potential confounders that yielded greater than 10% change in the age-, sex-adjusted OR were deemed to be confounders, 40 and were subsequently adjusted for in multivariate models. Variables that were not identified as confounders were not included in the final multivariate model which was designed to be the most parsimonious model. The Cochran-Armitage trend test was conducted to evaluate the significance of the trends for the number of first-degree kin diagnosed with cancer and the age of the first-degree kin’s cancer diagnosis variables. The exact test two-sided p-values are reported. Since oversampling of intermediate familial risk cases may have created a selection bias (the criteria used to select intermediate risk cases include two of our exposure variables, family histories of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer), we investigated this possibility, and cases and controls were stratified according to familial risk, and the age-, sex-adjusted OR and multivariate-adjusted OR estimates for family history of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer were compared. No differences were found (p > 0.05). Similarly, results from a likelihood ratio statistic test investigating the possibility of effect modification by familial risk by adding the product term 40 in the multivariate models were not statistically significant for both family history of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer. Hence, no further adjustments were made, and all cases were combined for analyses. The possibility of effect modification between sex and family history of each cancer type was also investigated using the likelihood ratio statistic. If the results of the likelihood ratio statistic indicated the presence of statistically significant (p < 0.05) effect modification, stratified analyses by sex were conducted. To investigate the possibility of differences in the association between family history of cancer and CRC risk by CRC sub-site, case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimates for family history of breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancers comparing distal CRC cases (ICD-933 codes 153.2, 153.3, 154.0, 154.1, 154.2, 154.3, and 154.8) to proximal CRC cases (ICD-933 codes 153.0, 153.1, 153.4, 153.5, 153.6, and 153.7) were calculated. If the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR was statistically significant (p < 0.05), cases were stratified according to cancer sub-site and compared to all controls. Cases with ICD-933 codes 153.8 (other specified sites of large intestine) and 153.9 (colon, unspecified) were excluded for the sub-site analyses as the specific sites of these cancers were unclear.  Case and Control Selection Incident, pathology confirmed CRC cases (International Classification of Diseases, 9th revision (ICD-9) 33 codes 153.0, 153.1, 153.2, 153.3, 153.4, 153.5, 153.6, 153.7, 153.8, 153.9, 154.0, 154.1, 154.2, 154.3, 154.8) diagnosed from July 1, 1997 to June 30, 2000 were obtained from the Ontario Cancer Registry. These individuals were Ontario residents who were alive at diagnosis. Cases were mailed self-administered questionnaires in two stages. First, the Family History Questionnaire (FHQ) was mailed to all cases, then based on responses on the FHQ, cases were categorized into high, intermediate, and low familial CRC risk. Individuals were classified as high risk if they met the Amsterdam criteria for HNPCC, 34 and classified as intermediate risk if they met one of several criteria, two of which included: 1) Having two relatives with HNPCC cancers (including endometrial and ovarian cancers) and at least two of these three individuals being first-degree relatives; and 2) Having a family member with an HNPCC cancer diagnosed at ?35 years of age. In the second stage of questionnaire mailing, all high and intermediate risk cases and 25% of randomly selected low risk cases were re-contacted and mailed the Personal History Questionnaire (PHQ) and the Diet Questionnaire (DQ). Only cases who completed the PHQ were included since the many epidemiological factors (e.g., age, sex, and other confounding variables) that were necessary for analysis were collected using the PHQ. Of the 2124 cases mailed the PHQ, approximately 72% completed it. Among these cases, 25 were subsequently found to be mismatch repair (MMR) gene mutation carriers, and 1 case was a MutY human homologue (MYH) gene mutation carrier. These carriers were excluded from analyses as these mutations are part of known, highly penetrant genetic syndromes. In total, 1512 cases were included in this study, with 59% of them being female. The average age of cases was 61 years. Population-based controls were recruited to sex- and age-frequency match the cases within 5–10 year age groups using two methods: 1) Random-digit dialing; and 2) the Ministry of Finance Property Assessment Database. Controls were mailed all three questionnaires (FHQ, PHQ, DQ) at once. Questionnaires were mailed to 2745 controls, and of these, approximately 71% completed the PHQ. In total, 1953 controls were in this study, with 47% of them being female. The average age of controls was 59 years.  Family History Family history for each cancer type was self-reported by the participants who completed the FHQ. However, for a very small number of deceased cases (n = 46), a proxy (e.g., a spouse or relative) completed the questionnaire. The FHQ asked if a first-degree kin ever had cancer or tumors, and if so, what type of cancer or tumor the kin had, the age of diagnosis, and the date of diagnosis. These four questions were asked regarding participants’ biological mother, father, siblings, and children. While information on cancer in other family members was also collected by the FHQ (using more general questions), only the first-degree family history was used in this study as it is the most reliable and consistently reported 35 – 39 and it was asked specifically for each first degree kin. Family history of cancer was defined in three different ways in our analyses, for a total of three exposure variables per cancer type. Note that these three variables are not independent. The three family history variables were: 1) Presence of first-degree family history of the specified cancer (Yes or No); 2) The number of first-degree kin with the specified cancer (None, 1 kin, or >1 kin); and 3) The age at which the first-degree kin was diagnosed with the specified cancer (No kin diagnosed, ?50 years of age, or >50 years of age). It was hypothesized that individuals with >1 kin with a family history of cancer, and those with kin diagnosed with cancer at ?50 years of age would have the greatest risk for CRC.  Other Variables Information on many suspected or established CRC risk factors (potential confounding variables) was collected using the PHQ. The PHQ asked participants about their health (bowel screening; medication; menstruation, pregnancy, and menopause; diet; physical activity; alcohol consumption; smoking; weight and height; demographic information) and the DQ asked more detailed information about dietary intake.  Statistical Analyses Multivariate unconditional logistic regression analysis was conducted to obtain odds ratio (OR) estimates for the association between CRC risk and each of the four family history variables (breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancer among first degree kin). Two multivariate logistic models were created for all family history cancer types: age-, sex-adjusted and multivariate-adjusted. In order to identify possible confounders that should be adjusted for in the multivariate models, 15 risk factors for CRC (family history of CRC, CRC screening, body mass index, use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, fiber intake, total fat intake, red meat consumption, fruit consumption, vegetable consumption, physical activity in 20s, and physical activity in 30/40s, number of first-degree relatives, and familial risk of CRC) were individually evaluated as potential confounders using the dichotomized definition (Yes/No) of breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancer family history and applying the 10% change in OR method. 40 The number of first-degree female relatives was tested as a potential confounder for family histories of breast, endometrial, and ovarian cancer, while the number of first-degree male relatives was tested as a potential confounder for family history of prostate cancer. Use of post-menopausal hormone replacement therapy and oral contraceptives were tested as potential confounders in a female only subset of the dataset. All potential confounders excluding number of first-degree relatives (all, females, and males), fiber intake, total fat intake, and familial risk of CRC, were defined and categorized as in our previous paper. 41 The three first-degree relative variables, fiber intake, and total fat intake were treated as categorical variables based on tertile distributions among controls, while familial risk of CRC was dichotomized into high/intermediate and low/sporadic risk categories. Potential confounders that yielded greater than 10% change in the age-, sex-adjusted OR were deemed to be confounders, 40 and were subsequently adjusted for in multivariate models. Variables that were not identified as confounders were not included in the final multivariate model which was designed to be the most parsimonious model. The Cochran-Armitage trend test was conducted to evaluate the significance of the trends for the number of first-degree kin diagnosed with cancer and the age of the first-degree kin’s cancer diagnosis variables. The exact test two-sided p-values are reported. Since oversampling of intermediate familial risk cases may have created a selection bias (the criteria used to select intermediate risk cases include two of our exposure variables, family histories of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer), we investigated this possibility, and cases and controls were stratified according to familial risk, and the age-, sex-adjusted OR and multivariate-adjusted OR estimates for family history of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer were compared. No differences were found (p > 0.05). Similarly, results from a likelihood ratio statistic test investigating the possibility of effect modification by familial risk by adding the product term 40 in the multivariate models were not statistically significant for both family history of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer. Hence, no further adjustments were made, and all cases were combined for analyses. The possibility of effect modification between sex and family history of each cancer type was also investigated using the likelihood ratio statistic. If the results of the likelihood ratio statistic indicated the presence of statistically significant (p < 0.05) effect modification, stratified analyses by sex were conducted. To investigate the possibility of differences in the association between family history of cancer and CRC risk by CRC sub-site, case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimates for family history of breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancers comparing distal CRC cases (ICD-933 codes 153.2, 153.3, 154.0, 154.1, 154.2, 154.3, and 154.8) to proximal CRC cases (ICD-933 codes 153.0, 153.1, 153.4, 153.5, 153.6, and 153.7) were calculated. If the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR was statistically significant (p < 0.05), cases were stratified according to cancer sub-site and compared to all controls. Cases with ICD-933 codes 153.8 (other specified sites of large intestine) and 153.9 (colon, unspecified) were excluded for the sub-site analyses as the specific sites of these cancers were unclear.  RESULTS Sex was not a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of breast cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.47). The case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases to proximal cases was 0.8 (95% CI = 0.6, 1.0), suggesting a borderline statistically significant difference in the association between CRC and family history of breast cancer by CRC sub-site. Thus, stratified analysis by CRC sub-site was conducted and presented. Since no additional confounders were identified in the association between family history of breast cancer and CRC risk, further multivariate analyses were not conducted. Table 1 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend tests for family history of breast cancer and CRC risk. The result from the analysis comparing all cases and controls indicates a modest increase in CRC risk among those with a first-degree family history of breast cancer (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.2, 95% CI = 1.0, 1.5). Individuals with more than one first-degree kin with breast cancer had a higher risk for CRC (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.7, 95% CI = 1.0, 2.9) compared to those with only one kin (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.1, 95% CI = 0.9, 1.4). In addition, individuals with a kin diagnosed at >50 years of age had a higher risk for CRC (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 1.1, 1.8) compared to those with a kin diagnosed ?50 years of age (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.2, 95% CI = 0.9, 1.8). Significant trends were observed for both the number of kin with breast cancer (p = 0.03) and the age of kin’s breast cancer diagnosis (p < 0.01). CRC risk associated with family history of breast cancer was higher among proximal cases (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 1.1, 1.8) than distal cases (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.1, 95% CI = 0.8, 1.4). Similarly, significant trends were observed for the number of kin with breast cancer and the age of kin’s breast cancer diagnosis for proximal cases, but not for distal cases. Sex was a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of endometrial cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.02), and the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases against proximal cases was 0.5 (95% CI = 0.3, 0.8), suggesting a difference in the association between CRC risk and family history of endometrial cancer by CRC sub-site. Table 2 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR, multivariate-adjusted OR and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend tests for family history of endometrial cancer and CRC risk. Family history of endometrial cancer was associated with an increased CRC risk, but this was not statistically significant (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.3, 95% CI = 0.8, 2.1). However, note that significant trends were observed for the number of kin with endometrial cancer (p < 0.01) and the age of kin’s endometrial cancer diagnosis (p < 0.01). A family history of endometrial cancer was associated with higher proximal CRC risk (multivariate-adjusted OR = 2.0, 95% CI = 1.1, 3.7) than distal CRC risk with family history of endometrial cancer was also higher among men (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.7, 95% CI = 0.4, 1.4). CRC risk associated iate-adjusted OR = 2.4, 95% CI = 1.0, 5.7) than women (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.0, 95% CI = 0.5, 1.8). Consistently, significant trends were observed for both the number of kin with endometrial cancer and the age of kin’s endometrial cancer diagnosis (p < 0.01) among men, but only the latter had a significant trend among women (p = 0.03). Sex was a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.03). However, the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases against proximal cases was not statistically significant (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 0.6, 95% CI = 0.3, 1.2). Table 3 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR, multivariate-adjusted OR and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend for family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk. The age-, sex-adjusted OR did not suggest CRC risk having a statistically significant association with family history of ovarian cancer (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 0.9, 2.2), however, the multivariate-adjusted OR indicated a marginally significant reduced CRC risk (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.6, 95% CI = 0.3, 1.0). No significant trends were observed for the number of kin with ovarian cancer and the age of kin’s ovarian cancer diagnosis. Results stratified by sex indicated that the association between family history of ovarian cancer and decreased CRC risk was statistically significant for women (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.4, 95% CI = 0.2, 0.9), but not men (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.9, 95% CI = 0.3, 2.2). However, note that significant trends for number of kin with ovarian cancer and the age of kin’s ovarian cancer diagnosis were observed for men, but not women; this is likely due to our small frequency counts for women. Sex was not a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.85). Similarly, the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases to proximal cases was 0.9 (95% CI = 0.6, 1.2), suggesting no difference in the association between CRC risk and family history of prostate cancer by CRC sub-site. Table 4 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR, multivariate-adjusted OR, and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend tests for family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk. Our results suggest that family history of prostate cancer is not significantly associated with CRC risk (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.0, 95% CI = 0.8, 1.3). However, CRC risk was higher among those with more than one kin diagnosed with prostate cancer (multivariate-adjusted OR = 2.1, 95% CI = 0.9, 4.8) compared to just one kin (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.9, 95% CI = 0.7, 1.2), and also if the kin was diagnosed at >50 years of age (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.1, 95% CI = 0.8, 1.5) compared to ?50 years of age (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.1, 95% CI = 0.01, 1.0). Only the trend for the age of kin’s prostate cancer diagnosis was statistically significant (p = 0.04).  RESULTS Sex was not a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of breast cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.47). The case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases to proximal cases was 0.8 (95% CI = 0.6, 1.0), suggesting a borderline statistically significant difference in the association between CRC and family history of breast cancer by CRC sub-site. Thus, stratified analysis by CRC sub-site was conducted and presented. Since no additional confounders were identified in the association between family history of breast cancer and CRC risk, further multivariate analyses were not conducted. Table 1 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend tests for family history of breast cancer and CRC risk. The result from the analysis comparing all cases and controls indicates a modest increase in CRC risk among those with a first-degree family history of breast cancer (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.2, 95% CI = 1.0, 1.5). Individuals with more than one first-degree kin with breast cancer had a higher risk for CRC (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.7, 95% CI = 1.0, 2.9) compared to those with only one kin (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.1, 95% CI = 0.9, 1.4). In addition, individuals with a kin diagnosed at >50 years of age had a higher risk for CRC (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 1.1, 1.8) compared to those with a kin diagnosed ?50 years of age (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.2, 95% CI = 0.9, 1.8). Significant trends were observed for both the number of kin with breast cancer (p = 0.03) and the age of kin’s breast cancer diagnosis (p < 0.01). CRC risk associated with family history of breast cancer was higher among proximal cases (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 1.1, 1.8) than distal cases (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.1, 95% CI = 0.8, 1.4). Similarly, significant trends were observed for the number of kin with breast cancer and the age of kin’s breast cancer diagnosis for proximal cases, but not for distal cases. Sex was a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of endometrial cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.02), and the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases against proximal cases was 0.5 (95% CI = 0.3, 0.8), suggesting a difference in the association between CRC risk and family history of endometrial cancer by CRC sub-site. Table 2 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR, multivariate-adjusted OR and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend tests for family history of endometrial cancer and CRC risk. Family history of endometrial cancer was associated with an increased CRC risk, but this was not statistically significant (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.3, 95% CI = 0.8, 2.1). However, note that significant trends were observed for the number of kin with endometrial cancer (p < 0.01) and the age of kin’s endometrial cancer diagnosis (p < 0.01). A family history of endometrial cancer was associated with higher proximal CRC risk (multivariate-adjusted OR = 2.0, 95% CI = 1.1, 3.7) than distal CRC risk with family history of endometrial cancer was also higher among men (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.7, 95% CI = 0.4, 1.4). CRC risk associated iate-adjusted OR = 2.4, 95% CI = 1.0, 5.7) than women (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.0, 95% CI = 0.5, 1.8). Consistently, significant trends were observed for both the number of kin with endometrial cancer and the age of kin’s endometrial cancer diagnosis (p < 0.01) among men, but only the latter had a significant trend among women (p = 0.03). Sex was a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.03). However, the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases against proximal cases was not statistically significant (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 0.6, 95% CI = 0.3, 1.2). Table 3 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR, multivariate-adjusted OR and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend for family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk. The age-, sex-adjusted OR did not suggest CRC risk having a statistically significant association with family history of ovarian cancer (age-, sex-adjusted OR = 1.4, 95% CI = 0.9, 2.2), however, the multivariate-adjusted OR indicated a marginally significant reduced CRC risk (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.6, 95% CI = 0.3, 1.0). No significant trends were observed for the number of kin with ovarian cancer and the age of kin’s ovarian cancer diagnosis. Results stratified by sex indicated that the association between family history of ovarian cancer and decreased CRC risk was statistically significant for women (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.4, 95% CI = 0.2, 0.9), but not men (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.9, 95% CI = 0.3, 2.2). However, note that significant trends for number of kin with ovarian cancer and the age of kin’s ovarian cancer diagnosis were observed for men, but not women; this is likely due to our small frequency counts for women. Sex was not a statistically significant effect modifier in the association between family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk (p = 0.85). Similarly, the case-case age-, sex-adjusted OR estimate comparing distal cases to proximal cases was 0.9 (95% CI = 0.6, 1.2), suggesting no difference in the association between CRC risk and family history of prostate cancer by CRC sub-site. Table 4 shows the frequency distributions of cases and controls, age-, sex-adjusted OR, multivariate-adjusted OR, and 95% CI estimates, and p-values for trend tests for family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk. Our results suggest that family history of prostate cancer is not significantly associated with CRC risk (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.0, 95% CI = 0.8, 1.3). However, CRC risk was higher among those with more than one kin diagnosed with prostate cancer (multivariate-adjusted OR = 2.1, 95% CI = 0.9, 4.8) compared to just one kin (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.9, 95% CI = 0.7, 1.2), and also if the kin was diagnosed at >50 years of age (multivariate-adjusted OR = 1.1, 95% CI = 0.8, 1.5) compared to ?50 years of age (multivariate-adjusted OR = 0.1, 95% CI = 0.01, 1.0). Only the trend for the age of kin’s prostate cancer diagnosis was statistically significant (p = 0.04).  DISCUSSION Family history of breast cancer among first degree kin was associated with a modest, marginally statistically significant increased CRC risk. This association was also stronger if there was more than one kin diagnosed with breast cancer, and if the kin was diagnosed at >50 years of age. The association between family history of breast cancer and CRC also appeared to be stronger among proximal CRC cases compared to distal cases. Family history of ovarian cancer had a marginally statistically significant inverse association with CRC risk. While the age-, sex-adjusted ORs for family history of endometrial cancer and prostate cancer showed statistically significant associations with CRC risk, these associations were no longer significant after multivariate adjustment. Comparison of findings to previous reports Our findings that a family history of breast cancer is associated with a moderate increase in CRC risk is consistent with some previous epidemiological reports, 16 , 19 but not others. 6 , 10 – 11 , 13 – 14 , 17 – 18 Alternatively, a couple of previous studies did not find an association between a family history of CRC and risk for breast cancer among first-degree relatives. 8 , 42 Our result of a strong association between having more than one kin diagnosed with breast cancer (compared to none) and CRC risk suggests that families with multiple breast cancer diagnoses may be genetically and/or environmentally susceptible to both CRC and breast cancer. Meanwhile, the strong association observed between having a kin diagnosed with breast cancer at >50 years of age (compared to none) and CRC risk is in contrast to our hypothesis that a stronger association may exist if the kin is diagnosed with breast cancer at ?50 years of age, given that cancers arising from genetic predisposition tend to have earlier onset. Our finding that breast cancer diagnosis occurring relatively later in life is strongly associated with CRC risk – even after adjusting for age – suggests that the familial clustering of breast cancer and CRC observed in our study may be distinct from cancer clustering observed in HNPCC families. In contrast with another study, 19 we found a moderate association between family history of breast cancer and proximal CRC risk and no association observed for distal CRC risk. Given the limited power for our analyses of family history of endometrial cancer and CRC risk, our results must be interpreted with caution. We found a statistically non-significant positive association between CRC risk and family history of endometrial cancer, which is consistent with previous findings that investigated family histories of endometrial 11 and uterine 13 , 18 cancers. However, one previous study did report that family history of endometrial cancer is associated with reduced colon cancer risk. 6 Our finding that CRC risk is higher among men reporting a family history of endometrial cancer, compared to women, is in agreement with those previously reported. 6 , 19 It is difficult to compare our finding that family history of endometrial cancer was associated with higher CRC risk for proximal cases than distal cases as the only other study that investigated risk by sub-site was by Slattery & Kerber, 19 and they reported that colon cancer risk was higher for distal than proximal cases reporting a family history of uterine cancer among men, but the risk was higher for proximal than distal cases among women. Our results regarding family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk must be interpreted with caution given the limited statistical power. Our multivariate-adjusted OR estimate suggests that a family history of ovarian cancer is associated with reduced CRC risk; however, this finding contradicts most previous studies. It is possible that this was a spurious finding since to our knowledge, only a handful of studies investigated this association with two studies 13 , 18 reporting a non-significant positive association with family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk and another study 19 reporting a statistically significant positive association among women only. Only one study reported a non-significant negative association among women. 6 A negative association between a family history of ovarian cancer and CRC suggests the possibility that (a) factor(s) – genetic or environmental – increasing the susceptibility of ovarian cancer in a family can actually be associated with reduced risk for CRC. We did not find a statistically significant association between family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk. Results from previous case-control studies are mixed with some reporting statistically significant, 16 , 19 and non-significant 18 , 19 increased risk, as well as no risk 6 , 11 associated with family history of prostate cancer. In addition, a previous study investigating the alternative association of family history of CRC and risk for prostate cancer did not find a statistically significant association. 42 In summary, the association between family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk remains unclear. We can speculate on possible factors contributing to the discrepancies between our study results and those in the literature, as well as the inconsistency of findings in the literature. First, residual confounding may have resulted in inflated results in studies that did not adjust for appropriate confounding variables. Slattery & Kerber 19 reported several significant associations between family histories of hormonal cancers and colon cancer risk. However, while the authors controlled for a limited number of variables (e.g., age, sex), they did not explore the possibility of confounding by lifestyle and dietary variables and thus residual confounding may have biased their results away from the null 19 In our study, we tested for 15 potential confounders and then adjusted for these if they were deemed to be confounders in our datasets; in addition, age and sex were always adjusted for in all our models. Second, some studies 10 , 17 that investigated family history of cancers and CRC risk had relatively small sample sizes for their calculations and thus may have had inadequate statistical power to detect a significant association, or their relative risk estimates may not have been stable. Third, some studies in the literature only evaluated colon cancer risk rather than CRC risk, as we did in the present study. It is possible that rectal cancer is more strongly associated with family history of hormonal cancers and that results from studies only investigating colon cancer risk attenuates the CRC risk estimated by the overall literature. Previous results suggest that rectal cancer is more strongly associated with family history of hormonal cancers, with one study reporting a stronger (although non-significant) association between family histories of breast, uterine, ovarian, and prostate cancers with rectal cancer risk compared to colon cancer risk. 18 Hormones and breast, ovarian, endometrial, prostate, and colorectal cancers Studies suggest that hormonal cancers and CRC may share common biological etiologies such as exogenous sources of hormone. Several reviews concluded that hormone replacement therapy is associated with modest increased risk for breast and ovarian cancers, and that specifically unopposed estrogen therapy is associated with increased risk for endometrial cancer, but that hormone replacement therapy significantly reduces the risk for colon cancer. 43 – 45 Meanwhile, the use of oral contraceptives is associated with increased risk for breast cancer in some studies, but decreased risk for endometrial, ovarian, and colorectal cancer. 45 – 49 Female sex hormones, specifically, estrogens, have also been implicated in prostate cancer. 50 – 52 Furthermore, previous studies demonstrated that hormonal cancers and CRC share common genetic factors. For instance, prostate cancer and CRC share a common polymorphism on chromosome 8q24, 53 and a region of 8q24 has been associated with prostate, colorectal, and ovarian cancer risk. 54 It has also been demonstrated that breast cancer and CRC share a common polymorphism in the ERBB4 gene. 55 However, given the limited knowledge regarding a common hormonal pathway between breast, endometrial, ovarian, prostate, and colorectal cancers, a common etiological hormonal factor remains speculative. HNPCC cancers Familial aggregation of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer with CRC may be due to the fact that these three types of cancers are HNPCC cancers. Thus, we excluded cases with known high-risk CRC mutations ( MMR and MYH polymorphisms) from our analyses, and we also tested for effect modification by familial risk. As previously discussed, familial risk was not a statistically significant effect modifier in our study. Hence, familial aggregations of cancers in our results are unlikely to be due to the presence of HNPCC families in our datasets. Validity of self-reported family history In our dataset, there were 482, 114, 83, and 351 first-degree kin with breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancers, respectively, as reported by our cases and controls. Of these reported kin cases, we were able to obtain pathology confirmation on only 8.3%, 21.9%, 14.5%, and 7.1% of breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancer reports, respectively (this was passively done as part of the OFCCR). Hence, our major method of ascertaining family histories was through participants’ self-reports. Although this method of ascertainment is admittedly imperfect, previous studies demonstrate that self-reports of first-degree family history can be highly accurate. The accuracy of a proband’s reported family history of cancer in first-degree kin has been reported to be as high as 95.4%, 37 and is generally higher than the accuracies of reporting for second- or third-degree kin. 35 – 39 Reporting accuracy also differs between cancer sites, with female breast cancer and prostate cancer having been reported with high accuracies, 37 , 56 – 58 ovarian cancer generally being reported with modest accuracy, 56 – 58 and endometrial cancer being reported with low accuracy. 37 , 56 , 59 The accuracy of participants’ reporting of kin’s age of diagnosis is less well-known. However, one study reports that the age of breast cancer diagnosis in first-degree relatives was accurately reported by 92% of their breast cancer cases, 38 while another breast cancer case-control study found that the average errors of the reported age of breast cancer diagnosis in first-degree relatives among cases and controls were similar at 2.0 and 1.7 years, respectively. 60 Thus, while inaccurate reporting of family history is a concern as this can lead to misclassification, previous studies suggest that misclassifications for family histories of breast and prostate cancer in the present study are unlikely, although misclassification for family history of endometrial and ovarian cancer is plausible. As with other case-control studies, recall bias is a potential limitation of this study. However, a previous study suggests the self-reported accuracy of family history does not differ between cases and controls. 56 Furthermore, within our dataset, a significant association between family history of CRC and CRC risk (age-adjusted OR = 2.4, 95% CI = 2.0, 2.9) was observed and is similar to previous literature, 10 , 16 , 41 suggesting that the family history information collected is valid. Limitations The limitations of our study are as follows. First, since an inclusion criterion for cases was being alive at the time of diagnosis, survival bias is a possibility if fatal CRC cases differed from live cases in their reporting of, or actual, family histories of cancers. Second, the OFCCR has a moderate control response rate of 71% for both this current and study and that previously reported, 41 which suggests that our control participants may not necessarily be representative of the general population. Third, since genotype information was available for only 68.9% of our high-risk participants, we may have failed to exclude some participants with high-risk HNPCC mutations, which would mean that our risk estimates are inflated. Similarly, a small number of HNPCC cases may have inadvertently been included in this study, as although MMR mutation screening was thorough based on current knowledge, false negative tests are always possible in genetic testing. Fourth, given the small frequencies and wide CIs for some of our OR estimates, our sample size was relatively small and our statistical power limited for some calculations. Finally, similar to that reported in a previous OFCCR paper 61 the majority of our sample (95%) was Caucasian. While ethnic differences in the association between family histories of hormonal cancer and CRC risk are unclear, at least one previous report 8 found that the odds for breast cancer among first-degree relatives of CRC patients was higher among their Japanese participants compared to all their participants combined. Thus, the applicability of our results to non-Caucasians is uncertain. Strengths Our study has several notable strengths. First, as the sampling frames for cases and controls were population-based, our study is not influenced by biases associated with hospital- or clinic-based samples. Second, cases were incident, pathology confirmed CRC cases, eliminating the possibility of misclassification on CRC status. Third, we collected extensive information on family histories of first-degree family members, including type of cancer diagnosed and age at diagnosis, allowing for the investigation of family history of cancer at different sites, and possible differences in the association between family history of cancer and CRC risk by kin’s age of cancer diagnosis. Finally, by testing for 19 potential confounders (number of first-degree relatives, number of first-degree female relatives, number of first-degree male relatives, familial risk of CRC, family history of CRC, CRC screening, body mass index, use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, fiber intake, total fat intake, red meat consumption, fruit consumption, vegetable consumption, physical activity in 20s, physical activity in 30/40s, use of post-menopausal hormone replacement therapy, and use of oral contraceptives) and adjusting for actual confounders applicable to our datasets, our results are unlikely to be influenced by confounding. Conclusion Our results suggest that a family history of certain hormonal cancers – in particular breast cancer – may put persons in the general population at increased risk for CRC. Authors 19 of a previous study investigating family history of cancers and CRC risk have noted that familial aggregation of cancers can be due to common genetic and environmental factors. Compared to previous studies, we investigated family history of hormonal cancers in greater detail; namely, evaluating the number of first-degree kin diagnosed with cancer and the age of the kin’s cancer diagnosis. Hence, our study adds to the exiting literature by providing intriguing findings regarding the possible association between hormonal cancers and CRC risk. However, given the paucity of existing studies in this area of research, further research is necessary to confirm or refute our findings. Authors of future studies should obtain larger sample sizes in order to have sufficient statistical power for evaluating family history of relatively rare hormonal cancers such as ovarian and endometrial cancer. Explorations into the roles of family history of hormonal cancers in second- and third-degree kin are also warranted. In conclusion, family history of hormonal cancers – particularly breast cancer – may be a risk factor for CRC. Furthermore, the details of such family history such as the number of kin diagnosed and the age of the kin’s breast cancer diagnosis may be important, and thus worth considering when evaluating individual CRC risk. These findings may be of importance to clinicians and genetic counsellors advising persons on cancer prevention and screening recommendations.  Comparison of findings to previous reports Our findings that a family history of breast cancer is associated with a moderate increase in CRC risk is consistent with some previous epidemiological reports, 16 , 19 but not others. 6 , 10 – 11 , 13 – 14 , 17 – 18 Alternatively, a couple of previous studies did not find an association between a family history of CRC and risk for breast cancer among first-degree relatives. 8 , 42 Our result of a strong association between having more than one kin diagnosed with breast cancer (compared to none) and CRC risk suggests that families with multiple breast cancer diagnoses may be genetically and/or environmentally susceptible to both CRC and breast cancer. Meanwhile, the strong association observed between having a kin diagnosed with breast cancer at >50 years of age (compared to none) and CRC risk is in contrast to our hypothesis that a stronger association may exist if the kin is diagnosed with breast cancer at ?50 years of age, given that cancers arising from genetic predisposition tend to have earlier onset. Our finding that breast cancer diagnosis occurring relatively later in life is strongly associated with CRC risk – even after adjusting for age – suggests that the familial clustering of breast cancer and CRC observed in our study may be distinct from cancer clustering observed in HNPCC families. In contrast with another study, 19 we found a moderate association between family history of breast cancer and proximal CRC risk and no association observed for distal CRC risk. Given the limited power for our analyses of family history of endometrial cancer and CRC risk, our results must be interpreted with caution. We found a statistically non-significant positive association between CRC risk and family history of endometrial cancer, which is consistent with previous findings that investigated family histories of endometrial 11 and uterine 13 , 18 cancers. However, one previous study did report that family history of endometrial cancer is associated with reduced colon cancer risk. 6 Our finding that CRC risk is higher among men reporting a family history of endometrial cancer, compared to women, is in agreement with those previously reported. 6 , 19 It is difficult to compare our finding that family history of endometrial cancer was associated with higher CRC risk for proximal cases than distal cases as the only other study that investigated risk by sub-site was by Slattery & Kerber, 19 and they reported that colon cancer risk was higher for distal than proximal cases reporting a family history of uterine cancer among men, but the risk was higher for proximal than distal cases among women. Our results regarding family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk must be interpreted with caution given the limited statistical power. Our multivariate-adjusted OR estimate suggests that a family history of ovarian cancer is associated with reduced CRC risk; however, this finding contradicts most previous studies. It is possible that this was a spurious finding since to our knowledge, only a handful of studies investigated this association with two studies 13 , 18 reporting a non-significant positive association with family history of ovarian cancer and CRC risk and another study 19 reporting a statistically significant positive association among women only. Only one study reported a non-significant negative association among women. 6 A negative association between a family history of ovarian cancer and CRC suggests the possibility that (a) factor(s) – genetic or environmental – increasing the susceptibility of ovarian cancer in a family can actually be associated with reduced risk for CRC. We did not find a statistically significant association between family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk. Results from previous case-control studies are mixed with some reporting statistically significant, 16 , 19 and non-significant 18 , 19 increased risk, as well as no risk 6 , 11 associated with family history of prostate cancer. In addition, a previous study investigating the alternative association of family history of CRC and risk for prostate cancer did not find a statistically significant association. 42 In summary, the association between family history of prostate cancer and CRC risk remains unclear. We can speculate on possible factors contributing to the discrepancies between our study results and those in the literature, as well as the inconsistency of findings in the literature. First, residual confounding may have resulted in inflated results in studies that did not adjust for appropriate confounding variables. Slattery & Kerber 19 reported several significant associations between family histories of hormonal cancers and colon cancer risk. However, while the authors controlled for a limited number of variables (e.g., age, sex), they did not explore the possibility of confounding by lifestyle and dietary variables and thus residual confounding may have biased their results away from the null 19 In our study, we tested for 15 potential confounders and then adjusted for these if they were deemed to be confounders in our datasets; in addition, age and sex were always adjusted for in all our models. Second, some studies 10 , 17 that investigated family history of cancers and CRC risk had relatively small sample sizes for their calculations and thus may have had inadequate statistical power to detect a significant association, or their relative risk estimates may not have been stable. Third, some studies in the literature only evaluated colon cancer risk rather than CRC risk, as we did in the present study. It is possible that rectal cancer is more strongly associated with family history of hormonal cancers and that results from studies only investigating colon cancer risk attenuates the CRC risk estimated by the overall literature. Previous results suggest that rectal cancer is more strongly associated with family history of hormonal cancers, with one study reporting a stronger (although non-significant) association between family histories of breast, uterine, ovarian, and prostate cancers with rectal cancer risk compared to colon cancer risk. 18  Hormones and breast, ovarian, endometrial, prostate, and colorectal cancers Studies suggest that hormonal cancers and CRC may share common biological etiologies such as exogenous sources of hormone. Several reviews concluded that hormone replacement therapy is associated with modest increased risk for breast and ovarian cancers, and that specifically unopposed estrogen therapy is associated with increased risk for endometrial cancer, but that hormone replacement therapy significantly reduces the risk for colon cancer. 43 – 45 Meanwhile, the use of oral contraceptives is associated with increased risk for breast cancer in some studies, but decreased risk for endometrial, ovarian, and colorectal cancer. 45 – 49 Female sex hormones, specifically, estrogens, have also been implicated in prostate cancer. 50 – 52 Furthermore, previous studies demonstrated that hormonal cancers and CRC share common genetic factors. For instance, prostate cancer and CRC share a common polymorphism on chromosome 8q24, 53 and a region of 8q24 has been associated with prostate, colorectal, and ovarian cancer risk. 54 It has also been demonstrated that breast cancer and CRC share a common polymorphism in the ERBB4 gene. 55 However, given the limited knowledge regarding a common hormonal pathway between breast, endometrial, ovarian, prostate, and colorectal cancers, a common etiological hormonal factor remains speculative.  HNPCC cancers Familial aggregation of endometrial cancer and ovarian cancer with CRC may be due to the fact that these three types of cancers are HNPCC cancers. Thus, we excluded cases with known high-risk CRC mutations ( MMR and MYH polymorphisms) from our analyses, and we also tested for effect modification by familial risk. As previously discussed, familial risk was not a statistically significant effect modifier in our study. Hence, familial aggregations of cancers in our results are unlikely to be due to the presence of HNPCC families in our datasets.  Validity of self-reported family history In our dataset, there were 482, 114, 83, and 351 first-degree kin with breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancers, respectively, as reported by our cases and controls. Of these reported kin cases, we were able to obtain pathology confirmation on only 8.3%, 21.9%, 14.5%, and 7.1% of breast, endometrial, ovarian, and prostate cancer reports, respectively (this was passively done as part of the OFCCR). Hence, our major method of ascertaining family histories was through participants’ self-reports. Although this method of ascertainment is admittedly imperfect, previous studies demonstrate that self-reports of first-degree family history can be highly accurate. The accuracy of a proband’s reported family history of cancer in first-degree kin has been reported to be as high as 95.4%, 37 and is generally higher than the accuracies of reporting for second- or third-degree kin. 35 – 39 Reporting accuracy also differs between cancer sites, with female breast cancer and prostate cancer having been reported with high accuracies, 37 , 56 – 58 ovarian cancer generally being reported with modest accuracy, 56 – 58 and endometrial cancer being reported with low accuracy. 37 , 56 , 59 The accuracy of participants’ reporting of kin’s age of diagnosis is less well-known. However, one study reports that the age of breast cancer diagnosis in first-degree relatives was accurately reported by 92% of their breast cancer cases, 38 while another breast cancer case-control study found that the average errors of the reported age of breast cancer diagnosis in first-degree relatives among cases and controls were similar at 2.0 and 1.7 years, respectively. 60 Thus, while inaccurate reporting of family history is a concern as this can lead to misclassification, previous studies suggest that misclassifications for family histories of breast and prostate cancer in the present study are unlikely, although misclassification for family history of endometrial and ovarian cancer is plausible. As with other case-control studies, recall bias is a potential limitation of this study. However, a previous study suggests the self-reported accuracy of family history does not differ between cases and controls. 56 Furthermore, within our dataset, a significant association between family history of CRC and CRC risk (age-adjusted OR = 2.4, 95% CI = 2.0, 2.9) was observed and is similar to previous literature, 10 , 16 , 41 suggesting that the family history information collected is valid.  Limitations The limitations of our study are as follows. First, since an inclusion criterion for cases was being alive at the time of diagnosis, survival bias is a possibility if fatal CRC cases differed from live cases in their reporting of, or actual, family histories of cancers. Second, the OFCCR has a moderate control response rate of 71% for both this current and study and that previously reported, 41 which suggests that our control participants may not necessarily be representative of the general population. Third, since genotype information was available for only 68.9% of our high-risk participants, we may have failed to exclude some participants with high-risk HNPCC mutations, which would mean that our risk estimates are inflated. Similarly, a small number of HNPCC cases may have inadvertently been included in this study, as although MMR mutation screening was thorough based on current knowledge, false negative tests are always possible in genetic testing. Fourth, given the small frequencies and wide CIs for some of our OR estimates, our sample size was relatively small and our statistical power limited for some calculations. Finally, similar to that reported in a previous OFCCR paper 61 the majority of our sample (95%) was Caucasian. While ethnic differences in the association between family histories of hormonal cancer and CRC risk are unclear, at least one previous report 8 found that the odds for breast cancer among first-degree relatives of CRC patients was higher among their Japanese participants compared to all their participants combined. Thus, the applicability of our results to non-Caucasians is uncertain.  Strengths Our study has several notable strengths. First, as the sampling frames for cases and controls were population-based, our study is not influenced by biases associated with hospital- or clinic-based samples. Second, cases were incident, pathology confirmed CRC cases, eliminating the possibility of misclassification on CRC status. Third, we collected extensive information on family histories of first-degree family members, including type of cancer diagnosed and age at diagnosis, allowing for the investigation of family history of cancer at different sites, and possible differences in the association between family history of cancer and CRC risk by kin’s age of cancer diagnosis. Finally, by testing for 19 potential confounders (number of first-degree relatives, number of first-degree female relatives, number of first-degree male relatives, familial risk of CRC, family history of CRC, CRC screening, body mass index, use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking, fiber intake, total fat intake, red meat consumption, fruit consumption, vegetable consumption, physical activity in 20s, physical activity in 30/40s, use of post-menopausal hormone replacement therapy, and use of oral contraceptives) and adjusting for actual confounders applicable to our datasets, our results are unlikely to be influenced by confounding.  Conclusion Our results suggest that a family history of certain hormonal cancers – in particular breast cancer – may put persons in the general population at increased risk for CRC. Authors 19 of a previous study investigating family history of cancers and CRC risk have noted that familial aggregation of cancers can be due to common genetic and environmental factors. Compared to previous studies, we investigated family history of hormonal cancers in greater detail; namely, evaluating the number of first-degree kin diagnosed with cancer and the age of the kin’s cancer diagnosis. Hence, our study adds to the exiting literature by providing intriguing findings regarding the possible association between hormonal cancers and CRC risk. However, given the paucity of existing studies in this area of research, further research is necessary to confirm or refute our findings. Authors of future studies should obtain larger sample sizes in order to have sufficient statistical power for evaluating family history of relatively rare hormonal cancers such as ovarian and endometrial cancer. Explorations into the roles of family history of hormonal cancers in second- and third-degree kin are also warranted. In conclusion, family history of hormonal cancers – particularly breast cancer – may be a risk factor for CRC. Furthermore, the details of such family history such as the number of kin diagnosed and the age of the kin’s breast cancer diagnosis may be important, and thus worth considering when evaluating individual CRC risk. These findings may be of importance to clinicians and genetic counsellors advising persons on cancer prevention and screening recommendations.  Supplementary Material sup 2 sup1  Tables Table 1 Distribution of colorectal cancer cases, controls, and age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio (ASOR) for family history of breast cancer among first-degree relatives. Family history of breast cancer in first-degree kin * Controls All CRC Cases Proximal CRC Cases § Distal CRC Cases ? n = 1953 No. † (%) n = 1512 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI) n = 573 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI) n = 876 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI) Breast cancer among kin     No 1717 (88.6) 1307 (86.5) 1.0 485 (84.6) 1.0 767 (87.7) 1.0     Yes 221 (11.4) 204 (13.5) 1.2 (1.0, 1.5) 88 (15.4) 1.4 (1.1, 1.8) 108 (12.3) 1.1 (0.8, 1.4) Number of kin with breast cancer     None 1717 (88.6) 1307 (86.5) 1.0 485 (84.6) 1.0 767 (87.7) 1.0     1 kin 198 (10.2) 173 (11.5) 1.1 (0.9, 1.4) 73 (12.7) 1.3 (1.0, 1.7) 92 (10.5) 1.0 (0.8, 1.3)     >1 kin 23 (1.2) 31 (2.1) 1.7 (1.0, 2.9) 15 (2.6) 2.2 (1.1, 4.3) 16 (1.8) 1.5 (0.8, 2.8) p for trend 0.03 <0.01 0.30 Age of kin’s breast cancer diagnosis ¶     No kin diagnosed 1717 (90.0) 1307 (87.0) 1.0 485 (85.1) 1.0 767 (88.3) 1.0     <= 50 years of age 65 (3.4) 62 (4.1) 1.2 (0.9, 1.8) 21 (3.7) 1.2 (0.7, 1.9) 38 (4.4) 1.3 (0.8, 1.9)     >50 years of age 125 (6.6) 133 (8.9) 1.4 (1.1, 1.8) 64 (11.2) 1.8 (1.3, 2.5) 64 (7.4) 1.1 (0.8, 1.5) p for trend <0.01 <0.01 0.25 * First-degree kin includes biological mother, sister(s), and daughter(s). † Numbers may not sum to total due to missing values. ‡ Odds ratio adjusted for age and sex. § ICD includes hepatic flexure (153.0), transverse colon (153.1), cecum (153.4), appendix (153.5), ascending colon (153.6), splenic flexure (153.7). ? ICD includes descending colon (153.2), sigmoid colon (153.3), rectosigmoid junction (154.0), rectum (154.1), anal canal (154.2), anus unspecified (154.3), rectum other (154.8). ¶ If more than one kin was diagnosed with the specified cancer, the age of the youngest kin diagnosed with the specified cancer was used to derive the variable. Table 2 Distribution of colorectal cancer cases, controls, age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio (ASOR), and multivariate-adjusted odds ratio (MVOR) for family history of endometrial cancer among first-degree relatives. Family history of endometrial cancer in first-degree kin * Controls All CRC Cases Proximal CRC Cases ** Distal CRC Cases †† n = 1953 No. † (%) n = 1512 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI) OR § (95% CI) n = 573 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI OR § (95% CI) n = 876 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI) OR § (95% CI) Endometrial cancer among kin     No 1902 (98.1) 1439 (95.2) 1.0 1.0 535 (93.4) 1.0 1.0 845 (96.6) 1.0 1.0     Yes 36 (1.9) 72 (4.8) 2.6 (1.7, 4.0) 1.3 (0.8, 2.1) 38 (6.6) 3.6 (2.3, 5.8) 2.0 (1.1, 3.7) 30 (3.4) 1.9 (1.1, 3.0) 0.7 (0.4, 1.4) Number of kin with endometrial cancer     None 1902 (98.1) 1439 (95.2) 1.0 1.0 535 (93.3) 1.0 1.0 845 (96.6) 1.0 1.0     1 kin 35 (1.8) 67 (4.4) 2.5 (1.7, 3.8) 1.3 (0.8, 2.2) 35 (6.1) 3.4 (2.1, 5.6) 2.0 (1.1, 3.7 29 (3.3) 1.9 (1.1, 3.1) 0.8 (0.4, 1.4)     >1 kin 1 (0.1) 5 (0.3) 6.4 (0.7, 55.6) 0.9 (0.1, 8.6) 3 (0.5) 10.6 (1.1, 103.5) 1.9 (0.2, 21.7) 1 (0.1) 1.8 (0.1, 29.4) 0.4 (0.1, 7.3) p for trend <0.01 <0.01 0.01 Age of kin’s endometrial cancer diagnosis ?     No kin diagnosed 1902 (98.5) 1439 (95.4) 1.0 1.0 535 (93.7) 1.0 1.0 845 (96.6) 1.0 1.0     <= 50 years of age 13 (0.7) 25 (1.7) 2.6 (1.3, 5.2) 1.0 (0.4, 2.3) 12 (2.1) 3.4 (1.5, 7.6 1.3 (0.5, 3.5) 9 (1.0) 1.6 (0.7, 3.7) 0.4 (0.1, 1.2)     >50 years of age 17 (0.9) 45 (3.0) 3.5 (2.0, 6.2) 2.0 (1.0, 3.9) 24 (4.2) 4.8 (2.6, 9.2) 3.2 (1.4, 7.3) 21 (2.4) 2.8 (1.5, 5.4) 1.5 (0.7, 3.3) p for trend <0.01 <0.01 <0.01 Men only Women only Controls n = 1042 No. † (%) CRC Cases n = 620 No. † (%) OR ‡‡ (95% CI) OR ¶ (95% CI) Controls n = 911 No. † (%) CRC Cases n = 891 No. † (%) OR ‡‡ (95% CI) OR ¶ (95% CI) Endometrial cancer among kin     No 1018 (98.7) 583 (94.0) 1.0 1.0 884 (97.5) 855 (96.1) 1.0 1.0     Yes 13 (1.3) 37 (6.0) 4.9 (2.6, 9.4) 2.4 (1.0, 5.7) 23 (2.5) 35 (3.9) 1.6 (0.9, 2.7) 1.0 (0.5, 1.8) Number of kin with endometrial cancer     None 1018 (98.7) 583 (94.0) 1.0 1.0 884 (97.5) 855 (96.1) 1.0 1.0     1 kin 13 (1.3) 35 (5.7) 4.7 (2.4, 8.9) 2.4 (1.0, 5.6) 22 (2.4) 32 (3.6) 1.5 (0.9, 2.6) 1.0 (0.5, 1.9)     >1 kin 0 (0.0) 2 (0.3) N/A N/A 1 (0.1) 3 (0.3) 3.1 (0.3, 30.2) 0.8 (0.1, 8.8) p for trend <0.01 0.09 Age of kin’s endometrial cancer diagnosis ?     No kin diagnosed 1018 (98.7) 583 (94.2) 1.0 1.0 884 (98.1) 855 (96.2) 1.0 1.0     <= 50 years of age 7 (0.7) 11 (1.8) 2.8 (1.1, 7.4) 0.7 (0.2, 2.9) 6 (0.7) 14 (1.6) 2.4 (0.9, 6.2) 1.3 (0.4, 3.6)     >50 years of age 6 (0.6) 25 (4.0) 7.1 (2.9, 17.4) 4.2 (1.3, 13.3) 11 (1.2) 20 (2.3) 1.9 (0.9, 3.9) 1.2 (0.5, 2.9) p for trend <0.01 0.03 * First-degree kin includes biological mother, sister(s), and daughter(s). † Numbers may not sum to total due to missing values. ‡ Odds ratio adjusted for age and sex. § Odds ratio adjusted for age, sex, first-degree family history of CRC, physical activity in 20s, and familial CRC risk. ? If more than one kin was diagnosed with the specified cancer, the age of the youngest kin diagnosed with the specified cancer was used to derive the variable. ¶ Adjusted for age, first-degree family history of CRC, physical activity in 20s, and familial CRC risk. ** ICD includes hepatic flexure (153.0), transverse colon (153.1), cecum (153.4), appendix (153.5), ascending colon (153.6), splenic flexure (153.7) †† ICD includes descending colon (153.2), sigmoid colon (153.3), rectosigmoid junction (154.0), rectum (154.1), anal canal (154.2), anus unspecified (154.3), rectum other (154.8) ‡‡ Adjusted for age Table 3 Distribution of colorectal cancer cases, controls, age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio (ASOR), and multivariate-adjusted odds ratio (MVOR) for family history of ovarian cancer among first-degree relatives. Family history of ovarian cancer in first-degree kin * All Participants Men Only Women Only Controls n=1953 No. † (%) CRC Cases n=1512 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI OR § (95% CI) Controls n=1042 No. † (%) CRC Cases n=620 No. † (%) OR ? (95% CI) OR ¶ (95% CI) Controls n=911 No. † (%) CRC Cases n=891 No. † (%) OR ? (95% CI) OR ¶ (95% CI Ovarian cancer in first-degree kin     No 1900 (98.0) 1469 (97.2) 1.0 1.0 1015 (98.5) 596 (96.1) 1.0 1.0 885 (97.6) 872 (98.0) 1.0 1.0     Yes 38 (2.0) 42 (2.8) 1.4 (0.9, 2.2) 0.6 (0.3, 1.0) 16 (1.6) 24 (3.9) 2.6 (1.4, 4.9) 0.9 (0.3, 2.2) 22 (2.4) 18 (2.0) 0.8 (0.4, 1.5) 0.4 (0.2, 0.9) Number of kin diagnosed with ovarian cancer     None 1900 (98.0) 1469 (97.2) 1.0 1.0 1015 (98.5) 596 (96.1) 1.0 1.0 885 (97.6) 872 (98.0) 1.0 1.0     1 kin 38 (2.0) 40 (2.7) 1.4 (0.9, 2.1) 0.5 (0.3, 1.0) 16 (1.6) 22 (3.6) 2.4 (1.2, 0.8 (0.3, 2.1) 22 (2.4) 18 (2.0) 0.8 (0.4, 1.5) 0.4 (0.2, 0.9)     >1 kin 0 (0.0) 2 (0.1) N/A N/A 0 (0.0) 2 (0.3) N/A N/A 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) N/A N/A p for trend 0.08 <0.01 0.63 Age of kin’s ovarian cancer diagnosis **     No kin diagnosed 1900 (98.3) 1469 (97.4) 1.0 1.0 1015 (98.6) 596 (96.1) 1.0 1.0 885 (97.9) 872 (98.2) 1.0 1.0     <= 50 years of age 8 (0.4) 15 (1.0) 2.4 (1.0, 5.9) 1.2 (0.4, 3.8) 2 (0.2) 9 (1.5) 7.8 (1.7, 36.4) 3.6 (0.3, 44.6) 6 (0.7) 6 (0.7) 0.9 (0.3, 2.8) 0.6 (0.1, 2.5)     >50 years of age 25 (1.3) 25 (1.7) 1.3 (0.8, 2.3) 0.5 (0.2, 1.0) 12 (1.2) 15 (2.4) 2.2 (1.0, 4.7) 0.8 (0.3, 2.5) 13 (1.4) 10 (1.1) 0.8 (0.3, 1.7) 0.3 (0.1, 0.9) p for trend 0.13 <0.01 0.62 * First-degree kin includes biological mother, sister(s), and daughter(s). † Numbers may not sum to total due to missing values. ‡ Odds ratio adjusted for age and sex. § Odds ratio adjusted for age, sex, physical activity in 20s, physical activity in 30/40s, and familial CRC risk. ? Odds ratio adjusted for age. ¶ Odds ratio adjusted for age, physical activity in 20s, physical activity in 30/40s, and familial CRC risk. ** If more than one kin was diagnosed with the specified cancer, the age of the youngest kin diagnosed with the specified cancer was used to derive the variable. Table 4 Distribution of colorectal cancer cases, controls, and age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio (ASOR) for family history of prostate cancer among first-degree relatives. Family history of prostate cancer in first-degree kin * Controls n = 1953 No. † (%) CRC Cases n = 1512 No. † (%) OR ‡ (95% CI) OR § (95% CI) Prostate cancer in first-degree kin     No 1772 (91.4) 1358 (89.9) 1.0 1.0     Yes 166 (8.6) 153 (10.1) 1.2 (1.0, 1.5) 1.0 (0.8, 1.3 Number of kin diagnosed with prostate cancer     None 1772 (91.4) 1358 (89.9) 1.0 1.0     1 kin 154 (8.0) 138 (9.1) 1.2 (0.9, 1.5) 0.9 (0.7, 1.2)     >1 kin 12 (0.6) 15 (1.0) 1.6 (0.7, 3.5) 2.1 (0.9, 4.8) p for trend 0.09 Age of kin’s prostate cancer diagnosis ?     No kin diagnosed 1772 (92.6) 1358 (90.8) 1.0 1.0     <= 50 years of age 7 (0.5) 1 (0.1) 0.2 (0.1, 1.8) 0.1 (0.1, 1.0)     >50 years of age 135 (7.1) 137 (9.2) 1.3 (1.0, 1.7) 1.1 (0.8, 1.5) p for trend 0.04 * First-degree kin includes biological father, brother(s), and son(s). † Numbers may not sum to total due to missing values. ‡ Odds ratio adjusted for age and sex. § Odds ratio adjusted for age, sex, and familial CRC risk. ? If more than one kin was diagnosed with the specified cancer, the age of the youngest kin diagnosed with the specified cancer was used to derive the variable. 