Effects of bisphenol A on adipokine release from human adipose tissue: Implications for the metabolic syndrome Summary Bisphenol A (BPA) is one of the most prevalent and best studied endocrine disruptors. After years of exposure to consumer products containing BPA, most individuals tested have circulating BPA at the low nanomolar levels. In addition to its well documented actions on the reproductive system, BPA exerts a wide variety of metabolic effects. This review summarizes recent findings on the ability of BPA, at environmentally relevant doses, to inhibit adiponectin and stimulate the release of inflammatory adipokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor ? (TNF?) from human adipose tissue. Expression of several classical and non-classical estrogen receptors in human adipose tissue raises the possibility of their involvement as mediators of BPA actions. The implications of these observations to the obesity-related metabolic syndrome and its sequalae are discussed.  Conclusions and Perspectives To firmly establish the metabolic effects of BPA, it is critically important to recognize the full spectrum of its actions on human fat. Although the value of rodents and murine adipocytes as experimental models is undisputed, there are sufficient differences in adipocyte biology between rodents and humans to warrant prudence ( Ben Jonathan et al., 2008 ). For example, the regional distribution of fat depots, their cellular composition (e.g., brown vs white fat, infiltration by macrophages), and the regulation of resistin, agouti protein, adipsin, and adrenergic receptors are dissimilar in rodents and humans. Interspecies differences in the cellular milieu are highlighted by the dependence on serum for adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells, while human preadipocytes undergo differentiation without serum ( Hauner et al., 2000 ). Intrinsic differences between the species are also exemplified by the suppression of adiponectin expression in 3T3-L1 cells by insulin but its induction by insulin in human adipose tissue ( Whitehead et al., 2006 ). Most attention to date has focused on high caloric food intake and sedentary life style as the root causes of the obesity epidemic. However, the roles of genetic predisposition and environmental factors should not be ignored. Lower circulating adiponectin levels and elevated inflammatory cytokines are strongly associated with increased risks of obesity-related diseases. Given its prevalence in the environment, presence in serum from humans worldwide, suppression of adiponectin and increased IL-6 and TNF? release at nanomolar concentrations, BPA may be the bona fide endocrine disruptor that adversely affects metabolic homeostasis. Fig 4 presents a model which incorporates input by environmental factors to the combined effects of diet, exercise and genetics on the development and manifestation of the metabolic syndrome.  Figures Fig 1 Structures of bisphenol A (BPA) and related compounds: estradiol (E2), polycarbonates, diethylstilbestrol (DES), and bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (BADGE). Fig 2 Comparison of the effects of BPA (B), estradiol (E), and ICI (I) on adipokine release from human adipose tissue explants. Upper left panel: Dose-dependent effects of BPA on adiponectin release from a representative patient (Means±SEM of 5 replicates). All other panels show release as percent of control (C). Values are means±SEM; N = 4 patients. Subcutaneous adipose tissue explants, obtained from patients undergoing abdominoplasty, were incubated for 6 hrs with the various compounds. Conditioned media were analyzed for adiponectin, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor ? (TNF?) by their respective ELISAs. * designates significant difference from controls (P<0.05). Fig 3 Relative expression of classical and non-classical estrogen receptors in human visceral adipose tissue, as determined by real-time PCR. Values are presented as percent of ER? expression on a logarithmic scale to highlight low abundance receptors. ER?/?-estrogen receptor ? or ?; GPR30 - G-protein coupled receptor 30; ERR?/?/? - estrogen related receptor ?, ?, or ?. (Redrawn and modified from Hugo et al. 2008 ). Fig 4 A model depicting an integrated view of the various factors that affect the obesity-related metabolic syndrome. BPA suppresses adiponectin and stimulates inflammatory cytokines by acting on adipocytes and infiltrating macrophages. Adiponectin is an insulin sensitizer whereas cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF? promote insulin resistance. The opposing actions of BPA on these adipokines contribute to the development and manifestation of the metabolic syndrome. 