Fibroblasts regulate monocyte response to ECM-derived matrix: The effects on monocyte adhesion and the production of inflammatory, matrix remodeling, and growth factor proteins Monocytes/macrophages and fibroblasts are recruited to the injury site and orchestrate the host response and tissue repair. We have previously shown that polyethylene glycol (PEG)-ylated arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) sequence grafted onto an extracellular matrix (ECM)-based semi-interpenetrating network (sIPN) enhances monocyte adhesion, and modulates subsequent gene expression and release of inflammatory and matrix remodeling factors. In this study, we investigate the direct influence of fibroblasts on monocyte response to this ECM mimic. Key wound-healing factors in inflammation, matrix remodeling, and regeneration were analyzed to gain insight into the interrelated role of regulation in fibroblast-monocyte interaction. Interleukin-1alpha/?1beta (IL-1?/?1?), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-? (TNF-?), monocyte inflammatory protein-1alpha/?1beta (MIP-1?/?1?), transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-?), monocyte chemoattractant factor (MCP-1), matrix metalloproteinase-2/?9 (MMP-2/?9), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) were analyzed. Fibroblasts decreased monocyte adhesion onto the RGD-grafted sIPN while increasing monocyte GM-CSF on all surfaces over time except for on RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPN at 96 h. Monocytes decreased initial fibroblast IL-1? and TGF-?, but drastically increased fibroblast MMP-2 and GM-CSF. Monocyte IL-1?, TNF-?, MIP-1?, MCP-1, MMP-9, and GM-CSF expression was increased over time in the presence of all sIPNs, and when the sIPNs were immobilized with ligands, a down-regulation of fibroblast IL-1?, MIP-1?, MIP-1? compared with unmodified sIPN was observed. When the ligand immobilized was RGD, monocyte TGF-?, MIP-1?, and VEGF expression was increased while monocyte GM-CSF was decreased at selected time points. These results showed a dynamic monocyte response to selected ECM components in the presence of fibroblasts.  INTRODUCTION During wound healing, a large number of monocytes are quickly recruited into the site of injury, and they play a crucial role in orchestrating the subsequent tissue repair. 1 – 3 Monocyte/macrophage response to the extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as fibronectin, collagen, and gelatin is an active field of research. 4 – 7 Some of these ECM proteins contain proline-histidine-serine-arginine-asparagine (PHSRN) and conserved motifs such as arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) that allow monocyte integrin-mediated cell attachment, focal contact formation, motility, and protein expression. 8 – 11 RGD has been utilized extensively to modify biomaterials to promote integrin-mediated cell attachment and we have previously demonstrated that RGD grafted onto an ECM-based semi-interpenetrating network (sIPN) enhances cell adhesion and modulates signaling, and cytokine and gene expression. 12 – 15 We have shown that adherent monocyte density was increased by RGD tethered onto a flexible polyethylene glycol (PEG) linker on the gelatin-based sIPN, and that subsequent protein and genetic regulation of IL-1? and MMP-2/?9 were increased in response to sIPNs. 13 , 14 RGD-PEG-grafted sIPNs also enhanced cellularity and organized ECM reconstruction over time in vivo in dermal wound-healing models. 16 In this study, we sought to investigate the influence of fibroblasts on monocyte response to this ECM mimic. Both fibroblasts and monocytes are present during the granulation stage of wound healing and they coordinate a highly controlled set of inflammatory, ECM production, and breakdown events during wound healing. 17 , 18 However, there are few studies investigating the role of fibroblasts in directly regulating human monocyte response to ECM components. 19 – 21 Key wound-healing factors in inflammation, matrix remodeling, and regeneration were analyzed to gain insight into the interrelated role of regulation in fibroblast–monocyte interaction.  METHODS AND MATERIALS Ligand-PEG-grafted gelatin synthesis: PEG-diol modification to Bis-N-hydroxysuccinimide-PEG and Ligand-PEG grafting to gelatin N-hydroxysuccinimide activated esters were prepared from PEGdiol (2k) as previously described. 22 All starting materials were purchased from Aldrich unless otherwise specified. First, bis-t-butylacetate-PEG (Bis-tBuOAc-PEG) was prepared by activating PEG with sodium hydride and then by reacting it with t-butyl bromoacetate for 24 h. T-butyl bromo-acetate was filtered and extracted to remove impurities and analyzed by 1H NMR. Bis-tBuOAc-PEG was then reacted with 4N HCl in dioxane to yield bis-carboxylate-PEG (bis-COOH-PEG). Bis-COOH-PEG was converted to bis-N-hydroxysuccinimide-PEG (bis-NHS-PEG) by adding bis-COOH-PEG to an oxalyl chloride solution ( 2M in CH2Cl2, 15.6 mmol) then adding one drop of catalytic DMF slowly via syringe, under argon, where catalytic DMF refers to one drop of DMF in 1 mL of CH2Cl2. In THF cooled to –108C, N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) in THF was added (5.71 mmol), followed by pyridine, then stirred for 2 h at room temperature. The bis-NHS-PEG powder was filtered and precipitated in ether then dried. 1H NMR analysis was carried out to confirm bis-NHS-PEG purity. 16 NHS-mPEG was prepared as described above, but from monomethoxy polyethylene glycol (mPEG) rather than PEGdiol. RGD and PHSRN for use in preparation of PEGy-lated peptides were prepared following standard solid phase peptide synthesis based on Fmoc resin cleavage and deprotection. 23 , 24 Peptide purity was confirmed at >95% with reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography. RGD and PHSRN identity was analyzed with H NMR and MALDI mass spectrometry as described previously (University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center, Madison, WI). 16 Bis-NHS-PEG (0.43 mmol) was dissolved in 5 mL of DMF and GGG, RGD, or PHSRN (0.52 mmol) was added, followed by a dropwise addition of N,N -diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA) (0.52 mmol). After 45 min, the peptide-PEG solution was poured into a 1% gelatin (0.008 mol gelatin, 0.21 mol lysine) in 1× PBS solution and adjusted to pH 8. For mPEG conjugation onto gelatin backbone, 1.5 g of NHS-mPEG was dissolved in 100 mL of 1× PBS. After 60 min, purification was carried out with a Millipore filter apparatus with a 30 kDa filter, rinsing with pH = 4 DI water. The product was lyophilized and characterized with the 2,4,6-trinitro-benzenesulphonic acid assay for lysyl group modification and with gel permeation chromatography for average molecular weight determination and conjugation. 25 , 12 Lysyl modification averaged 70% for mPEG gelatin, 73% for GGG-PEG gelatin, 77% for RGD-PEG gelatin, and 79% for PHSRN-PEG gelatin ( n = 3). Preparation of semi-interpenetrating networks Semi-interpenetrating networks (sIPNs) were +prepared as described elsewhere. 12 , 13 Briefly, mPEG-gelatin, GGG-PEG-gelatin, RGD-PEG-gelatin, PHSRN-PEG-gelatin, or unmodified gelatin was dissolved in ddH2O (10% w/v) by heating at 608C. The gelatin solution was added PEG diacrylate (PEGdA, M n ? 575 Da) to form a 4:6 gelatin:PEGdA weight ratio. About 20 µL of 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenyl-acetophe-none (DMPA) initiator solution (0.02 g DMPA in 0.5 g PEGdA) was added to the gelatin/PEGdA mixture, vortexed, and 175 µL was transferred to the polycarbonate transwell insert (3.0 µm pore size, d = 12 mm, Corning Inc., Corning, NY) and polymerized directly in the insert via exposure to light emitting diode (?max = 365 nm at 10 cm) for 5 min. The resultant sIPNs were dipped into a 70% ethanol solution for 30 min for sterilization, rinsed three times with 1× PBS and transferred to 12-well plates to equilibrate for 3 days in 1× PBS all under 48C. Density of peptide-PEG-grafted sIPN was previously analyzed on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPNs via ELISA using RGD directed antibody. 26 We found that accessible RGD concentration (µmole/mL) on the unmodified sIPN surface was significantly ( p < 0.05) lower compared with that of RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN. 27 sIPN containing transwells and polycarbonate transwells were equilibrated in RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, Calsbad, CA) at 378C and 5% CO2 for 2 h prior to monocyte seeding. Monocyte/fibroblast monoculture and coculture Neonatal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF) (Lonza Group Ltd., Switzerland) between passages 4 through 7 were seeded in a 12-well TCPS plate (Corning Inc., Corning, CA) and cultured to a monolayer confluency (approximately >90%) in fibroblast growth media (FGM) plus 5% FBS as previously described. 28 Once fibroblasts reached confluency, the media was removed and replaced with RPMI 1640 containing 10% human serum for 3 days prior to the experiment. Effects of the media transition were optimized prior to the experiment and fibroblast confluency/cell density, morphology, and viability on TCPS were monitored at 48 and 168 h. Confluency was unaffected by RPMI with 10% human serum through 168 h and LIVE/DEAD assay (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) confirmed >95% fibroblast viability was also maintained by this media, as observed with FGM supplemented with 5% FBS ( n = 3). Morphological observations also revealed that the characteristic spindle shape (data not shown) was unaltered by RPMI supplemented with 10% human serum. This indicates that the culture medium employed in the coculture sets in this study did not adversely affect the behavior of fibroblasts. Human peripheral blood monocytes were isolated from citrated whole blood of a healthy, medication-refrained adult volunteer using a density-gradient, nonadhesion method previously described in detail. 14 , 29 Briefly, citrated blood (100 ? 150 mL) was diluted 1:2 with PBS/5 mM EDTA (PBSE), layered onto Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden), and centrifuged at 400 g for 30 min (no brake). The resultant mononuclear cells were serially washed three times with 50 volumes of PBSE by centrifugation at 350, 200, and 150g for 10 min each. Cells were resuspended in 2 ? 3 mL of PBSE, layered onto two 10-mL columns of FBS, and centrifuged at 120g for 10 min. The same procedure was repeated, after which cells were resuspended in 3.5 mL of PBSE, added to 6.7 mL of Percoll (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), mixed, and centrifuged at 2000g for 25 min (no brake). The resultant topmost cell layer (1 mL) was washed twice with 50 volumes of cold RPMI 1640 medium resuspended in cold RPMI 1640, and seeded immediately. Co-culture set up: Freshly isolated cells were seeded onto each surface on the transwell insert (i.e. polycarbonate transwell or ligand-PEG-grafted sIPN surface) at a concentration of 106 cells/mL in RPMI 1640 culture medium and 10% autologous serum at 37°C and 5% CO2 and cultured up to 96 h. Once the monocytes were seeded onto the transwell insert with or without sIPN, it was immediately but gently placed into the well with a confluent layer of fibroblasts. Figure 1 outlines the monocyte and fibroblast coculture schematic in the presence of the sIPN. Chamber A refers to the upper chamber where monocytes were seeded and chamber B refers to the bottom chamber where a confluent layer of fibroblasts were cultured. Monocultures were constructed in the same set up as cocultures, but with only monocytes in chamber A for monocyte monocultures and only fibroblasts in chamber B for fibroblast monocultures. While monocytes in monocultures were in direct contact with sIPNs or polycarbonate transwell, a confluent layer of fibroblasts on TCPS in chamber B in fibro-blast monocultures were in the presence of, but were not in direct contact with the various surfaces. Supernatants were collected from both chamber A and B at all time points and all monocultures and cocultures. In separate experiments, small molecule diffusion across the sIPN was also examined with fluorescein (332.31 g/mol, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 67 µg/mL in PBS where 0.5 mL of this solution was place in chamber A and 1.5 mL of PBS without the dye molecule was placed in chamber B and absorbance was measured at 469 nm at 5, 30, 60, and 120 min, all under ambient temperature. Diffusion across chambers was observed as early as 5 min, and by 120 min both chambers had equilibrated with 16.4 µg/mL in chamber A and 13.4 µg/mL in chamber B. A portion of the fluorescein was entrapped within the sIPN thus absorbance readings in both chambers did not reflect the total concentration throughout 120 min. We also observed previously that time to maximum percent released of basic fibroblast growth factor out of the sIPN was 2 h. 30 Live/dead adherent monocyte assay, ELISA, and microsphere-based multiplex protein assay At 2, 24, and 96 h, all surfaces were rinsed with D-PBS and stained with LIVE/DEAD (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Working dilutions of calcein-AM (2 µM) and ethidium homodimer-1 (4 µM) were made in D-PBS immediately before use. For each sample well in chamber A, a minimum of two different areas at 0.55 mm2 each were imaged using an inverted microscope. Confluent fibroblasts in chamber B were not quantified but LIVE/DEAD assay was still carried out for verification of fibroblast viability. Supernatants were collected from both chamber A and B at 2, 24, and 96 h. With the supernatant collected at 2, 24, and 96 h, all proteins were analyzed with the microsphere-based multiplex protein assay (Linco Research, St. Charles, MO), except MMP-2 and MMP-9, where the ELISA (Raybiotech Inc., Norcross, GA) method was used. The ELISA and the microsphere-based multiplex protein assays were carried out according to manufacturers’ instructions. The protein concentrations reported contain the concentrations in addition to the protein concentrations from the 10% autologous serum in the media. Statistical Analysis Cell adhesion and ELISA data were expressed as the mean of triplicate wells ± standard deviation ( n = 3). Adherent live cell density data and protein concentrations were analyzed by unpaired Student t-test where p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.  Ligand-PEG-grafted gelatin synthesis: PEG-diol modification to Bis-N-hydroxysuccinimide-PEG and Ligand-PEG grafting to gelatin N-hydroxysuccinimide activated esters were prepared from PEGdiol (2k) as previously described. 22 All starting materials were purchased from Aldrich unless otherwise specified. First, bis-t-butylacetate-PEG (Bis-tBuOAc-PEG) was prepared by activating PEG with sodium hydride and then by reacting it with t-butyl bromoacetate for 24 h. T-butyl bromo-acetate was filtered and extracted to remove impurities and analyzed by 1H NMR. Bis-tBuOAc-PEG was then reacted with 4N HCl in dioxane to yield bis-carboxylate-PEG (bis-COOH-PEG). Bis-COOH-PEG was converted to bis-N-hydroxysuccinimide-PEG (bis-NHS-PEG) by adding bis-COOH-PEG to an oxalyl chloride solution ( 2M in CH2Cl2, 15.6 mmol) then adding one drop of catalytic DMF slowly via syringe, under argon, where catalytic DMF refers to one drop of DMF in 1 mL of CH2Cl2. In THF cooled to –108C, N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) in THF was added (5.71 mmol), followed by pyridine, then stirred for 2 h at room temperature. The bis-NHS-PEG powder was filtered and precipitated in ether then dried. 1H NMR analysis was carried out to confirm bis-NHS-PEG purity. 16 NHS-mPEG was prepared as described above, but from monomethoxy polyethylene glycol (mPEG) rather than PEGdiol. RGD and PHSRN for use in preparation of PEGy-lated peptides were prepared following standard solid phase peptide synthesis based on Fmoc resin cleavage and deprotection. 23 , 24 Peptide purity was confirmed at >95% with reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography. RGD and PHSRN identity was analyzed with H NMR and MALDI mass spectrometry as described previously (University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center, Madison, WI). 16 Bis-NHS-PEG (0.43 mmol) was dissolved in 5 mL of DMF and GGG, RGD, or PHSRN (0.52 mmol) was added, followed by a dropwise addition of N,N -diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA) (0.52 mmol). After 45 min, the peptide-PEG solution was poured into a 1% gelatin (0.008 mol gelatin, 0.21 mol lysine) in 1× PBS solution and adjusted to pH 8. For mPEG conjugation onto gelatin backbone, 1.5 g of NHS-mPEG was dissolved in 100 mL of 1× PBS. After 60 min, purification was carried out with a Millipore filter apparatus with a 30 kDa filter, rinsing with pH = 4 DI water. The product was lyophilized and characterized with the 2,4,6-trinitro-benzenesulphonic acid assay for lysyl group modification and with gel permeation chromatography for average molecular weight determination and conjugation. 25 , 12 Lysyl modification averaged 70% for mPEG gelatin, 73% for GGG-PEG gelatin, 77% for RGD-PEG gelatin, and 79% for PHSRN-PEG gelatin ( n = 3).  Preparation of semi-interpenetrating networks Semi-interpenetrating networks (sIPNs) were +prepared as described elsewhere. 12 , 13 Briefly, mPEG-gelatin, GGG-PEG-gelatin, RGD-PEG-gelatin, PHSRN-PEG-gelatin, or unmodified gelatin was dissolved in ddH2O (10% w/v) by heating at 608C. The gelatin solution was added PEG diacrylate (PEGdA, M n ? 575 Da) to form a 4:6 gelatin:PEGdA weight ratio. About 20 µL of 2,2-dimethoxy-2-phenyl-acetophe-none (DMPA) initiator solution (0.02 g DMPA in 0.5 g PEGdA) was added to the gelatin/PEGdA mixture, vortexed, and 175 µL was transferred to the polycarbonate transwell insert (3.0 µm pore size, d = 12 mm, Corning Inc., Corning, NY) and polymerized directly in the insert via exposure to light emitting diode (?max = 365 nm at 10 cm) for 5 min. The resultant sIPNs were dipped into a 70% ethanol solution for 30 min for sterilization, rinsed three times with 1× PBS and transferred to 12-well plates to equilibrate for 3 days in 1× PBS all under 48C. Density of peptide-PEG-grafted sIPN was previously analyzed on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPNs via ELISA using RGD directed antibody. 26 We found that accessible RGD concentration (µmole/mL) on the unmodified sIPN surface was significantly ( p < 0.05) lower compared with that of RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN. 27 sIPN containing transwells and polycarbonate transwells were equilibrated in RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, Calsbad, CA) at 378C and 5% CO2 for 2 h prior to monocyte seeding.  Monocyte/fibroblast monoculture and coculture Neonatal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF) (Lonza Group Ltd., Switzerland) between passages 4 through 7 were seeded in a 12-well TCPS plate (Corning Inc., Corning, CA) and cultured to a monolayer confluency (approximately >90%) in fibroblast growth media (FGM) plus 5% FBS as previously described. 28 Once fibroblasts reached confluency, the media was removed and replaced with RPMI 1640 containing 10% human serum for 3 days prior to the experiment. Effects of the media transition were optimized prior to the experiment and fibroblast confluency/cell density, morphology, and viability on TCPS were monitored at 48 and 168 h. Confluency was unaffected by RPMI with 10% human serum through 168 h and LIVE/DEAD assay (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) confirmed >95% fibroblast viability was also maintained by this media, as observed with FGM supplemented with 5% FBS ( n = 3). Morphological observations also revealed that the characteristic spindle shape (data not shown) was unaltered by RPMI supplemented with 10% human serum. This indicates that the culture medium employed in the coculture sets in this study did not adversely affect the behavior of fibroblasts. Human peripheral blood monocytes were isolated from citrated whole blood of a healthy, medication-refrained adult volunteer using a density-gradient, nonadhesion method previously described in detail. 14 , 29 Briefly, citrated blood (100 ? 150 mL) was diluted 1:2 with PBS/5 mM EDTA (PBSE), layered onto Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden), and centrifuged at 400 g for 30 min (no brake). The resultant mononuclear cells were serially washed three times with 50 volumes of PBSE by centrifugation at 350, 200, and 150g for 10 min each. Cells were resuspended in 2 ? 3 mL of PBSE, layered onto two 10-mL columns of FBS, and centrifuged at 120g for 10 min. The same procedure was repeated, after which cells were resuspended in 3.5 mL of PBSE, added to 6.7 mL of Percoll (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), mixed, and centrifuged at 2000g for 25 min (no brake). The resultant topmost cell layer (1 mL) was washed twice with 50 volumes of cold RPMI 1640 medium resuspended in cold RPMI 1640, and seeded immediately. Co-culture set up: Freshly isolated cells were seeded onto each surface on the transwell insert (i.e. polycarbonate transwell or ligand-PEG-grafted sIPN surface) at a concentration of 106 cells/mL in RPMI 1640 culture medium and 10% autologous serum at 37°C and 5% CO2 and cultured up to 96 h. Once the monocytes were seeded onto the transwell insert with or without sIPN, it was immediately but gently placed into the well with a confluent layer of fibroblasts. Figure 1 outlines the monocyte and fibroblast coculture schematic in the presence of the sIPN. Chamber A refers to the upper chamber where monocytes were seeded and chamber B refers to the bottom chamber where a confluent layer of fibroblasts were cultured. Monocultures were constructed in the same set up as cocultures, but with only monocytes in chamber A for monocyte monocultures and only fibroblasts in chamber B for fibroblast monocultures. While monocytes in monocultures were in direct contact with sIPNs or polycarbonate transwell, a confluent layer of fibroblasts on TCPS in chamber B in fibro-blast monocultures were in the presence of, but were not in direct contact with the various surfaces. Supernatants were collected from both chamber A and B at all time points and all monocultures and cocultures. In separate experiments, small molecule diffusion across the sIPN was also examined with fluorescein (332.31 g/mol, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 67 µg/mL in PBS where 0.5 mL of this solution was place in chamber A and 1.5 mL of PBS without the dye molecule was placed in chamber B and absorbance was measured at 469 nm at 5, 30, 60, and 120 min, all under ambient temperature. Diffusion across chambers was observed as early as 5 min, and by 120 min both chambers had equilibrated with 16.4 µg/mL in chamber A and 13.4 µg/mL in chamber B. A portion of the fluorescein was entrapped within the sIPN thus absorbance readings in both chambers did not reflect the total concentration throughout 120 min. We also observed previously that time to maximum percent released of basic fibroblast growth factor out of the sIPN was 2 h. 30  Live/dead adherent monocyte assay, ELISA, and microsphere-based multiplex protein assay At 2, 24, and 96 h, all surfaces were rinsed with D-PBS and stained with LIVE/DEAD (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Working dilutions of calcein-AM (2 µM) and ethidium homodimer-1 (4 µM) were made in D-PBS immediately before use. For each sample well in chamber A, a minimum of two different areas at 0.55 mm2 each were imaged using an inverted microscope. Confluent fibroblasts in chamber B were not quantified but LIVE/DEAD assay was still carried out for verification of fibroblast viability. Supernatants were collected from both chamber A and B at 2, 24, and 96 h. With the supernatant collected at 2, 24, and 96 h, all proteins were analyzed with the microsphere-based multiplex protein assay (Linco Research, St. Charles, MO), except MMP-2 and MMP-9, where the ELISA (Raybiotech Inc., Norcross, GA) method was used. The ELISA and the microsphere-based multiplex protein assays were carried out according to manufacturers’ instructions. The protein concentrations reported contain the concentrations in addition to the protein concentrations from the 10% autologous serum in the media.  Statistical Analysis Cell adhesion and ELISA data were expressed as the mean of triplicate wells ± standard deviation ( n = 3). Adherent live cell density data and protein concentrations were analyzed by unpaired Student t-test where p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Fibroblasts decrease monocyte adhesion onto RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN The presence of fibroblasts decreased initial monocyte adhesion on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN. At 2 h, adherent monocyte density in monocyte monoculture and coculture was significantly higher on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPNs when compared with that on all other surfaces with the exception of unmodified sIPN in coculture ( Table I ). Furthermore, adherent monocyte density on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN was approximately twofold less in coculture compared with that in monocyte monoculture at 2 h. On other surfaces, there were no significant differences in adherent monocyte density when comparing monocyte monoculture and coculture at 2 and 24 h. Our previous studies had shown that monocytes adhered at significantly -/GGG-PEG-grafted sIPN when compared with tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) and PEG-only hydrogels. 13 , 31 RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN mediated enhanced monocyte adhesion in a ligand-integrin dependent fashion and that sub-unit ?1- and ?3-containing integrins were critical in mediating this observation. Although enhanced monocyte adhesion on RGD-grafted surfaces is consistent with others’ findings, fibroblasts inhibiting this enhanced monocyte adhesion is unexpected. Fibroblast-monocyte protein regulation: Attenuated inflammatory and up-regulated growth and matrix remodeling factors To gain insight into monocyte-fibroblast regulated proteins in the presence of the ECM-derived matrix as a communication conduit, we quantified several growth factors and inflammatory and remodeling proteins. We found that monocyte and fibroblast in coculture resulted in increased GM-CSF concentrations in chambers A and B at 24 and 96 h, except with RGD- and PHSRN-PEG-grafted sIPN at 96 h ( Fig. 2 ). Under monoculture conditions, GM-CSF was expressed by both monocytes and fibroblasts; however, only low levels were expressed in our fibroblast monocultures. Under monocyte monocultures in the presence of the RGD- and PHSRN-grafted sIPN, a significant increase in GM-CSF concentration was observed from 2 to 24 h as observed with other surfaces, but by 96 h, levels were significantly decreased. It has been reported that the integrin ?5 subunit mRNA is down-regulated by GM-CSF in a dose-dependent manner. 32 In this study, we observed drastically increased GM-CSF levels from 2 to 24 h along with decreased monocyte adhesion on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN at 2 and 96 h in coculture compared with monoculture. Hence, our results suggest that the decreased monocyte adhesion on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN in the presence of fibroblasts may be a result of a monocyte-fibroblast regulation that has been indicated in wound healing and likely the down-regulation of monocyte integrin by the increased GM-CSF levels up until 24 h. Inflammatory factors were also directed by the presence of fibroblasts. In monocyte monocultures, high IL-1? ( Fig. 3 ) and TGF-? ( Fig. 4 ) concentrations were observed in chambers A and B at 2 h in the presence of polycarbonate, but the presence of fibro-blasts significantly decreased those concentrations in coculture. Monocytes also attenuated initial fibro-blast IL-1? and TGF-? expression. For example, IL-1? concentrations in chambers A and B from fibro-blast monoculture were generally significantly higher at 2 h compared with that from coculture at 2 h, in the presence of all surfaces. Although IL-1? and TGF-? were expressed more in monocytes/macrophages, our results indicate that significant expression was also observed in our fibroblast monocultures that was initially decreased in cocultures. In addition to inflammatory and growth factors, we characterized matrix remodeling factors critical in the proliferation and remodeling phase of wound healing. Monocytes induced fibroblast expression of MMP-2 ( Fig. 5 ). For example, MMP-2 levels from chamber B in fibroblast monocultures were generally consistent from 2 to 96 h. In monocyte monocultures, subtle increases in MMP-2 levels were observed from 2 to 96 h. However, in cocultures versus monocultures, MMP-2 concentrations from chamber B were drastically increased at 96 h to concentrations beyond the detection limit (>18,000 pg/mL). This high concentration was also observed in chamber A only on polycarbonate and sIPN containing unmodified gelatin at 96 h, indicating different protein transport property between the unmodified and ligand-grafted sIPNs. Although both fibroblasts and monocytes express MMP-2, our data indicate that the presence of both cell types enhanced fibroblast MMP-2 expression at 96 h especially with ligand-immobilized sIPN suggesting the synergistic interaction between fibroblasts and monocytes during the matrix remodeling process. Although MMP-2 possesses important implications in tissue remodeling, angio-genesis, and foreign body giant reaction, GM-CSF also plays an important role in these processes and a closely regulated relationship between growth factors and matrix metalloproteases exists. 2 , 33 , 34 GM-CSF has been reported to induce MMP-2 expression and our data shows drastically increased GM-CSF levels at 24 h and MMP-2 concentrations at 96 h only in cocultures and not in monocultures. 35 This suggests a monocyte-fibroblast paracrine mediated MMP-2 induction by GM-CSF in coculture. Inflammatory proteins can also induce growth factors and matrix remodeling agents as these factors are also closely intertwined players in activation and regulation of the inflammatory phase that eventually progress through the proliferative and remodeling stage. 36 Our data suggest that though initial fibro-blast inflammatory factors could be attenuated, these inflammatory factors increased in concentration with time, and they could up-regulate growth and matrix remodeling factors. ECM-derived matrix mediated monocyte-fibroblast protein regulation: Expression and transport are dependent on sIPN and ligand immobilization of the sIPN Although culture condition (i.e. coculture versus monoculture) mediated IL-1?, TGF-?, GM-CSF, and MMP-2 expression, the ECM-based sIPN predominantly mediated the expression of other monocyte inflammatory and remodeling proteins such as IL-1? , TNF-?, MIP-1?, and MMP-9. In both monocyte monoculture and coculture, the presence of sIPNs significantly elevated IL-1? ( Fig. 6 ), TNF-? (data not shown), and MIP-1? ( Fig. 7 ) concentrations from 2 to 24 h in chamber A when compared with the polycarbonate controls. MCP-1 concentrations in chamber A also increased in monocyte monocultures and cocultures in the presence of all sIPNs at 24 and 96 h when compared with the polycarbonate controls (data not shown). As inflammatory factors such as TNF-? and IL-1? have been reported to stimulate MCP-1 levels in various cell types, the sIPN substrata’s modulation of these inflammatory proteins may hold a critical role in activation of a cascade of events crucial to wound healing. 37 , 38 Furthermore, MMP-9 levels at 96 h in chamber A were significantly elevated in the presence of sIPNs and not the polycarbonate controls in both cocultures and monocyte monocultures ( Fig. 8 ). These results are consistent with others’ findings that the ECM substratum can play a critical role in increasing MMP-9 levels over time. 39 , 40 GM-CSF levels at 24 h were also increased in response to the ECM-derived matrix, but in cocultures, this increase was amplified by the presence of fibroblasts. Additionally, TNF-? and IL-1? have been shown in literature to be common inducers of matrix remodeling and growth factors such as MMP-9 and GM-CSF. 41 – 43 The inflammatory proteins and the ECM-derived sIPN are likely to have a cooperative enhancement effect on GM-CSF and MMP-9 expression. In addition to sIPN-mediated effects, ligand immobilization on the sIPNs led to varied protein expression and transport compared with unmodified sIPN. In the presence of unmodified sIPN, TGF-? concentrations in chambers A and B were generally significantly lower at 24 h and significantly higher at 2 and 24 h in monocyte and fibroblast monocultures, respectively, when compared with sIPN immobilized with ligand. IL-1? concentrations in chambers A and B at 24 h were significantly higher with unmodified sIPN when compared with ligand-grafted sIPN in monocyte and fibroblast monocultures. In fibroblast monoculture, IL-1? in chambers A and B were significantly higher with unmodified sIPNs versus ligand-grafted sIPN at 2 h as well, and MIP-1? (data not shown) and MIP-1? also showed higher concentrations at 2 h in the presence of unmodified sIPN compared with ligand-grafted sIPN. The increased inflammatory agents IL-1?, MIP-1?, and MIP-1? could be the result of the greater rate of gelatin dissolution from the unmodified sIPN versus the ligand-PEG-grafted sIPN that we have observed previously and in separate experiments (data not shown). 44 Taken together, the immobilization of the ligand-PEG on the sIPN appears to down-regulate certain key proinflammatory mediators such as IL-1?, MIP-1?, and MIP-1? in fibroblast monocultures. Additionally, the matrix also regulated the transport of these proteins, depending on ligand immobilization on the sIPN. For TNF-? (data not shown), we observed concentrations at 24 h in chamber B that were significantly higher in the presence of unmodified gelatin compared with all other ligand immobilized sIPN in monocyte monocultures, though concentrations in chamber A at 24 h did not differ in the presence of unmodified sIPN compared to other ligand immobilized sIPN. Similarly, MMP-2 concentrations in chamber B at 96 h were over the detection limit of 18000 pg/mL in the presence of all surfaces while, in chamber A at 96 h, only those in the presence of polycarbonate and unmodified sIPN reflected the concentrations over the detection limit. These results indicate a selective transport property for TNF-? and MMP-2 across the peptide-modified sIPN and that this selectivity is less observed in unmodified sIPN. Although sIPN with or without grafted peptides enhanced the expression of monocyte proinflammatory and matrix remodeling regulator, the effect of these proteins on an effector cell would be decreased by the inhibited transport of these proteins through the sIPN ECM mimics. These sIPNs are rather porous hydrogels and the mesh structure would restrict diffusive movement of a solute and the addition of polymer chains would cause an increase in diffusion path length. 45 , 46 Furthermore, diffusive passage of proteins through the sIPNs as well as other hydrogel systems depends on the protein’s molecular weight, hydrodynamic radius, and ionic interactions with other solutes, properties that remain incompletely understood. 46 , 47 ECM-derived matrix-mediated monocyte-fibroblast protein regulation: Expression is mediated by identity of peptide grafted on the sIPN We have observed that ligand immobilized sIPN induced varied protein expression and transport from unmodified sIPN. In addition to these findings, we observed that the identity of grafted peptides also induced peptide-specific protein expression. We identified decreased GM-CSF levels in the presence of RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPN as described above. We also measured elevated TGF-? concentrations at 24 h in cocultures in the presence of RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPN compared with other ligand-grafted sIPN. Also in cocultures, we observed increased concentrations of MIP-1? at 96 h and VEGF ( Fig. 9 ) at 24 h and in the presence of grafted RGD but not PHSRN and RGD and PHSRN, respectively, when compared with other sIPN. It has been reported that integrin ?v?3 mediates and activates various intracellular signaling pathways involved in proliferation and differentiation secondary to multiple growth factor receptors such as VEGF. 48 Furthermore, the presence of monocytes and sIPN-enhanced fibroblast matrix remodeling expression in terms of elevated GM-CSF and MMP-2. Postligation signaling and phenotypic expression modulated by RGD and PHSRN in monocyte and fibroblasts are unclear at the moment. However, these data indicate divergent downstream effects of these ligands in monocytes and fibroblasts, perhaps in response to other stimuli as a part of signal proofreading and cooperative regulation. Recognition and signaling activities can be mediated solely by integrins (private functions), but integrins can also have public activities in which they interact physically with other plasma membrane receptors to elicit cellular responses to ligands that do not bind directly to integrins. In monocytes, this relationship has been established for several systems: (i) monocyte a4?1 integrin is activated through the G protein-coupled receptor binding of MCP-1 and MIP-1 chemokines; (ii) integrin (av?3, a5?1, av?5, ?1 superfamily) crosstalk with growth factor receptors (i.e., platelet derived growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, epithelial growth factor, VEGF) has been implicated in the cooperative regulation of 100–120 monocyte genes when adhered to fibronectin. 49 – 52 For the latter, these cross-talks occur in several fashions including shared signaling molecules and coclustering of receptors in the formation of focal adhesion. Thus fibroblasts in coculture with monocytes can mediate physical and intermolecular monocyte interactions with the sIPN. In this investigation, we have shown that fibroblasts decrease monocyte adhesion onto RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN while increasing monocyte GM-CSF except on RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPNs at 96 h. The presence of monocytes decreased initial fibroblast IL-1?, TGF-?, and VEGF, but increased MMP-2 and GM-CSF at later time points. Furthermore, the ECM-derived sIPNs led to increased monocyte IL-1?, TNF-?, MIP-1?, MCP-1, MMP-9, and GM-CSF expression. Ligand immobilization of the sIPNs led to a down-regulation of fibroblast IL-1?, MIP-1?, MIP-1? compared with unmodified sIPN. When the ligand immobilized on the sIPN was RGD, increased TGF-?, MIP-1?, and VEGF but decreased GM-CSF expression at selected time points was observed. Figure 10 summarizes the effects of a secondary cell type and of the sIPN substrata on monocyte and fibroblast protein expression. These results shed light into the dynamic monocyte adhesion, and inflammatory, matrix remodeling, and growth factor response to the ECM mimic in the presence of fibroblasts in wound healing.  Fibroblasts decrease monocyte adhesion onto RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN The presence of fibroblasts decreased initial monocyte adhesion on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN. At 2 h, adherent monocyte density in monocyte monoculture and coculture was significantly higher on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPNs when compared with that on all other surfaces with the exception of unmodified sIPN in coculture ( Table I ). Furthermore, adherent monocyte density on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN was approximately twofold less in coculture compared with that in monocyte monoculture at 2 h. On other surfaces, there were no significant differences in adherent monocyte density when comparing monocyte monoculture and coculture at 2 and 24 h. Our previous studies had shown that monocytes adhered at significantly -/GGG-PEG-grafted sIPN when compared with tissue culture polystyrene (TCPS) and PEG-only hydrogels. 13 , 31 RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN mediated enhanced monocyte adhesion in a ligand-integrin dependent fashion and that sub-unit ?1- and ?3-containing integrins were critical in mediating this observation. Although enhanced monocyte adhesion on RGD-grafted surfaces is consistent with others’ findings, fibroblasts inhibiting this enhanced monocyte adhesion is unexpected.  Fibroblast-monocyte protein regulation: Attenuated inflammatory and up-regulated growth and matrix remodeling factors To gain insight into monocyte-fibroblast regulated proteins in the presence of the ECM-derived matrix as a communication conduit, we quantified several growth factors and inflammatory and remodeling proteins. We found that monocyte and fibroblast in coculture resulted in increased GM-CSF concentrations in chambers A and B at 24 and 96 h, except with RGD- and PHSRN-PEG-grafted sIPN at 96 h ( Fig. 2 ). Under monoculture conditions, GM-CSF was expressed by both monocytes and fibroblasts; however, only low levels were expressed in our fibroblast monocultures. Under monocyte monocultures in the presence of the RGD- and PHSRN-grafted sIPN, a significant increase in GM-CSF concentration was observed from 2 to 24 h as observed with other surfaces, but by 96 h, levels were significantly decreased. It has been reported that the integrin ?5 subunit mRNA is down-regulated by GM-CSF in a dose-dependent manner. 32 In this study, we observed drastically increased GM-CSF levels from 2 to 24 h along with decreased monocyte adhesion on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN at 2 and 96 h in coculture compared with monoculture. Hence, our results suggest that the decreased monocyte adhesion on RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN in the presence of fibroblasts may be a result of a monocyte-fibroblast regulation that has been indicated in wound healing and likely the down-regulation of monocyte integrin by the increased GM-CSF levels up until 24 h. Inflammatory factors were also directed by the presence of fibroblasts. In monocyte monocultures, high IL-1? ( Fig. 3 ) and TGF-? ( Fig. 4 ) concentrations were observed in chambers A and B at 2 h in the presence of polycarbonate, but the presence of fibro-blasts significantly decreased those concentrations in coculture. Monocytes also attenuated initial fibro-blast IL-1? and TGF-? expression. For example, IL-1? concentrations in chambers A and B from fibro-blast monoculture were generally significantly higher at 2 h compared with that from coculture at 2 h, in the presence of all surfaces. Although IL-1? and TGF-? were expressed more in monocytes/macrophages, our results indicate that significant expression was also observed in our fibroblast monocultures that was initially decreased in cocultures. In addition to inflammatory and growth factors, we characterized matrix remodeling factors critical in the proliferation and remodeling phase of wound healing. Monocytes induced fibroblast expression of MMP-2 ( Fig. 5 ). For example, MMP-2 levels from chamber B in fibroblast monocultures were generally consistent from 2 to 96 h. In monocyte monocultures, subtle increases in MMP-2 levels were observed from 2 to 96 h. However, in cocultures versus monocultures, MMP-2 concentrations from chamber B were drastically increased at 96 h to concentrations beyond the detection limit (>18,000 pg/mL). This high concentration was also observed in chamber A only on polycarbonate and sIPN containing unmodified gelatin at 96 h, indicating different protein transport property between the unmodified and ligand-grafted sIPNs. Although both fibroblasts and monocytes express MMP-2, our data indicate that the presence of both cell types enhanced fibroblast MMP-2 expression at 96 h especially with ligand-immobilized sIPN suggesting the synergistic interaction between fibroblasts and monocytes during the matrix remodeling process. Although MMP-2 possesses important implications in tissue remodeling, angio-genesis, and foreign body giant reaction, GM-CSF also plays an important role in these processes and a closely regulated relationship between growth factors and matrix metalloproteases exists. 2 , 33 , 34 GM-CSF has been reported to induce MMP-2 expression and our data shows drastically increased GM-CSF levels at 24 h and MMP-2 concentrations at 96 h only in cocultures and not in monocultures. 35 This suggests a monocyte-fibroblast paracrine mediated MMP-2 induction by GM-CSF in coculture. Inflammatory proteins can also induce growth factors and matrix remodeling agents as these factors are also closely intertwined players in activation and regulation of the inflammatory phase that eventually progress through the proliferative and remodeling stage. 36 Our data suggest that though initial fibro-blast inflammatory factors could be attenuated, these inflammatory factors increased in concentration with time, and they could up-regulate growth and matrix remodeling factors.  ECM-derived matrix mediated monocyte-fibroblast protein regulation: Expression and transport are dependent on sIPN and ligand immobilization of the sIPN Although culture condition (i.e. coculture versus monoculture) mediated IL-1?, TGF-?, GM-CSF, and MMP-2 expression, the ECM-based sIPN predominantly mediated the expression of other monocyte inflammatory and remodeling proteins such as IL-1? , TNF-?, MIP-1?, and MMP-9. In both monocyte monoculture and coculture, the presence of sIPNs significantly elevated IL-1? ( Fig. 6 ), TNF-? (data not shown), and MIP-1? ( Fig. 7 ) concentrations from 2 to 24 h in chamber A when compared with the polycarbonate controls. MCP-1 concentrations in chamber A also increased in monocyte monocultures and cocultures in the presence of all sIPNs at 24 and 96 h when compared with the polycarbonate controls (data not shown). As inflammatory factors such as TNF-? and IL-1? have been reported to stimulate MCP-1 levels in various cell types, the sIPN substrata’s modulation of these inflammatory proteins may hold a critical role in activation of a cascade of events crucial to wound healing. 37 , 38 Furthermore, MMP-9 levels at 96 h in chamber A were significantly elevated in the presence of sIPNs and not the polycarbonate controls in both cocultures and monocyte monocultures ( Fig. 8 ). These results are consistent with others’ findings that the ECM substratum can play a critical role in increasing MMP-9 levels over time. 39 , 40 GM-CSF levels at 24 h were also increased in response to the ECM-derived matrix, but in cocultures, this increase was amplified by the presence of fibroblasts. Additionally, TNF-? and IL-1? have been shown in literature to be common inducers of matrix remodeling and growth factors such as MMP-9 and GM-CSF. 41 – 43 The inflammatory proteins and the ECM-derived sIPN are likely to have a cooperative enhancement effect on GM-CSF and MMP-9 expression. In addition to sIPN-mediated effects, ligand immobilization on the sIPNs led to varied protein expression and transport compared with unmodified sIPN. In the presence of unmodified sIPN, TGF-? concentrations in chambers A and B were generally significantly lower at 24 h and significantly higher at 2 and 24 h in monocyte and fibroblast monocultures, respectively, when compared with sIPN immobilized with ligand. IL-1? concentrations in chambers A and B at 24 h were significantly higher with unmodified sIPN when compared with ligand-grafted sIPN in monocyte and fibroblast monocultures. In fibroblast monoculture, IL-1? in chambers A and B were significantly higher with unmodified sIPNs versus ligand-grafted sIPN at 2 h as well, and MIP-1? (data not shown) and MIP-1? also showed higher concentrations at 2 h in the presence of unmodified sIPN compared with ligand-grafted sIPN. The increased inflammatory agents IL-1?, MIP-1?, and MIP-1? could be the result of the greater rate of gelatin dissolution from the unmodified sIPN versus the ligand-PEG-grafted sIPN that we have observed previously and in separate experiments (data not shown). 44 Taken together, the immobilization of the ligand-PEG on the sIPN appears to down-regulate certain key proinflammatory mediators such as IL-1?, MIP-1?, and MIP-1? in fibroblast monocultures. Additionally, the matrix also regulated the transport of these proteins, depending on ligand immobilization on the sIPN. For TNF-? (data not shown), we observed concentrations at 24 h in chamber B that were significantly higher in the presence of unmodified gelatin compared with all other ligand immobilized sIPN in monocyte monocultures, though concentrations in chamber A at 24 h did not differ in the presence of unmodified sIPN compared to other ligand immobilized sIPN. Similarly, MMP-2 concentrations in chamber B at 96 h were over the detection limit of 18000 pg/mL in the presence of all surfaces while, in chamber A at 96 h, only those in the presence of polycarbonate and unmodified sIPN reflected the concentrations over the detection limit. These results indicate a selective transport property for TNF-? and MMP-2 across the peptide-modified sIPN and that this selectivity is less observed in unmodified sIPN. Although sIPN with or without grafted peptides enhanced the expression of monocyte proinflammatory and matrix remodeling regulator, the effect of these proteins on an effector cell would be decreased by the inhibited transport of these proteins through the sIPN ECM mimics. These sIPNs are rather porous hydrogels and the mesh structure would restrict diffusive movement of a solute and the addition of polymer chains would cause an increase in diffusion path length. 45 , 46 Furthermore, diffusive passage of proteins through the sIPNs as well as other hydrogel systems depends on the protein’s molecular weight, hydrodynamic radius, and ionic interactions with other solutes, properties that remain incompletely understood. 46 , 47  ECM-derived matrix-mediated monocyte-fibroblast protein regulation: Expression is mediated by identity of peptide grafted on the sIPN We have observed that ligand immobilized sIPN induced varied protein expression and transport from unmodified sIPN. In addition to these findings, we observed that the identity of grafted peptides also induced peptide-specific protein expression. We identified decreased GM-CSF levels in the presence of RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPN as described above. We also measured elevated TGF-? concentrations at 24 h in cocultures in the presence of RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPN compared with other ligand-grafted sIPN. Also in cocultures, we observed increased concentrations of MIP-1? at 96 h and VEGF ( Fig. 9 ) at 24 h and in the presence of grafted RGD but not PHSRN and RGD and PHSRN, respectively, when compared with other sIPN. It has been reported that integrin ?v?3 mediates and activates various intracellular signaling pathways involved in proliferation and differentiation secondary to multiple growth factor receptors such as VEGF. 48 Furthermore, the presence of monocytes and sIPN-enhanced fibroblast matrix remodeling expression in terms of elevated GM-CSF and MMP-2. Postligation signaling and phenotypic expression modulated by RGD and PHSRN in monocyte and fibroblasts are unclear at the moment. However, these data indicate divergent downstream effects of these ligands in monocytes and fibroblasts, perhaps in response to other stimuli as a part of signal proofreading and cooperative regulation. Recognition and signaling activities can be mediated solely by integrins (private functions), but integrins can also have public activities in which they interact physically with other plasma membrane receptors to elicit cellular responses to ligands that do not bind directly to integrins. In monocytes, this relationship has been established for several systems: (i) monocyte a4?1 integrin is activated through the G protein-coupled receptor binding of MCP-1 and MIP-1 chemokines; (ii) integrin (av?3, a5?1, av?5, ?1 superfamily) crosstalk with growth factor receptors (i.e., platelet derived growth factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, epithelial growth factor, VEGF) has been implicated in the cooperative regulation of 100–120 monocyte genes when adhered to fibronectin. 49 – 52 For the latter, these cross-talks occur in several fashions including shared signaling molecules and coclustering of receptors in the formation of focal adhesion. Thus fibroblasts in coculture with monocytes can mediate physical and intermolecular monocyte interactions with the sIPN. In this investigation, we have shown that fibroblasts decrease monocyte adhesion onto RGD-PEG-grafted sIPN while increasing monocyte GM-CSF except on RGD and PHSRN-grafted sIPNs at 96 h. The presence of monocytes decreased initial fibroblast IL-1?, TGF-?, and VEGF, but increased MMP-2 and GM-CSF at later time points. Furthermore, the ECM-derived sIPNs led to increased monocyte IL-1?, TNF-?, MIP-1?, MCP-1, MMP-9, and GM-CSF expression. Ligand immobilization of the sIPNs led to a down-regulation of fibroblast IL-1?, MIP-1?, MIP-1? compared with unmodified sIPN. When the ligand immobilized on the sIPN was RGD, increased TGF-?, MIP-1?, and VEGF but decreased GM-CSF expression at selected time points was observed. Figure 10 summarizes the effects of a secondary cell type and of the sIPN substrata on monocyte and fibroblast protein expression. These results shed light into the dynamic monocyte adhesion, and inflammatory, matrix remodeling, and growth factor response to the ECM mimic in the presence of fibroblasts in wound healing. 