Development and Treatment of Astigmatism-Related Amblyopia Blur induced by uncorrected astigmatism during early development can result in amblyopia, as evidenced by reduced best-corrected vision relative to normal, in measures of grating acuity, vernier acuity, contrast sensitivity across a range of spatial frequencies, recognition acuity, and stereoacuity. In addition, uncorrected astigmatism during early development can result in meridional amblyopia (MA), or best-corrected visual deficits that are greater for, or are present only for, specific stimulus orientations. Astigmatism-related amblyopia can be successfully treated with optical correction in children as old as school age, but the amblyopia may not be completely eliminated with optical treatment alone, and the age at which optical treatment is most effective has yet to be determined. Future research on determining the period of susceptibility of the visual system to negative effects of uncorrected astigmatism and exploration of alternative or complimentary treatment methods, in addition to optical correction, are warranted.  CONCLUSIONS In summary, the existing literature on development of astigmatism-related amblyopia has provided us with insight into how patterns of early visual input, often fairly subtle, are reflected in the developing visual brain. Studies of treatment of astigmatism-related amblyopia have allowed us to better understand how altering patterns of visual input through optical correction can result in changes in neural responsiveness to visual stimuli, and how this responsiveness varies across age and across different visual functions. It has been 35 years since Mitchell, Freeman, and their colleagues first documented their cases of meridional amblyopia in astigmatic adults. 3 , 4 Since then, several research groups have focused on the study of this phenomenon, and have provided valuable information about the effect of early astigmatism on visual development. 5 – 14 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 34 , 35 As a result of recent collaboration with the Tohono O’odham Nation, the first large-scale cross-sectional and prospective studies of astigmatic children aimed at better understanding the nature and treatability of astigmatism-related amblyopia have been conducted. 21 – 26 These studies have significantly increased our understanding of astigmatism-related amblyopia, but are limited to a specific population of individuals with bilateral with-the-rule astigmatism. Further research on astigmatism-related amblyopia can provide insight in terms of our basic understanding of normal development and capacity for plasticity across age, will allow development of treatment guidelines that are based on controlled clinical studies, and may lead to improvement in treatment success through the introduction and evaluation of new treatment options.  Figure Figure 1 Illustration of the location relative to the retina that horizontal and vertical line stimuli come into focus when accommodation is relaxed in non-astigmatic eyes (A–C) and in astigmatic eyes with with-the-rule astigmatism (greatest curvature in the vertical meridian, plus cylinder axis 90°, minus cylinder axis 180°) (D–H) (From Harvey et al., 2007). 22 