Responsiveness of T Cells to Interleukin-7 Is Associated with Higher CD4 + T Cell Counts in HIV1-Positive Individuals with Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy-Induced Viral Load Suppression Background Despite suppression of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1(HIV-1) load by highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), recovery of CD4+ T cell counts can be impaired. We investigated whether this impairment may be associated with hyporesponsiveness of T cells to ?-chain (?c) cytokines known to influence T cell homeostasis. Methods The responsiveness of T cells to interleukin (IL)-2, IL-7, and IL-15 was determined by assessing cytokine-induced phosphorylation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) in peripheral T cells obtained from 118 HIV-positive subjects and 13 HIV-negative subjects. Results The responsiveness of T cells to interleukin (IL)-7 but not to IL-2 or IL-15 was lower among HIV-positive subjects than among HIV-negative subjects. Among subjects with viral load suppression, the degree of IL-7 responsiveness (1) correlated with naive CD4+ T cell counts and was a better immune correlate of the prevailing CD4+ T cell count than were levels of human leukocyte antigen-DR1 or programmed death-1, which are predictors of T cell homeostasis during HIV infection; and (2) was greater in subjects with complete (i.e., attainment of ?500 CD4+ T cells/mm3 ?5 years after initiation of HAART) versus incomplete immunologic responses. The correlation between plasma levels of IL-7 and CD4+ T cell counts during HAART was maximal in subjects with increased IL-7 responsiveness. Conclusions Responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 is associated with higher CD4+ T cell counts during HAART and thus may be a determinant of the extent of immune reconstitution.  SUBJECTS AND METHODS Study subjects A total of 118 HIV-positive individuals who were monitored at the Wilford Hall Medical Center (WHMC), San Antonio, Texas, were evaluated ( figure 1 A ). These subjects were part of the US Military’s Department of Defense HIV Natural History Study. The clinical characteristics of these subjects are presented in table 1 . Subjects with VL suppression were defined as subjects receiving HAART who had undetectable plasma HIV-1 RNA levels (<50 copies/mL) on the day of assessment of pSTAT5 levels. Subjects with complete and incomplete immunologic responses were defined as those subjects with VL suppression who, at ?5 years after initiation of HAART, attained CD4+ cell counts of ?500 and <500 cells/mm3, respectively [ 15 ]. Additional details regarding the overall WHMC cohort are described elsewhere [ 26 – 28 ]. A control group of 13 healthy adult HIV-negative volunteers was examined. Fully informed consent was provided by all of the volunteers. Approval was given by the institutional review board at the participating institutions. Cell preparation Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by Histopaque gradient separation, washed twice with sterile saline, and resuspended in serum-free RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with L-glutamine. Flow cytometric analysis Surface expression of CD25, CD122, CD127, and CD132 in CD3+ T cells was determined using standard protocols. Freshly isolated PBMCs were incubated in the presence of Fc blocking reagent and were washed before staining. Appropriate isotype controls were included in all assays. Expression of HLA-DR and CCR5 in CD4+ T cells and PD-1 in CD3+ T cells was also determined. The proportion of naive CD4+ T cells was estimated using the percentage of gated CD4+ CD45RO? CCR7+ cells. Phosphoprotein staining was performed using standard protocols [ 19 , 29 ] ( figure 1 B ). For our studies, we selected a cytokine dose of 100 ng/mL for stimulation, because this appeared to be the most optimal concentration ( figure 1 C ). Because, in accordance with a recent study [ 30 ], the mean levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 fluorescence intensity in T cells did not differ between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals, the pSTAT5 levels reported in the present study correspond to the percentage of T cells that were positive for pSTAT5 (%CD3+pSTAT5+) after cytokine stimulation. Initiation of HAART occurred 8 years (mean interval ± interquartile range [IQR], 8.27 ± 4.36 years) before assessment of pSTAT5 and PD-1 levels. CCR5 and HLA-DR levels were assessed 6–12 months before pSTAT5 levels were assessed. Antibodies were obtained from BD Pharmingen. ELISA IL-7 levels were measured in plasma samples obtained on the same day that pSTAT5 levels were assessed. The sensitivity cutoff of the assay was 4 pg/mL (R&D Systems). Statistical analyses The prevailing CD4+ T cell counts are defined as the mean of the CD4+ T cell measurements determined in the 1 year before assessment of pSTAT5 levels. Linear generalized estimating equations (GEEs) were used to model the time trends of CD4+ T cell counts. Where appropriate, we used the Mann-Whitney U test and Student’s t test to determine between-group differences. Correlations were quantified non-parametrically by use of Spearman’s coefficients. Associations between the biomarkers evaluated and outcome variables were assessed by multivariate linear regression. All statistical analyses were conducted using Stata software (version 7.0; Stata).  Study subjects A total of 118 HIV-positive individuals who were monitored at the Wilford Hall Medical Center (WHMC), San Antonio, Texas, were evaluated ( figure 1 A ). These subjects were part of the US Military’s Department of Defense HIV Natural History Study. The clinical characteristics of these subjects are presented in table 1 . Subjects with VL suppression were defined as subjects receiving HAART who had undetectable plasma HIV-1 RNA levels (<50 copies/mL) on the day of assessment of pSTAT5 levels. Subjects with complete and incomplete immunologic responses were defined as those subjects with VL suppression who, at ?5 years after initiation of HAART, attained CD4+ cell counts of ?500 and <500 cells/mm3, respectively [ 15 ]. Additional details regarding the overall WHMC cohort are described elsewhere [ 26 – 28 ]. A control group of 13 healthy adult HIV-negative volunteers was examined. Fully informed consent was provided by all of the volunteers. Approval was given by the institutional review board at the participating institutions.  Cell preparation Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated by Histopaque gradient separation, washed twice with sterile saline, and resuspended in serum-free RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with L-glutamine.  Flow cytometric analysis Surface expression of CD25, CD122, CD127, and CD132 in CD3+ T cells was determined using standard protocols. Freshly isolated PBMCs were incubated in the presence of Fc blocking reagent and were washed before staining. Appropriate isotype controls were included in all assays. Expression of HLA-DR and CCR5 in CD4+ T cells and PD-1 in CD3+ T cells was also determined. The proportion of naive CD4+ T cells was estimated using the percentage of gated CD4+ CD45RO? CCR7+ cells. Phosphoprotein staining was performed using standard protocols [ 19 , 29 ] ( figure 1 B ). For our studies, we selected a cytokine dose of 100 ng/mL for stimulation, because this appeared to be the most optimal concentration ( figure 1 C ). Because, in accordance with a recent study [ 30 ], the mean levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 fluorescence intensity in T cells did not differ between HIV-positive and HIV-negative individuals, the pSTAT5 levels reported in the present study correspond to the percentage of T cells that were positive for pSTAT5 (%CD3+pSTAT5+) after cytokine stimulation. Initiation of HAART occurred 8 years (mean interval ± interquartile range [IQR], 8.27 ± 4.36 years) before assessment of pSTAT5 and PD-1 levels. CCR5 and HLA-DR levels were assessed 6–12 months before pSTAT5 levels were assessed. Antibodies were obtained from BD Pharmingen.  ELISA IL-7 levels were measured in plasma samples obtained on the same day that pSTAT5 levels were assessed. The sensitivity cutoff of the assay was 4 pg/mL (R&D Systems).  Statistical analyses The prevailing CD4+ T cell counts are defined as the mean of the CD4+ T cell measurements determined in the 1 year before assessment of pSTAT5 levels. Linear generalized estimating equations (GEEs) were used to model the time trends of CD4+ T cell counts. Where appropriate, we used the Mann-Whitney U test and Student’s t test to determine between-group differences. Correlations were quantified non-parametrically by use of Spearman’s coefficients. Associations between the biomarkers evaluated and outcome variables were assessed by multivariate linear regression. All statistical analyses were conducted using Stata software (version 7.0; Stata).  RESULTS Characteristics of the study cohort HIV-positive individuals were categorized in terms of receipt of HAART, attainment of HAART-induced VL suppression, and immunologic responses, according to criteria described elsewhere [ 15 ] ( figure 1 A ). Compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression were younger and had significantly higher CD4+ T cell counts at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels ( table 1 ). These 2 patient groups did not differ according to sex, race/ethnicity, pre-HAART CD4+ cell counts, length of treatment, or distribution of the CC chemokine ligand 3-like 1 (CCL3L1) - and CCR5 -based genetic risk groups ( table 1 ), genetic factors that have been shown to also influence CD4+ T cell recovery during HAART [ 26 , 27 ]. Cytokine receptor and pSTAT5 levels in HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects In this study, responsiveness of T cells to ?c cytokines was defined as the proportion of peripheral T cells that express pSTAT5 after stimulation with IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 ( figure 1 B ). We observed that stimulation of T cells with increasing concentrations of IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 was associated with a stepwise increase in pSTAT5 levels, with maximal effects observed with a dose of 100 ng/mL ( figure 1 C ). After stimulation with IL-7, there were no differences in pSTAT5 levels in CD4+ or CD4? (i.e., CD8+) T cells ( figure 1 D ). However, pSTAT5 levels were higher in CD4? T cells than in CD4+ T cells after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 1 D ). Comparative analyses of HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects revealed a significant influence of HIV-1 infection on levels of constitutive and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5, as well as levels of cytokine receptors ( figure 1 E–G ). Previous studies have demonstrated that HIV induces STAT-dependent signaling pathways [ 31 , 32 ]. In the present study, we confirmed these previous observations that constitutive levels of pSTAT5 were higher in the T cells of HIV-positive subjects than in those of HIV-negative subjects and that they were also higher among subjects without VL suppression than among subjects with VL suppression ( figure 1 E ). In addition, there was a positive correlation between the extent of viral replication, as reflected by the VL, and the constitutive pSTAT5 level ( table 2 ). Compared with HIV-negative subjects, HIV-positive subjects had higher levels of CD25 and IL-2-induced pSTAT5, reduced levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, and a trend toward higher expression of CD132 ( figure 1 F and 1 G ). By contrast, levels of CD122 and IL-15-induced pSTAT5 were similar in HIV-positive and HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 F and 1 G ). HIV suppression and IL-7 responsiveness Although the aforementioned data indicated that HIV infection results in perturbations in levels of ?c cytokine responsiveness and receptor expression, they did not provide insights into whether HIV preferentially targeted specific ?c cytokine-dependent signaling pathways. To examine this possibility, we determined the influence of the degree of viral replication and its suppression by HAART on levels of ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor expression. Although associations between the VL and the levels of these parameters were detected ( table 2 and figure 2 A and 2 B ), the strongest associations were for the IL-7-IL-7R (CD127) axis. Statistically, there were very strong negative correlations between the VL and levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). In addition, compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression had higher pSTAT5 levels after stimulation with IL-7 but not after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 2 A ). Furthermore, subjects with VL suppression had higher levels of CD127, whereas levels of IL-2 and IL-15 receptors—namely, IL-2R (CD25), IL-2/IL-15R (CD122), the common ?c cytokine receptor (CD132)—were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression ( figure 2 B ). These findings suggest that HIV infection may preferentially target IL-7 responsiveness and IL-7 receptor levels. Predictably, because the VL in untreated subjects was similar to that in subjects without VL suppression ( table 1 ), we observed that the levels of cytokine receptors and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 noted in subjects without VL suppression approximated those found in untreated subjects ( figure 2 A and 2 B ). Two findings underscored the fact that the aforementioned associations were unlikely to be spurious and that the group of subjects in the present study provided sufficient statistical power to detect the relevant immunologic phenotypes present during HIV disease. First, levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were higher in subjects without VL suppression and in untreated subjects than in subjects with VL suppression ( figure 2 C ). Second, univariate analyses in the entire group of HIV-positive subjects revealed that subjects with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR had lower prevailing CD4+ T cell counts ( table 3 ). These data are consistent with previous reports indicating that (1) an increased VL is associated with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR, and (2) enhanced expression of HLA-DR and PD-1 is associated with negative effects on T cell homeostasis (i.e., lower CD4+ T cell counts) [ 21 , 22 ]. Thus, the juxtaposition of findings from 2 comparisons— namely, HIV-positive subjects versus HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 E –1 G ) and subjects with VL suppression versus subjects without VL suppression ( figure 1 E and figure 2 )—suggested the following pathogenic model: high viral replication during HIV-1 infection induces high constitutive levels of pSTAT5. These high levels, along with an abnormal pattern of cytokine receptor expression, may desensitize pSTAT5-dependent signaling pathways for further cytokine stimulation, as is reflected by the negative correlations between VL and cytokine-induced pSTAT5 levels ( table 2 ). We had anticipated that suppression of viral replication by HAART would be associated with changes in all the pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor profiles. However, we found this to be true only for the perturbations in the IL-7/CD127 axis, because suppression of viral replication was associated with higher levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but levels of CD25, CD122, and CD132, as well as those of IL-2- and IL-15-induced pSTAT5, were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression. Taken together, these findings indicated specificity between the extent of viral replication and perturbations in IL-7-dependent signaling pathways. IL-7 responsiveness, CD127 expression, and CD4 T cell count For the overall study cohort, the following correlations were observed for the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts: (1) there were negative and positive correlations with constitutive and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, respectively; (2) there were no correlations with IL-2- or IL-15-induced pSTAT5 levels or IL-2/and IL-15 receptor levels; and (3) among the cytokine receptors, the strongest correlation was with CD127 expression, which was a positive correlation ( table 2 ). CD127 expression and IL-7 responsiveness The following findings suggested that CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 were tracking similar biological processes: there was a strong inverse correlation between the VL and levels of both CD127 and IL-7- induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). The levels of these 2 parameters were lower in subjects without VL suppression than in those with VL suppression ( figure 2 A and 2 B ), and they both correlated positively with CD4+ T cell counts and with each other ( table 2 and figure 3 A ). Thus, one possibility was that the negative association between the VL and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels was simply a reflection of the coincident negative association between VL and CD127 expression. However, there are 2 reasons that this was unlikely. First, although there was a strong correlation between CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, we found that one-half of the variation in IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels could not be attributed to CD127 expression (? correlation, 0.749; 1 ? R 2 = 0.44). Second, in a multivariate regression model, IL-7 responsiveness during HIV disease was associated with CD4+ T cell counts, even after controlling for the effects of CD127 ( figure 3 A ). IL-7 responsiveness and CD4 T cell recovery We next sought to distinguish whether the higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 observed in subjects with VL suppression, compared with subjects without suppression, were merely an epiphenomenon occurring in parallel to virologic control or whether IL-7 responsiveness was associated with the extent of CD4+ recovery, independent of viral suppression. In addition, we assessed whether the association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell recovery was independent of plasma levels of IL-7 and parameters that are known to have a negative influence on CD4+ T cell homeostasis during HIV infection and/or during HAART, such as levels of HLA-DR [ 21 , 33 ], PD-1 [ 22 ], and CCR5 [ 23 , 34 ]. To assess the association between the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts and immune recovery during HAART, we first determined whether the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was reflective of the historical changes in CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART. We found that, among those who received HAART, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count closely tracked the prior trajectory of CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART until the day of assessment of T cell responsiveness (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We categorized the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts into 5 strata, and we found that HAART-treated subjects who, at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels, had the highest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts, had gained an average of 4 CD4+ T cells per month from the time of initiation of HAART, whereas those who had the lowest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts had lost an average of 1 cell per month (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We therefore reasoned that, in our study population, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count may serve as a proxy for changes in the CD4+ T cell counts of subjects who received HAART. The following 5 findings demonstrated an association between the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 and immunologic recovery that was independent of several parameters known to have an influence on immune reconstitution. First, among subjects with VL suppression, higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 correlated positively with higher total and naive CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 B and 3 C ). No association was found between IL-7-induced pSTAT5 and memory CD4+ T cell counts (data not shown). Second, a positive correlation between IL-7 responsiveness and the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was detected in subjects with VL suppression, as well as in all subjects, when the effects of the VL were accounted for in multivariate models ( table 3 ). Third, although univariate analyses showed that higher levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were negatively associated with CD4+ T cell counts, multivariate analyses revealed that only IL-7 responsiveness was independently associated with the prevailing CD4+ T cell count ( table 3 ). Fourth, CD4+ T cell trajectories from the time of initiation of HAART differed according to tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels ( figure 3 D ). The mean monthly increase in CD4+ T cell counts in subjects with VL suppression was estimated to be 3.5, 2.2, and 1.6 cells/mm3 for subjects in the upper, middle, and lower tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 D ). Fifth, the extent of IL-7 responsiveness was higher in those subjects who were treated with HAART and were categorized as having a complete immunologic response than in those who were categorized as having an incomplete immunologic response; the latter group constituted 30% of the study population, a frequency that is consistent with that found in previous studies [ 15 , 16 ]. Levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but not levels of IL-7, PD-1, CCR5, or HLA-DR, differed between subjects with complete and incomplete immunologic responses ( table 4 ). Differences in IL-7 responsiveness among these groups of subjects were not confounded by differential lengths of follow-up: the mean duration of follow-up (± standard deviation) was 7.57 ± 2.45 years for subjects with a complete response versus 6.76 ± 3.01 years for subjects with an incomplete response ( P = .2507, for the difference between groups). By logistic regression analysis, we found that subjects with higher IL-7 responsiveness were more likely to be categorized as having a complete immunologic response, after adjustment for pre-HAART CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 E ), which are a known predictor of the extent of immune reconstitution [ 15 – 17 ] and are the only other parameter that was strongly associated with CD4+ T cell recovery in the group of subjects with VL suppression studied herein ( table 4 ). It is noteworthy that, in the aforementioned analyses, plasma levels of IL-7 did not appear to influence CD4+ T cell recovery ( table 3 ). However, in light of the observation that there was an association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell counts during HAART, we considered the possibility that the previously ascribed positive influence of IL-7 on T cell homeostasis [ 4 , 35 – 38 ] might be primarily apparent in the subset of subjects who also have evidence of high IL-7 responsiveness. Consistent with this possibility, a positive correlation between plasma IL-7 levels and CD4+ T cell counts was detected in subjects with VL suppression who had high but not low or intermediate levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 F ). We found that, among subjects with VL suppression who had high responsiveness to IL-7 ex vivo, every unit (1 pg/mL) of plasma levels of IL-7 was associated with 17 more CD4+ T cells ( figure 3 F ).  RESULTS Characteristics of the study cohort HIV-positive individuals were categorized in terms of receipt of HAART, attainment of HAART-induced VL suppression, and immunologic responses, according to criteria described elsewhere [ 15 ] ( figure 1 A ). Compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression were younger and had significantly higher CD4+ T cell counts at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels ( table 1 ). These 2 patient groups did not differ according to sex, race/ethnicity, pre-HAART CD4+ cell counts, length of treatment, or distribution of the CC chemokine ligand 3-like 1 (CCL3L1) - and CCR5 -based genetic risk groups ( table 1 ), genetic factors that have been shown to also influence CD4+ T cell recovery during HAART [ 26 , 27 ]. Cytokine receptor and pSTAT5 levels in HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects In this study, responsiveness of T cells to ?c cytokines was defined as the proportion of peripheral T cells that express pSTAT5 after stimulation with IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 ( figure 1 B ). We observed that stimulation of T cells with increasing concentrations of IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 was associated with a stepwise increase in pSTAT5 levels, with maximal effects observed with a dose of 100 ng/mL ( figure 1 C ). After stimulation with IL-7, there were no differences in pSTAT5 levels in CD4+ or CD4? (i.e., CD8+) T cells ( figure 1 D ). However, pSTAT5 levels were higher in CD4? T cells than in CD4+ T cells after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 1 D ). Comparative analyses of HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects revealed a significant influence of HIV-1 infection on levels of constitutive and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5, as well as levels of cytokine receptors ( figure 1 E–G ). Previous studies have demonstrated that HIV induces STAT-dependent signaling pathways [ 31 , 32 ]. In the present study, we confirmed these previous observations that constitutive levels of pSTAT5 were higher in the T cells of HIV-positive subjects than in those of HIV-negative subjects and that they were also higher among subjects without VL suppression than among subjects with VL suppression ( figure 1 E ). In addition, there was a positive correlation between the extent of viral replication, as reflected by the VL, and the constitutive pSTAT5 level ( table 2 ). Compared with HIV-negative subjects, HIV-positive subjects had higher levels of CD25 and IL-2-induced pSTAT5, reduced levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, and a trend toward higher expression of CD132 ( figure 1 F and 1 G ). By contrast, levels of CD122 and IL-15-induced pSTAT5 were similar in HIV-positive and HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 F and 1 G ). HIV suppression and IL-7 responsiveness Although the aforementioned data indicated that HIV infection results in perturbations in levels of ?c cytokine responsiveness and receptor expression, they did not provide insights into whether HIV preferentially targeted specific ?c cytokine-dependent signaling pathways. To examine this possibility, we determined the influence of the degree of viral replication and its suppression by HAART on levels of ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor expression. Although associations between the VL and the levels of these parameters were detected ( table 2 and figure 2 A and 2 B ), the strongest associations were for the IL-7-IL-7R (CD127) axis. Statistically, there were very strong negative correlations between the VL and levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). In addition, compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression had higher pSTAT5 levels after stimulation with IL-7 but not after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 2 A ). Furthermore, subjects with VL suppression had higher levels of CD127, whereas levels of IL-2 and IL-15 receptors—namely, IL-2R (CD25), IL-2/IL-15R (CD122), the common ?c cytokine receptor (CD132)—were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression ( figure 2 B ). These findings suggest that HIV infection may preferentially target IL-7 responsiveness and IL-7 receptor levels. Predictably, because the VL in untreated subjects was similar to that in subjects without VL suppression ( table 1 ), we observed that the levels of cytokine receptors and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 noted in subjects without VL suppression approximated those found in untreated subjects ( figure 2 A and 2 B ). Two findings underscored the fact that the aforementioned associations were unlikely to be spurious and that the group of subjects in the present study provided sufficient statistical power to detect the relevant immunologic phenotypes present during HIV disease. First, levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were higher in subjects without VL suppression and in untreated subjects than in subjects with VL suppression ( figure 2 C ). Second, univariate analyses in the entire group of HIV-positive subjects revealed that subjects with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR had lower prevailing CD4+ T cell counts ( table 3 ). These data are consistent with previous reports indicating that (1) an increased VL is associated with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR, and (2) enhanced expression of HLA-DR and PD-1 is associated with negative effects on T cell homeostasis (i.e., lower CD4+ T cell counts) [ 21 , 22 ]. Thus, the juxtaposition of findings from 2 comparisons— namely, HIV-positive subjects versus HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 E –1 G ) and subjects with VL suppression versus subjects without VL suppression ( figure 1 E and figure 2 )—suggested the following pathogenic model: high viral replication during HIV-1 infection induces high constitutive levels of pSTAT5. These high levels, along with an abnormal pattern of cytokine receptor expression, may desensitize pSTAT5-dependent signaling pathways for further cytokine stimulation, as is reflected by the negative correlations between VL and cytokine-induced pSTAT5 levels ( table 2 ). We had anticipated that suppression of viral replication by HAART would be associated with changes in all the pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor profiles. However, we found this to be true only for the perturbations in the IL-7/CD127 axis, because suppression of viral replication was associated with higher levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but levels of CD25, CD122, and CD132, as well as those of IL-2- and IL-15-induced pSTAT5, were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression. Taken together, these findings indicated specificity between the extent of viral replication and perturbations in IL-7-dependent signaling pathways. IL-7 responsiveness, CD127 expression, and CD4 T cell count For the overall study cohort, the following correlations were observed for the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts: (1) there were negative and positive correlations with constitutive and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, respectively; (2) there were no correlations with IL-2- or IL-15-induced pSTAT5 levels or IL-2/and IL-15 receptor levels; and (3) among the cytokine receptors, the strongest correlation was with CD127 expression, which was a positive correlation ( table 2 ). CD127 expression and IL-7 responsiveness The following findings suggested that CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 were tracking similar biological processes: there was a strong inverse correlation between the VL and levels of both CD127 and IL-7- induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). The levels of these 2 parameters were lower in subjects without VL suppression than in those with VL suppression ( figure 2 A and 2 B ), and they both correlated positively with CD4+ T cell counts and with each other ( table 2 and figure 3 A ). Thus, one possibility was that the negative association between the VL and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels was simply a reflection of the coincident negative association between VL and CD127 expression. However, there are 2 reasons that this was unlikely. First, although there was a strong correlation between CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, we found that one-half of the variation in IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels could not be attributed to CD127 expression (? correlation, 0.749; 1 ? R 2 = 0.44). Second, in a multivariate regression model, IL-7 responsiveness during HIV disease was associated with CD4+ T cell counts, even after controlling for the effects of CD127 ( figure 3 A ). IL-7 responsiveness and CD4 T cell recovery We next sought to distinguish whether the higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 observed in subjects with VL suppression, compared with subjects without suppression, were merely an epiphenomenon occurring in parallel to virologic control or whether IL-7 responsiveness was associated with the extent of CD4+ recovery, independent of viral suppression. In addition, we assessed whether the association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell recovery was independent of plasma levels of IL-7 and parameters that are known to have a negative influence on CD4+ T cell homeostasis during HIV infection and/or during HAART, such as levels of HLA-DR [ 21 , 33 ], PD-1 [ 22 ], and CCR5 [ 23 , 34 ]. To assess the association between the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts and immune recovery during HAART, we first determined whether the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was reflective of the historical changes in CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART. We found that, among those who received HAART, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count closely tracked the prior trajectory of CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART until the day of assessment of T cell responsiveness (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We categorized the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts into 5 strata, and we found that HAART-treated subjects who, at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels, had the highest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts, had gained an average of 4 CD4+ T cells per month from the time of initiation of HAART, whereas those who had the lowest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts had lost an average of 1 cell per month (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We therefore reasoned that, in our study population, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count may serve as a proxy for changes in the CD4+ T cell counts of subjects who received HAART. The following 5 findings demonstrated an association between the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 and immunologic recovery that was independent of several parameters known to have an influence on immune reconstitution. First, among subjects with VL suppression, higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 correlated positively with higher total and naive CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 B and 3 C ). No association was found between IL-7-induced pSTAT5 and memory CD4+ T cell counts (data not shown). Second, a positive correlation between IL-7 responsiveness and the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was detected in subjects with VL suppression, as well as in all subjects, when the effects of the VL were accounted for in multivariate models ( table 3 ). Third, although univariate analyses showed that higher levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were negatively associated with CD4+ T cell counts, multivariate analyses revealed that only IL-7 responsiveness was independently associated with the prevailing CD4+ T cell count ( table 3 ). Fourth, CD4+ T cell trajectories from the time of initiation of HAART differed according to tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels ( figure 3 D ). The mean monthly increase in CD4+ T cell counts in subjects with VL suppression was estimated to be 3.5, 2.2, and 1.6 cells/mm3 for subjects in the upper, middle, and lower tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 D ). Fifth, the extent of IL-7 responsiveness was higher in those subjects who were treated with HAART and were categorized as having a complete immunologic response than in those who were categorized as having an incomplete immunologic response; the latter group constituted 30% of the study population, a frequency that is consistent with that found in previous studies [ 15 , 16 ]. Levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but not levels of IL-7, PD-1, CCR5, or HLA-DR, differed between subjects with complete and incomplete immunologic responses ( table 4 ). Differences in IL-7 responsiveness among these groups of subjects were not confounded by differential lengths of follow-up: the mean duration of follow-up (± standard deviation) was 7.57 ± 2.45 years for subjects with a complete response versus 6.76 ± 3.01 years for subjects with an incomplete response ( P = .2507, for the difference between groups). By logistic regression analysis, we found that subjects with higher IL-7 responsiveness were more likely to be categorized as having a complete immunologic response, after adjustment for pre-HAART CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 E ), which are a known predictor of the extent of immune reconstitution [ 15 – 17 ] and are the only other parameter that was strongly associated with CD4+ T cell recovery in the group of subjects with VL suppression studied herein ( table 4 ). It is noteworthy that, in the aforementioned analyses, plasma levels of IL-7 did not appear to influence CD4+ T cell recovery ( table 3 ). However, in light of the observation that there was an association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell counts during HAART, we considered the possibility that the previously ascribed positive influence of IL-7 on T cell homeostasis [ 4 , 35 – 38 ] might be primarily apparent in the subset of subjects who also have evidence of high IL-7 responsiveness. Consistent with this possibility, a positive correlation between plasma IL-7 levels and CD4+ T cell counts was detected in subjects with VL suppression who had high but not low or intermediate levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 F ). We found that, among subjects with VL suppression who had high responsiveness to IL-7 ex vivo, every unit (1 pg/mL) of plasma levels of IL-7 was associated with 17 more CD4+ T cells ( figure 3 F ).  Characteristics of the study cohort HIV-positive individuals were categorized in terms of receipt of HAART, attainment of HAART-induced VL suppression, and immunologic responses, according to criteria described elsewhere [ 15 ] ( figure 1 A ). Compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression were younger and had significantly higher CD4+ T cell counts at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels ( table 1 ). These 2 patient groups did not differ according to sex, race/ethnicity, pre-HAART CD4+ cell counts, length of treatment, or distribution of the CC chemokine ligand 3-like 1 (CCL3L1) - and CCR5 -based genetic risk groups ( table 1 ), genetic factors that have been shown to also influence CD4+ T cell recovery during HAART [ 26 , 27 ].  Characteristics of the study cohort HIV-positive individuals were categorized in terms of receipt of HAART, attainment of HAART-induced VL suppression, and immunologic responses, according to criteria described elsewhere [ 15 ] ( figure 1 A ). Compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression were younger and had significantly higher CD4+ T cell counts at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels ( table 1 ). These 2 patient groups did not differ according to sex, race/ethnicity, pre-HAART CD4+ cell counts, length of treatment, or distribution of the CC chemokine ligand 3-like 1 (CCL3L1) - and CCR5 -based genetic risk groups ( table 1 ), genetic factors that have been shown to also influence CD4+ T cell recovery during HAART [ 26 , 27 ].  Cytokine receptor and pSTAT5 levels in HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects In this study, responsiveness of T cells to ?c cytokines was defined as the proportion of peripheral T cells that express pSTAT5 after stimulation with IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 ( figure 1 B ). We observed that stimulation of T cells with increasing concentrations of IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 was associated with a stepwise increase in pSTAT5 levels, with maximal effects observed with a dose of 100 ng/mL ( figure 1 C ). After stimulation with IL-7, there were no differences in pSTAT5 levels in CD4+ or CD4? (i.e., CD8+) T cells ( figure 1 D ). However, pSTAT5 levels were higher in CD4? T cells than in CD4+ T cells after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 1 D ). Comparative analyses of HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects revealed a significant influence of HIV-1 infection on levels of constitutive and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5, as well as levels of cytokine receptors ( figure 1 E–G ). Previous studies have demonstrated that HIV induces STAT-dependent signaling pathways [ 31 , 32 ]. In the present study, we confirmed these previous observations that constitutive levels of pSTAT5 were higher in the T cells of HIV-positive subjects than in those of HIV-negative subjects and that they were also higher among subjects without VL suppression than among subjects with VL suppression ( figure 1 E ). In addition, there was a positive correlation between the extent of viral replication, as reflected by the VL, and the constitutive pSTAT5 level ( table 2 ). Compared with HIV-negative subjects, HIV-positive subjects had higher levels of CD25 and IL-2-induced pSTAT5, reduced levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, and a trend toward higher expression of CD132 ( figure 1 F and 1 G ). By contrast, levels of CD122 and IL-15-induced pSTAT5 were similar in HIV-positive and HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 F and 1 G ).  Cytokine receptor and pSTAT5 levels in HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects In this study, responsiveness of T cells to ?c cytokines was defined as the proportion of peripheral T cells that express pSTAT5 after stimulation with IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 ( figure 1 B ). We observed that stimulation of T cells with increasing concentrations of IL-2, IL-7, or IL-15 was associated with a stepwise increase in pSTAT5 levels, with maximal effects observed with a dose of 100 ng/mL ( figure 1 C ). After stimulation with IL-7, there were no differences in pSTAT5 levels in CD4+ or CD4? (i.e., CD8+) T cells ( figure 1 D ). However, pSTAT5 levels were higher in CD4? T cells than in CD4+ T cells after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 1 D ). Comparative analyses of HIV-negative and HIV-positive subjects revealed a significant influence of HIV-1 infection on levels of constitutive and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5, as well as levels of cytokine receptors ( figure 1 E–G ). Previous studies have demonstrated that HIV induces STAT-dependent signaling pathways [ 31 , 32 ]. In the present study, we confirmed these previous observations that constitutive levels of pSTAT5 were higher in the T cells of HIV-positive subjects than in those of HIV-negative subjects and that they were also higher among subjects without VL suppression than among subjects with VL suppression ( figure 1 E ). In addition, there was a positive correlation between the extent of viral replication, as reflected by the VL, and the constitutive pSTAT5 level ( table 2 ). Compared with HIV-negative subjects, HIV-positive subjects had higher levels of CD25 and IL-2-induced pSTAT5, reduced levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, and a trend toward higher expression of CD132 ( figure 1 F and 1 G ). By contrast, levels of CD122 and IL-15-induced pSTAT5 were similar in HIV-positive and HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 F and 1 G ).  HIV suppression and IL-7 responsiveness Although the aforementioned data indicated that HIV infection results in perturbations in levels of ?c cytokine responsiveness and receptor expression, they did not provide insights into whether HIV preferentially targeted specific ?c cytokine-dependent signaling pathways. To examine this possibility, we determined the influence of the degree of viral replication and its suppression by HAART on levels of ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor expression. Although associations between the VL and the levels of these parameters were detected ( table 2 and figure 2 A and 2 B ), the strongest associations were for the IL-7-IL-7R (CD127) axis. Statistically, there were very strong negative correlations between the VL and levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). In addition, compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression had higher pSTAT5 levels after stimulation with IL-7 but not after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 2 A ). Furthermore, subjects with VL suppression had higher levels of CD127, whereas levels of IL-2 and IL-15 receptors—namely, IL-2R (CD25), IL-2/IL-15R (CD122), the common ?c cytokine receptor (CD132)—were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression ( figure 2 B ). These findings suggest that HIV infection may preferentially target IL-7 responsiveness and IL-7 receptor levels. Predictably, because the VL in untreated subjects was similar to that in subjects without VL suppression ( table 1 ), we observed that the levels of cytokine receptors and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 noted in subjects without VL suppression approximated those found in untreated subjects ( figure 2 A and 2 B ). Two findings underscored the fact that the aforementioned associations were unlikely to be spurious and that the group of subjects in the present study provided sufficient statistical power to detect the relevant immunologic phenotypes present during HIV disease. First, levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were higher in subjects without VL suppression and in untreated subjects than in subjects with VL suppression ( figure 2 C ). Second, univariate analyses in the entire group of HIV-positive subjects revealed that subjects with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR had lower prevailing CD4+ T cell counts ( table 3 ). These data are consistent with previous reports indicating that (1) an increased VL is associated with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR, and (2) enhanced expression of HLA-DR and PD-1 is associated with negative effects on T cell homeostasis (i.e., lower CD4+ T cell counts) [ 21 , 22 ]. Thus, the juxtaposition of findings from 2 comparisons— namely, HIV-positive subjects versus HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 E –1 G ) and subjects with VL suppression versus subjects without VL suppression ( figure 1 E and figure 2 )—suggested the following pathogenic model: high viral replication during HIV-1 infection induces high constitutive levels of pSTAT5. These high levels, along with an abnormal pattern of cytokine receptor expression, may desensitize pSTAT5-dependent signaling pathways for further cytokine stimulation, as is reflected by the negative correlations between VL and cytokine-induced pSTAT5 levels ( table 2 ). We had anticipated that suppression of viral replication by HAART would be associated with changes in all the pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor profiles. However, we found this to be true only for the perturbations in the IL-7/CD127 axis, because suppression of viral replication was associated with higher levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but levels of CD25, CD122, and CD132, as well as those of IL-2- and IL-15-induced pSTAT5, were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression. Taken together, these findings indicated specificity between the extent of viral replication and perturbations in IL-7-dependent signaling pathways.  HIV suppression and IL-7 responsiveness Although the aforementioned data indicated that HIV infection results in perturbations in levels of ?c cytokine responsiveness and receptor expression, they did not provide insights into whether HIV preferentially targeted specific ?c cytokine-dependent signaling pathways. To examine this possibility, we determined the influence of the degree of viral replication and its suppression by HAART on levels of ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor expression. Although associations between the VL and the levels of these parameters were detected ( table 2 and figure 2 A and 2 B ), the strongest associations were for the IL-7-IL-7R (CD127) axis. Statistically, there were very strong negative correlations between the VL and levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). In addition, compared with subjects without VL suppression, subjects with VL suppression had higher pSTAT5 levels after stimulation with IL-7 but not after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15 ( figure 2 A ). Furthermore, subjects with VL suppression had higher levels of CD127, whereas levels of IL-2 and IL-15 receptors—namely, IL-2R (CD25), IL-2/IL-15R (CD122), the common ?c cytokine receptor (CD132)—were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression ( figure 2 B ). These findings suggest that HIV infection may preferentially target IL-7 responsiveness and IL-7 receptor levels. Predictably, because the VL in untreated subjects was similar to that in subjects without VL suppression ( table 1 ), we observed that the levels of cytokine receptors and ?c cytokine-induced pSTAT5 noted in subjects without VL suppression approximated those found in untreated subjects ( figure 2 A and 2 B ). Two findings underscored the fact that the aforementioned associations were unlikely to be spurious and that the group of subjects in the present study provided sufficient statistical power to detect the relevant immunologic phenotypes present during HIV disease. First, levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were higher in subjects without VL suppression and in untreated subjects than in subjects with VL suppression ( figure 2 C ). Second, univariate analyses in the entire group of HIV-positive subjects revealed that subjects with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR had lower prevailing CD4+ T cell counts ( table 3 ). These data are consistent with previous reports indicating that (1) an increased VL is associated with higher levels of PD-1 and HLA-DR, and (2) enhanced expression of HLA-DR and PD-1 is associated with negative effects on T cell homeostasis (i.e., lower CD4+ T cell counts) [ 21 , 22 ]. Thus, the juxtaposition of findings from 2 comparisons— namely, HIV-positive subjects versus HIV-negative subjects ( figure 1 E –1 G ) and subjects with VL suppression versus subjects without VL suppression ( figure 1 E and figure 2 )—suggested the following pathogenic model: high viral replication during HIV-1 infection induces high constitutive levels of pSTAT5. These high levels, along with an abnormal pattern of cytokine receptor expression, may desensitize pSTAT5-dependent signaling pathways for further cytokine stimulation, as is reflected by the negative correlations between VL and cytokine-induced pSTAT5 levels ( table 2 ). We had anticipated that suppression of viral replication by HAART would be associated with changes in all the pSTAT5 and cytokine receptor profiles. However, we found this to be true only for the perturbations in the IL-7/CD127 axis, because suppression of viral replication was associated with higher levels of CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but levels of CD25, CD122, and CD132, as well as those of IL-2- and IL-15-induced pSTAT5, were similar between subjects with and without VL suppression. Taken together, these findings indicated specificity between the extent of viral replication and perturbations in IL-7-dependent signaling pathways.  IL-7 responsiveness, CD127 expression, and CD4 T cell count For the overall study cohort, the following correlations were observed for the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts: (1) there were negative and positive correlations with constitutive and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, respectively; (2) there were no correlations with IL-2- or IL-15-induced pSTAT5 levels or IL-2/and IL-15 receptor levels; and (3) among the cytokine receptors, the strongest correlation was with CD127 expression, which was a positive correlation ( table 2 ).  IL-7 responsiveness, CD127 expression, and CD4 T cell count For the overall study cohort, the following correlations were observed for the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts: (1) there were negative and positive correlations with constitutive and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, respectively; (2) there were no correlations with IL-2- or IL-15-induced pSTAT5 levels or IL-2/and IL-15 receptor levels; and (3) among the cytokine receptors, the strongest correlation was with CD127 expression, which was a positive correlation ( table 2 ).  CD127 expression and IL-7 responsiveness The following findings suggested that CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 were tracking similar biological processes: there was a strong inverse correlation between the VL and levels of both CD127 and IL-7- induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). The levels of these 2 parameters were lower in subjects without VL suppression than in those with VL suppression ( figure 2 A and 2 B ), and they both correlated positively with CD4+ T cell counts and with each other ( table 2 and figure 3 A ). Thus, one possibility was that the negative association between the VL and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels was simply a reflection of the coincident negative association between VL and CD127 expression. However, there are 2 reasons that this was unlikely. First, although there was a strong correlation between CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, we found that one-half of the variation in IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels could not be attributed to CD127 expression (? correlation, 0.749; 1 ? R 2 = 0.44). Second, in a multivariate regression model, IL-7 responsiveness during HIV disease was associated with CD4+ T cell counts, even after controlling for the effects of CD127 ( figure 3 A ).  CD127 expression and IL-7 responsiveness The following findings suggested that CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 were tracking similar biological processes: there was a strong inverse correlation between the VL and levels of both CD127 and IL-7- induced pSTAT5 ( table 2 ). The levels of these 2 parameters were lower in subjects without VL suppression than in those with VL suppression ( figure 2 A and 2 B ), and they both correlated positively with CD4+ T cell counts and with each other ( table 2 and figure 3 A ). Thus, one possibility was that the negative association between the VL and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels was simply a reflection of the coincident negative association between VL and CD127 expression. However, there are 2 reasons that this was unlikely. First, although there was a strong correlation between CD127 and IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels, we found that one-half of the variation in IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels could not be attributed to CD127 expression (? correlation, 0.749; 1 ? R 2 = 0.44). Second, in a multivariate regression model, IL-7 responsiveness during HIV disease was associated with CD4+ T cell counts, even after controlling for the effects of CD127 ( figure 3 A ).  IL-7 responsiveness and CD4 T cell recovery We next sought to distinguish whether the higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 observed in subjects with VL suppression, compared with subjects without suppression, were merely an epiphenomenon occurring in parallel to virologic control or whether IL-7 responsiveness was associated with the extent of CD4+ recovery, independent of viral suppression. In addition, we assessed whether the association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell recovery was independent of plasma levels of IL-7 and parameters that are known to have a negative influence on CD4+ T cell homeostasis during HIV infection and/or during HAART, such as levels of HLA-DR [ 21 , 33 ], PD-1 [ 22 ], and CCR5 [ 23 , 34 ]. To assess the association between the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts and immune recovery during HAART, we first determined whether the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was reflective of the historical changes in CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART. We found that, among those who received HAART, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count closely tracked the prior trajectory of CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART until the day of assessment of T cell responsiveness (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We categorized the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts into 5 strata, and we found that HAART-treated subjects who, at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels, had the highest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts, had gained an average of 4 CD4+ T cells per month from the time of initiation of HAART, whereas those who had the lowest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts had lost an average of 1 cell per month (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We therefore reasoned that, in our study population, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count may serve as a proxy for changes in the CD4+ T cell counts of subjects who received HAART. The following 5 findings demonstrated an association between the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 and immunologic recovery that was independent of several parameters known to have an influence on immune reconstitution. First, among subjects with VL suppression, higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 correlated positively with higher total and naive CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 B and 3 C ). No association was found between IL-7-induced pSTAT5 and memory CD4+ T cell counts (data not shown). Second, a positive correlation between IL-7 responsiveness and the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was detected in subjects with VL suppression, as well as in all subjects, when the effects of the VL were accounted for in multivariate models ( table 3 ). Third, although univariate analyses showed that higher levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were negatively associated with CD4+ T cell counts, multivariate analyses revealed that only IL-7 responsiveness was independently associated with the prevailing CD4+ T cell count ( table 3 ). Fourth, CD4+ T cell trajectories from the time of initiation of HAART differed according to tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels ( figure 3 D ). The mean monthly increase in CD4+ T cell counts in subjects with VL suppression was estimated to be 3.5, 2.2, and 1.6 cells/mm3 for subjects in the upper, middle, and lower tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 D ). Fifth, the extent of IL-7 responsiveness was higher in those subjects who were treated with HAART and were categorized as having a complete immunologic response than in those who were categorized as having an incomplete immunologic response; the latter group constituted 30% of the study population, a frequency that is consistent with that found in previous studies [ 15 , 16 ]. Levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but not levels of IL-7, PD-1, CCR5, or HLA-DR, differed between subjects with complete and incomplete immunologic responses ( table 4 ). Differences in IL-7 responsiveness among these groups of subjects were not confounded by differential lengths of follow-up: the mean duration of follow-up (± standard deviation) was 7.57 ± 2.45 years for subjects with a complete response versus 6.76 ± 3.01 years for subjects with an incomplete response ( P = .2507, for the difference between groups). By logistic regression analysis, we found that subjects with higher IL-7 responsiveness were more likely to be categorized as having a complete immunologic response, after adjustment for pre-HAART CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 E ), which are a known predictor of the extent of immune reconstitution [ 15 – 17 ] and are the only other parameter that was strongly associated with CD4+ T cell recovery in the group of subjects with VL suppression studied herein ( table 4 ). It is noteworthy that, in the aforementioned analyses, plasma levels of IL-7 did not appear to influence CD4+ T cell recovery ( table 3 ). However, in light of the observation that there was an association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell counts during HAART, we considered the possibility that the previously ascribed positive influence of IL-7 on T cell homeostasis [ 4 , 35 – 38 ] might be primarily apparent in the subset of subjects who also have evidence of high IL-7 responsiveness. Consistent with this possibility, a positive correlation between plasma IL-7 levels and CD4+ T cell counts was detected in subjects with VL suppression who had high but not low or intermediate levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 F ). We found that, among subjects with VL suppression who had high responsiveness to IL-7 ex vivo, every unit (1 pg/mL) of plasma levels of IL-7 was associated with 17 more CD4+ T cells ( figure 3 F ).  IL-7 responsiveness and CD4 T cell recovery We next sought to distinguish whether the higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 observed in subjects with VL suppression, compared with subjects without suppression, were merely an epiphenomenon occurring in parallel to virologic control or whether IL-7 responsiveness was associated with the extent of CD4+ recovery, independent of viral suppression. In addition, we assessed whether the association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell recovery was independent of plasma levels of IL-7 and parameters that are known to have a negative influence on CD4+ T cell homeostasis during HIV infection and/or during HAART, such as levels of HLA-DR [ 21 , 33 ], PD-1 [ 22 ], and CCR5 [ 23 , 34 ]. To assess the association between the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts and immune recovery during HAART, we first determined whether the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was reflective of the historical changes in CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART. We found that, among those who received HAART, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count closely tracked the prior trajectory of CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART until the day of assessment of T cell responsiveness (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We categorized the prevailing CD4+ T cell counts into 5 strata, and we found that HAART-treated subjects who, at the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels, had the highest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts, had gained an average of 4 CD4+ T cells per month from the time of initiation of HAART, whereas those who had the lowest prevailing CD4+ T cell counts had lost an average of 1 cell per month (see the Appendix , which appears only in the electronic version of the Journal ). We therefore reasoned that, in our study population, the prevailing CD4+ T cell count may serve as a proxy for changes in the CD4+ T cell counts of subjects who received HAART. The following 5 findings demonstrated an association between the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 and immunologic recovery that was independent of several parameters known to have an influence on immune reconstitution. First, among subjects with VL suppression, higher levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 correlated positively with higher total and naive CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 B and 3 C ). No association was found between IL-7-induced pSTAT5 and memory CD4+ T cell counts (data not shown). Second, a positive correlation between IL-7 responsiveness and the prevailing CD4+ T cell count was detected in subjects with VL suppression, as well as in all subjects, when the effects of the VL were accounted for in multivariate models ( table 3 ). Third, although univariate analyses showed that higher levels of HLA-DR and PD-1 were negatively associated with CD4+ T cell counts, multivariate analyses revealed that only IL-7 responsiveness was independently associated with the prevailing CD4+ T cell count ( table 3 ). Fourth, CD4+ T cell trajectories from the time of initiation of HAART differed according to tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels ( figure 3 D ). The mean monthly increase in CD4+ T cell counts in subjects with VL suppression was estimated to be 3.5, 2.2, and 1.6 cells/mm3 for subjects in the upper, middle, and lower tertiles of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 D ). Fifth, the extent of IL-7 responsiveness was higher in those subjects who were treated with HAART and were categorized as having a complete immunologic response than in those who were categorized as having an incomplete immunologic response; the latter group constituted 30% of the study population, a frequency that is consistent with that found in previous studies [ 15 , 16 ]. Levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5, but not levels of IL-7, PD-1, CCR5, or HLA-DR, differed between subjects with complete and incomplete immunologic responses ( table 4 ). Differences in IL-7 responsiveness among these groups of subjects were not confounded by differential lengths of follow-up: the mean duration of follow-up (± standard deviation) was 7.57 ± 2.45 years for subjects with a complete response versus 6.76 ± 3.01 years for subjects with an incomplete response ( P = .2507, for the difference between groups). By logistic regression analysis, we found that subjects with higher IL-7 responsiveness were more likely to be categorized as having a complete immunologic response, after adjustment for pre-HAART CD4+ T cell counts ( figure 3 E ), which are a known predictor of the extent of immune reconstitution [ 15 – 17 ] and are the only other parameter that was strongly associated with CD4+ T cell recovery in the group of subjects with VL suppression studied herein ( table 4 ). It is noteworthy that, in the aforementioned analyses, plasma levels of IL-7 did not appear to influence CD4+ T cell recovery ( table 3 ). However, in light of the observation that there was an association between IL-7 responsiveness and CD4+ T cell counts during HAART, we considered the possibility that the previously ascribed positive influence of IL-7 on T cell homeostasis [ 4 , 35 – 38 ] might be primarily apparent in the subset of subjects who also have evidence of high IL-7 responsiveness. Consistent with this possibility, a positive correlation between plasma IL-7 levels and CD4+ T cell counts was detected in subjects with VL suppression who had high but not low or intermediate levels of IL-7-induced pSTAT5 ( figure 3 F ). We found that, among subjects with VL suppression who had high responsiveness to IL-7 ex vivo, every unit (1 pg/mL) of plasma levels of IL-7 was associated with 17 more CD4+ T cells ( figure 3 F ).  DISCUSSION We found that, among subjects with HAART-induced VL suppression, there was a strong association between the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 (but not to IL-2 or IL-15) and prevailing CD4+ T cell counts, which, in this study, were defined as the average of all CD4+ T cell counts noted in the 1 year before assessment of pSTAT5 levels. This association might have relevance regarding the extent of immune reconstitution during HAART, because there was a strong positive correlation between prevailing CD4+ T cell counts and the rate of change in CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART until the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels. Persistent T cell activation is a major determinant of impaired CD4+ T cell recovery [ 33 ], and accordingly, in univariate analyses, we found that a high T cell activation status was associated with lower prevailing CD4+ T cell counts. However, when several parameters known to influence immune recovery were included as covariates in a multivariate analysis, only IL-7 responsiveness remained significantly associated with prevailing CD4+ T cell counts. Furthermore, subjects categorized as having a complete or incomplete immunologic response differed according to IL-7 responsiveness but not to activation status or levels of PD-1, CCR5, or plasma IL-7. Finally, IL-7 responsiveness predicted prevailing CD4+ T cell counts after adjustment for the pre-HAART CD4+ T cell count, which is the only other parameter that distinguished subjects with a complete response from those with an incomplete response. Taken together, these data suggested that the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 may help promote and/or maintain CD4+ T cell recovery in subjects who attain HAART-induced VL suppression. This inference is consistent with the viewpoint that, among the ?c cytokines, IL-7 is most influential in regulating the proliferation and survival of CD4+ T cells [ 35 , 36 ]. In addition, even though many ?c cytokines participate in lymphopenia-induced homeostatic proliferation, only IL-7 appears to be an absolute requirement for this process in vivo [ 37 , 38 ]. The specificity of IL-7-dependent signaling pathways in facilitating CD4+ T cell reconstitution was underscored by our findings that surface levels of CD127 but not CD25, CD122, or CD132 were significantly higher in subjects with VL suppression. Furthermore, the positive correlation between IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels and the frequency of naive CD4+ T cells in subjects with VL suppression suggests that the high IL-7 responsiveness observed in subjects with a complete immunologic response may underlie the previous observation that such individuals have increased numbers of circulating naive CD4+ T cells and thymic emigrants [ 39 – 41 ]. Our results have 3 major implications. First, intersubject differences in IL-7 responsiveness, as assessed by cytokine-induced pSTAT5 levels, may serve as a novel basis for the significant heterogeneity in the extent of immune recovery noted during HAART. A limitation of our study is that it is based on a cross-sectional study design, and studies are currently under way to determine whether hyporesponsiveness of T cells to IL-7 before HAART predicts impaired immune recovery during therapy. Second, our findings have relevance for the quest to identify biomarkers that predict therapeutic outcomes. The observation that the correlation between IL-7 and CD4+ T cell counts was most evident in those who also had high IL-7 responsiveness suggests that assessing cytokine and cytokine receptor levels without accounting for the functional cytokine-dependent intracellular signaling pathways may convey limited predictive capacity. Third, our findings suggest that the IL-7-CD127 axis might be an important therapeutic target for enhancing immunologic reconstitution. In this respect, IL-7 is being evaluated as a coadjuvant to HAART [ 42 ]. Because intersubject differences in increases in CD4+ T cell counts are observed after administration of recombinant IL-7 [ 43 ], assessment of IL-7 responsiveness might help to identify subjects in whom this immune-based therapy might have the greatest salutary effect.  DISCUSSION We found that, among subjects with HAART-induced VL suppression, there was a strong association between the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 (but not to IL-2 or IL-15) and prevailing CD4+ T cell counts, which, in this study, were defined as the average of all CD4+ T cell counts noted in the 1 year before assessment of pSTAT5 levels. This association might have relevance regarding the extent of immune reconstitution during HAART, because there was a strong positive correlation between prevailing CD4+ T cell counts and the rate of change in CD4+ T cell counts from the time of initiation of HAART until the time of assessment of pSTAT5 levels. Persistent T cell activation is a major determinant of impaired CD4+ T cell recovery [ 33 ], and accordingly, in univariate analyses, we found that a high T cell activation status was associated with lower prevailing CD4+ T cell counts. However, when several parameters known to influence immune recovery were included as covariates in a multivariate analysis, only IL-7 responsiveness remained significantly associated with prevailing CD4+ T cell counts. Furthermore, subjects categorized as having a complete or incomplete immunologic response differed according to IL-7 responsiveness but not to activation status or levels of PD-1, CCR5, or plasma IL-7. Finally, IL-7 responsiveness predicted prevailing CD4+ T cell counts after adjustment for the pre-HAART CD4+ T cell count, which is the only other parameter that distinguished subjects with a complete response from those with an incomplete response. Taken together, these data suggested that the responsiveness of T cells to IL-7 may help promote and/or maintain CD4+ T cell recovery in subjects who attain HAART-induced VL suppression. This inference is consistent with the viewpoint that, among the ?c cytokines, IL-7 is most influential in regulating the proliferation and survival of CD4+ T cells [ 35 , 36 ]. In addition, even though many ?c cytokines participate in lymphopenia-induced homeostatic proliferation, only IL-7 appears to be an absolute requirement for this process in vivo [ 37 , 38 ]. The specificity of IL-7-dependent signaling pathways in facilitating CD4+ T cell reconstitution was underscored by our findings that surface levels of CD127 but not CD25, CD122, or CD132 were significantly higher in subjects with VL suppression. Furthermore, the positive correlation between IL-7-induced pSTAT5 levels and the frequency of naive CD4+ T cells in subjects with VL suppression suggests that the high IL-7 responsiveness observed in subjects with a complete immunologic response may underlie the previous observation that such individuals have increased numbers of circulating naive CD4+ T cells and thymic emigrants [ 39 – 41 ]. Our results have 3 major implications. First, intersubject differences in IL-7 responsiveness, as assessed by cytokine-induced pSTAT5 levels, may serve as a novel basis for the significant heterogeneity in the extent of immune recovery noted during HAART. A limitation of our study is that it is based on a cross-sectional study design, and studies are currently under way to determine whether hyporesponsiveness of T cells to IL-7 before HAART predicts impaired immune recovery during therapy. Second, our findings have relevance for the quest to identify biomarkers that predict therapeutic outcomes. The observation that the correlation between IL-7 and CD4+ T cell counts was most evident in those who also had high IL-7 responsiveness suggests that assessing cytokine and cytokine receptor levels without accounting for the functional cytokine-dependent intracellular signaling pathways may convey limited predictive capacity. Third, our findings suggest that the IL-7-CD127 axis might be an important therapeutic target for enhancing immunologic reconstitution. In this respect, IL-7 is being evaluated as a coadjuvant to HAART [ 42 ]. Because intersubject differences in increases in CD4+ T cell counts are observed after administration of recombinant IL-7 [ 43 ], assessment of IL-7 responsiveness might help to identify subjects in whom this immune-based therapy might have the greatest salutary effect.  Supplementary Material Supplement  Supplementary Material Supplement 