Antitumor vaccines, immunotherapy and the immunological constant of rejection Anti-cancer vaccines have not matched the clinical expectations projected from their ability to induce consistently systemic anti-cancer T-cell responses. Thus, a dichotomy is observed between the immunological and clinical endpoints of anti-cancer immunization. Anti-cancer vaccines have clearly demonstrated that highly specific T-cell responses can be induced that can recognize autologous cancer antigens in patients with cancer. This ability is an outstanding achievement of modern biotechnology, yielding one of the most specific types of potential anti-cancer reagents. However, systemic, vaccine-induced anti-cancer responses exemplify a broader immunological paradox: cytotoxic T-cells can coexist within the same organism with their target cells not only in the context of cancer, but also in the context of chronic infections, well-controlled allo-transplant reactions and autoimmunity. According to this view, anti-cancer immune responses are a facet of a tissue-specific autoimmune phenomenon specific for cancer tissue that may or may not result in the successful immune-destruction of target cells, depending on an assortment of genetic factors related to the background of the host or evolving phenotypes of a heterogeneous cancer environment. This feature article summarizes the current understanding of the mechanisms leading to tumor rejection in humans as well as in experimental models, in the context of the broader immunological phenomenon leading to tissue-specific destruction. Anti-cancer vaccines that may not induce clinically significant anti-cancer responses independently could function as a unique tool to enhance the specificity of the response of the host against cancer, provided that strategies are implemented to amplify the immune reaction initiated by vaccine-induced antibodies and/or T-cells.  Conclusion Active specific immunization against cancer is far from obsolete as an anti-cancer modality. The limited success of this approach in the last decade has resulted from a failure to better understand the physiology of effector T-cells in humans and their precise role in mediating TSD. A broader view of immunology that encompasses adaptive and immune mechanisms as integrated units rather than separate entities will increase the likelihood of therapeutic success. Active specific immunization against cancer has delivered most of its potential by reproducibly enhancing the frequency of circulating tumor-specific T-cells. The next step is addressing the requirements to induce the effective localization of T-cells at the tumor site, the full activation of these cells and, most importantly, their exploitation as tissue-specific pro-inflammatory reagents in the target tissue. Only following this systematic approach will the goal of successful cancer immunization be ultimately met. 