Suggested response criteria for phase II antitumor drug studies for neurofibromatosis type 2 related vestibular schwannoma Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a tumor suppressor gene syndrome characterized by multiple schwannomas, especially vestibular schwannomas (VS), and meningiomas. Anticancer drug trials are now being explored, but there are no standardized endpoints in NF2. We review the challenges of NF2 clinical trials and suggest possible response criteria for use in initial phase II studies. We suggest two main response criteria in such trials. Objective radiographic response is defined as a durable 20% or greater reduction in VS volume based on postcontrast T1-weighted MRI images collected with 3 mm or finer cuts through the internal auditory canal. Hearing response is defined as a statistically significant improvement in word recognition scores using 50-word recorded lists in audiology. A possible composite endpoint incorporating both radiographic response and hearing response is outlined. We emphasize pitfalls in response assessment and suggest guidelines to minimize misinterpretations of response. We also identify research goals in NF2 to facilitate future trial conduct, such as identifying the expectations for time to tumor progression and time to measurable hearing loss in untreated NF2-related VS, and the relation of both endpoints to patient prognostic factors (such as age, baseline tumor volume, and measures of disease severity). These data would facilitate future use of endpoints based on stability of tumor size and hearing, which might be more appropriate for testing certain drugs. We encourage adoption of standardized endpoints early in the development of phase II trials for this population to facilitate comparison of results across trials of different agents.  Discussion In this communication, we suggest two important means of assessing tumor response of NF2-related VS to drug treatment: radiographic tumor response (defined as a 20% reduction in tumor volume) and hearing response (defined as a statistically significant improvement in word recognition score). Prior experience with chemotherapy for VS has been very limited, and no standard response criteria for such trials have been defined. Riccardi reported improvement in depression, weight gain and improved muscle mass, gait improvement, absence of tumor-associated pain, and “slowing of neurofibromas growth” in one NF patient treated using ketotifen [ 152 ], and Jahrsdoerfer and Benjamin [ 153 ] reported cessation of tumor growth and stabilization or improvement in hearing in two patients treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and dacarbazine. Neither report used predefined criteria to classify response. Recent advances in the understanding of schwannoma tumor biology [ 20 – 26 ], combined with development of active anticancer drugs designed to target specific molecular pathways in neoplastic cells, suggest that trials of drug treatment for NF2-related VS may now be warranted. We suggest that the criteria defined here deserve consideration for inclusion as primary endpoints in such trials, at least initially. When more detailed information becomes available on the time to tumor progression and time to hearing loss in untreated NF2 VS, these endpoints are likely to replace tumor shrinkage and hearing improvement in trials. However, because many NF2 patients represent new somatic mutations in the NF2 gene and do not belong to known NF2 kindreds [ 4 ], some patients will continue to present as new diagnoses with poor hearing in both ears. Such patients would benefit from drugs that cause hearing improvement, rather than stability. In addition, a recent review of phase II trial design for targeted anticancer agents (many of which would be expected to be cytostatic) showed that most agents reaching regulatory approval generated objective responses in phase II testing; this was correlated with endpoints reflecting tumor stability [ 154 ]. Special considerations for primary endpoints in NF2 trials, and composite endpoints Some special considerations in NF2 phase II trials may prevent either radiographic response or hearing response from serving all of the typical functions of a phase II primary endpoint. For example, patients in a phase II trial whose tumors progress according to the primary endpoint (e.g., radiographic criteria) do not normally continue to receive the study drug and are no longer treated on protocol. However, in an NF2 trial some patients may achieve a hearing response to treatment while developing progressive disease by MRI scan. Although treatment is deemed to have failed in these patients by traditional response criteria, we feel these patients should be allowed to continue treatment with the study drug on a compassionate- use basis at the discretion of the study chair in an NF2 trial. We believe this can be justified based on the current standard of care for NF2-related VS, in which growing tumors are often monitored without active intervention to preserve hearing. Conversely, some patients might enter an NF2 VS trial because of a growing VS in an only hearing ear with word recognition scores above 94%. Such patients would be ineligible for hearing responses because of the “ceiling effect” described above, although drug activity could still be detected through changes in tumor size. One approach to the problem of two endpoints, either one of which might be more important in a given clinical situation, is to combine the two into a composite endpoint. Table 2 shows one possible means of integrating objective radiographic response and hearing response in NF2 VS. As shown, the combination of major and minor radiographic and hearing responses can be used to construct a composite endpoint with four response categories: major response, minor response, stable disease, and progressive disease. Whether a composite endpoint of this nature had value would probably become clear as clinical experience with such trials accrues. Initially, we suggest using objective (radiographic) tumor response as the major endpoint for designing phase II trials, because its measurement in relation to known NF2 VS natural history seems most secure. All patients enrolled in an NF2 VS trial would be expected to be eligible for volumetric response, while our preliminary experience suggests only half of patients might be eligible for a hearing response or composite endpoint response. A volumetric primary endpoint would increase efficiency in this rare disease. Hearing response rates, though, also deserve significant weight in judging a drug’s clinical benefit in NF2 related VS and whether to progress to phase III testing—as do response durability, treatment toxicity, and other factors. Future research and novel endpoints This communication also identifies several important research goals in NF2 natural history in order to facilitate future development of new endpoints for NF2 trials. These goals include identifying the time to tumor progression and time to measurable hearing loss in untreated NF2-related VS, and the relation of both endpoints to patient prognostic factors (such as age, baseline tumor volume, and measures of disease severity). In addition, researchers should seek better definition of the smallest improvement in hearing (specifically word recognition) that has clinical significance for NF2 patients with only hearing ears (i.e., the minimal clinically significant difference). If the test for word recognition using standard audiometric technique that we describe proves to be insensitive to small but meaningful hearing improvements in the context of an only hearing ear, more sensitive hearing endpoint measures may need to be developed. Finally, the possibility of using a composite endpoint in NF2 trials, such as the one we describe here, should be considered for future use in selecting drugs for phase III trials in this rare disease.  Discussion In this communication, we suggest two important means of assessing tumor response of NF2-related VS to drug treatment: radiographic tumor response (defined as a 20% reduction in tumor volume) and hearing response (defined as a statistically significant improvement in word recognition score). Prior experience with chemotherapy for VS has been very limited, and no standard response criteria for such trials have been defined. Riccardi reported improvement in depression, weight gain and improved muscle mass, gait improvement, absence of tumor-associated pain, and “slowing of neurofibromas growth” in one NF patient treated using ketotifen [ 152 ], and Jahrsdoerfer and Benjamin [ 153 ] reported cessation of tumor growth and stabilization or improvement in hearing in two patients treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and dacarbazine. Neither report used predefined criteria to classify response. Recent advances in the understanding of schwannoma tumor biology [ 20 – 26 ], combined with development of active anticancer drugs designed to target specific molecular pathways in neoplastic cells, suggest that trials of drug treatment for NF2-related VS may now be warranted. We suggest that the criteria defined here deserve consideration for inclusion as primary endpoints in such trials, at least initially. When more detailed information becomes available on the time to tumor progression and time to hearing loss in untreated NF2 VS, these endpoints are likely to replace tumor shrinkage and hearing improvement in trials. However, because many NF2 patients represent new somatic mutations in the NF2 gene and do not belong to known NF2 kindreds [ 4 ], some patients will continue to present as new diagnoses with poor hearing in both ears. Such patients would benefit from drugs that cause hearing improvement, rather than stability. In addition, a recent review of phase II trial design for targeted anticancer agents (many of which would be expected to be cytostatic) showed that most agents reaching regulatory approval generated objective responses in phase II testing; this was correlated with endpoints reflecting tumor stability [ 154 ]. Special considerations for primary endpoints in NF2 trials, and composite endpoints Some special considerations in NF2 phase II trials may prevent either radiographic response or hearing response from serving all of the typical functions of a phase II primary endpoint. For example, patients in a phase II trial whose tumors progress according to the primary endpoint (e.g., radiographic criteria) do not normally continue to receive the study drug and are no longer treated on protocol. However, in an NF2 trial some patients may achieve a hearing response to treatment while developing progressive disease by MRI scan. Although treatment is deemed to have failed in these patients by traditional response criteria, we feel these patients should be allowed to continue treatment with the study drug on a compassionate- use basis at the discretion of the study chair in an NF2 trial. We believe this can be justified based on the current standard of care for NF2-related VS, in which growing tumors are often monitored without active intervention to preserve hearing. Conversely, some patients might enter an NF2 VS trial because of a growing VS in an only hearing ear with word recognition scores above 94%. Such patients would be ineligible for hearing responses because of the “ceiling effect” described above, although drug activity could still be detected through changes in tumor size. One approach to the problem of two endpoints, either one of which might be more important in a given clinical situation, is to combine the two into a composite endpoint. Table 2 shows one possible means of integrating objective radiographic response and hearing response in NF2 VS. As shown, the combination of major and minor radiographic and hearing responses can be used to construct a composite endpoint with four response categories: major response, minor response, stable disease, and progressive disease. Whether a composite endpoint of this nature had value would probably become clear as clinical experience with such trials accrues. Initially, we suggest using objective (radiographic) tumor response as the major endpoint for designing phase II trials, because its measurement in relation to known NF2 VS natural history seems most secure. All patients enrolled in an NF2 VS trial would be expected to be eligible for volumetric response, while our preliminary experience suggests only half of patients might be eligible for a hearing response or composite endpoint response. A volumetric primary endpoint would increase efficiency in this rare disease. Hearing response rates, though, also deserve significant weight in judging a drug’s clinical benefit in NF2 related VS and whether to progress to phase III testing—as do response durability, treatment toxicity, and other factors. Future research and novel endpoints This communication also identifies several important research goals in NF2 natural history in order to facilitate future development of new endpoints for NF2 trials. These goals include identifying the time to tumor progression and time to measurable hearing loss in untreated NF2-related VS, and the relation of both endpoints to patient prognostic factors (such as age, baseline tumor volume, and measures of disease severity). In addition, researchers should seek better definition of the smallest improvement in hearing (specifically word recognition) that has clinical significance for NF2 patients with only hearing ears (i.e., the minimal clinically significant difference). If the test for word recognition using standard audiometric technique that we describe proves to be insensitive to small but meaningful hearing improvements in the context of an only hearing ear, more sensitive hearing endpoint measures may need to be developed. Finally, the possibility of using a composite endpoint in NF2 trials, such as the one we describe here, should be considered for future use in selecting drugs for phase III trials in this rare disease.  Special considerations for primary endpoints in NF2 trials, and composite endpoints Some special considerations in NF2 phase II trials may prevent either radiographic response or hearing response from serving all of the typical functions of a phase II primary endpoint. For example, patients in a phase II trial whose tumors progress according to the primary endpoint (e.g., radiographic criteria) do not normally continue to receive the study drug and are no longer treated on protocol. However, in an NF2 trial some patients may achieve a hearing response to treatment while developing progressive disease by MRI scan. Although treatment is deemed to have failed in these patients by traditional response criteria, we feel these patients should be allowed to continue treatment with the study drug on a compassionate- use basis at the discretion of the study chair in an NF2 trial. We believe this can be justified based on the current standard of care for NF2-related VS, in which growing tumors are often monitored without active intervention to preserve hearing. Conversely, some patients might enter an NF2 VS trial because of a growing VS in an only hearing ear with word recognition scores above 94%. Such patients would be ineligible for hearing responses because of the “ceiling effect” described above, although drug activity could still be detected through changes in tumor size. One approach to the problem of two endpoints, either one of which might be more important in a given clinical situation, is to combine the two into a composite endpoint. Table 2 shows one possible means of integrating objective radiographic response and hearing response in NF2 VS. As shown, the combination of major and minor radiographic and hearing responses can be used to construct a composite endpoint with four response categories: major response, minor response, stable disease, and progressive disease. Whether a composite endpoint of this nature had value would probably become clear as clinical experience with such trials accrues. Initially, we suggest using objective (radiographic) tumor response as the major endpoint for designing phase II trials, because its measurement in relation to known NF2 VS natural history seems most secure. All patients enrolled in an NF2 VS trial would be expected to be eligible for volumetric response, while our preliminary experience suggests only half of patients might be eligible for a hearing response or composite endpoint response. A volumetric primary endpoint would increase efficiency in this rare disease. Hearing response rates, though, also deserve significant weight in judging a drug’s clinical benefit in NF2 related VS and whether to progress to phase III testing—as do response durability, treatment toxicity, and other factors.  Special considerations for primary endpoints in NF2 trials, and composite endpoints Some special considerations in NF2 phase II trials may prevent either radiographic response or hearing response from serving all of the typical functions of a phase II primary endpoint. For example, patients in a phase II trial whose tumors progress according to the primary endpoint (e.g., radiographic criteria) do not normally continue to receive the study drug and are no longer treated on protocol. However, in an NF2 trial some patients may achieve a hearing response to treatment while developing progressive disease by MRI scan. Although treatment is deemed to have failed in these patients by traditional response criteria, we feel these patients should be allowed to continue treatment with the study drug on a compassionate- use basis at the discretion of the study chair in an NF2 trial. We believe this can be justified based on the current standard of care for NF2-related VS, in which growing tumors are often monitored without active intervention to preserve hearing. Conversely, some patients might enter an NF2 VS trial because of a growing VS in an only hearing ear with word recognition scores above 94%. Such patients would be ineligible for hearing responses because of the “ceiling effect” described above, although drug activity could still be detected through changes in tumor size. One approach to the problem of two endpoints, either one of which might be more important in a given clinical situation, is to combine the two into a composite endpoint. Table 2 shows one possible means of integrating objective radiographic response and hearing response in NF2 VS. As shown, the combination of major and minor radiographic and hearing responses can be used to construct a composite endpoint with four response categories: major response, minor response, stable disease, and progressive disease. Whether a composite endpoint of this nature had value would probably become clear as clinical experience with such trials accrues. Initially, we suggest using objective (radiographic) tumor response as the major endpoint for designing phase II trials, because its measurement in relation to known NF2 VS natural history seems most secure. All patients enrolled in an NF2 VS trial would be expected to be eligible for volumetric response, while our preliminary experience suggests only half of patients might be eligible for a hearing response or composite endpoint response. A volumetric primary endpoint would increase efficiency in this rare disease. Hearing response rates, though, also deserve significant weight in judging a drug’s clinical benefit in NF2 related VS and whether to progress to phase III testing—as do response durability, treatment toxicity, and other factors.  Future research and novel endpoints This communication also identifies several important research goals in NF2 natural history in order to facilitate future development of new endpoints for NF2 trials. These goals include identifying the time to tumor progression and time to measurable hearing loss in untreated NF2-related VS, and the relation of both endpoints to patient prognostic factors (such as age, baseline tumor volume, and measures of disease severity). In addition, researchers should seek better definition of the smallest improvement in hearing (specifically word recognition) that has clinical significance for NF2 patients with only hearing ears (i.e., the minimal clinically significant difference). If the test for word recognition using standard audiometric technique that we describe proves to be insensitive to small but meaningful hearing improvements in the context of an only hearing ear, more sensitive hearing endpoint measures may need to be developed. Finally, the possibility of using a composite endpoint in NF2 trials, such as the one we describe here, should be considered for future use in selecting drugs for phase III trials in this rare disease.  Future research and novel endpoints This communication also identifies several important research goals in NF2 natural history in order to facilitate future development of new endpoints for NF2 trials. These goals include identifying the time to tumor progression and time to measurable hearing loss in untreated NF2-related VS, and the relation of both endpoints to patient prognostic factors (such as age, baseline tumor volume, and measures of disease severity). In addition, researchers should seek better definition of the smallest improvement in hearing (specifically word recognition) that has clinical significance for NF2 patients with only hearing ears (i.e., the minimal clinically significant difference). If the test for word recognition using standard audiometric technique that we describe proves to be insensitive to small but meaningful hearing improvements in the context of an only hearing ear, more sensitive hearing endpoint measures may need to be developed. Finally, the possibility of using a composite endpoint in NF2 trials, such as the one we describe here, should be considered for future use in selecting drugs for phase III trials in this rare disease. 