Human Papillomavirus Infection as a Prognostic Factor in Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma Patients Treated in a Prospective Phase II Clinical Trial Background Human papillomvirus (HPV)-16 is associated with an improved prognosis in a subset of patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Cervical carcinoma models have also demonstrated that HPV oncoproteins, E6 and E7, can induce VEGF and HIF-1 gene expression. The purpose of this study was to 1) determine the presence of high-risk HPV 16 in patients with HNSCC enrolled in a prospective phase II clinical trial, 2) assess the impact of HPV status on treatment response and survival in this select cohort treated with combined modality therapy, and 3) identify the differences between HIF/VEGF expression in HPV-positive and -negative tumors. Experimental Design The effect of HPV status on treatment response and outcome was prospectively evaluated in a single-institution phase II clinical trial. Patients had resectable untreated stage III, IV HNSCC of the oral cavity, oropharynx, hyopharynx, or larynryx, and stage II cancer of the base of tongue, hypopharynx, and larynx. All patients received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with two course of docetaxel (T) 60 mg/m2, then a 96-hour infusion of cisplatin (P) 25mg/m2/d, 5-fluorouracil (F) 700 mg/m2/d, and leucovorin (L) 500 mg/m2/d (TPFL). Those with at least a partial response received a third course. Responding patients then underwent surgery including modified lymph node dissection followed by adjuvant radiation or chemoradiation. Patients who progressed during neoadjuvant chemotherapy proceeded directly to surgery. HPV status was determined by conventional PCR in fresh frozen biopsy samples and Taqman PCR assay on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens. HIF-1a and VEGF-A expression were assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and quantitative real-time PCR (RT-PCR). Multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis of time to disease progression or death was used to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for HPV-positive status. Results Of the 24 evaluable cases, HPV16 DNA was detected in 14 specimens, 13 of which were oropharyngeal tumors. HPV18 was not detected in any of the specimens. Treatment compliance was similar between both groups. There was no difference in either the response rates seen after NCT (85.7% vs. 90%), or the pathologic complete response rate for surgical patients (38.5% vs. 42.9%) for the HPV-positive and –negative tumors, respectively. After a median follow-up time of 52.9 months, there was a trend toward better progression-free (HR 0.15; p = 0.06) and overall survival (HR 0.14; p = 0.10), but this was not statistically significant. There was no difference in the level of VEGF expression at the protein level, however, in a subset of 13 fresh frozen tissue samples, quantitative RT-PCR revealed a statistically significant increase in VEGF mRNA transcript in the HPV-positive tumors (p < 0.01). No difference was seen for HIF-1a expression. Conclusions HPV-positivity portended a better prognosis in patients with oropharyngeal SCC treated with induction chemotherapy and adjuvant radiation in a prospective clinical trial although the benefit did not reach the level of statistical significance due to the small patient number. The level of VEGF mRNA was up-regulated in HPV16-positive tumors possibly by a HIF-1 independent manner.  Introduction Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a DNA tumor virus with oncogenic potential and is the primary causal agent in the development of cervical cancer (Walboomers JM 1999). Of the more than 80 subtypes identified to date, HPV16 and 18 are among the high-risk strains and are the most closely linked to cervical carcinoma (Walboomers JM 1999). HPV viral proteins E6 and E7 play vital roles in cervical carcinogenesis. Both proteins bind to and disrupt the function of two tumor suppressor genes, p53 and retinoblastoma gene product (pRB), respectively, resulting in cell immortalization and transformation (Storey A 1988; Werness BA 1990). Since the 1980's, there is now growing evidence pointing to an etiologic link between HPV infection and a subset of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), especially involving the oropharynx (Syrjänen K 1983; Gillison ML 2000; D'Souza G 2007). The implications of such an assocation would impact future diagnostic, prognostic, therapeutic, and prevention strategies for this subset. However, the oncogenic pathway from infection to transformation for head and neck cancers has not been fully defined. In recent years, much attention has been given to the prognostic role of HPV status in HNSCC. Various studies have reported conflicting results. Some investigators have demonstrated no association with HPV and survival (Haraf DJ 1996; Paz IB 1997) while others have confirmed a survival advantage for patients with HPV-positive tumors (Gillison ML 2000; Mellin H 2000; Lindel K 2001; Schwartz SR 2001; Ringstrom E 2002; Ritchie JM 2003). The variability in the reported outcomes is likely due to the heterogeneous patient populations included, diverse treatments received, and HPV detection methods used. These studies were limited by their retrospective nature and could not comment on the efficacy of the various treatments given for this HPV-positive subset. Recently, Fakhry et al. were the first group to report on the prognostic value of HPV status in a prospective phase II clinical trial of HNSCC in which patients received homogeneous treatment confirming better survival in the HPV-positive group (Fakhry C 2007). With our study, we are now the second group to further validate the positive outcomes associated with HPV infection in HNSCC in a prospective phase II study. And finally, if the etiologic role of HPV in HNSCC is to be further substantiated, this will require better characterization of the mutagenic and transforming events accounting for the observed differences in clinical behavior of this tumor subset. Tumor-mediated angiogenesis is a fundamental prerequisite for sustained cancer growth and metastases. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) are two of the most important proangiogenic factors involved in this process for most tumor types, including head and neck cancers (Sauter ER 1999; Cohen NA 2004). In cervical carcinoma models, preclinical data have shown that HPV16 oncoproteins E5, E6, and E7 are able to induce VEGF expression directly, via a p53 independent manner (López-Ocejo O 2000) or indirectly by way of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (Kim 2006) or HIF (Tang X 2007). However, the HPV-associated angiogenic pathways for HNSCC are not as well defined. We hypothesized that similar interactions between HPV, HIF, and VEGF could be observed in HNSCC tumors. The objectives of our study were to 1) determine the presence of high-risk HPV 16 in patients with HNSCC enrolled in a prospective phase II clinical trial of induction chemotherapy, organ preservation, and radiation, 2) assess the impact of HPV status on treatment response and survival in this select cohort treated with combined modality therapy, and 3) identify the differences between HIF/VEGF expression in HPV-positive and -negative tumors to better understand the biology of HPV tumorigenesis.  Patients and Methods Patients and Therapy Between June 2000 and November 2003, 31 patients with biopsy-proven newly diagnosed squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were enrolled in a prospective phase II trial of multimodality management at the City of Hope (Duarte, CA). Eligible patients were those with previously untreated, resectable clinical stage III or IV SCC or the oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, or larynx. Stage II cancer of the larynx, hypopharynx, and base of tongue were also eligible. All patients were uniformly treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of the following: docetaxel 60mg/m2, then a 96-hour infusion of cisplatin 25mg/m2/d, 5-fluoruracil 700 mg/m2/d, and leucovorin 500 mg/m2/d administered every 28 days. After 2 courses, those with at least a partial response received a third cycle followed by surgery. Organ preservation was one goal of the protocol. Patients with progressive or stable disease following cycle 2 proceeded directly to surgery. Adjuvant radiation (standard fractionation external beam radiation therapy, total dose 70 Gy in 35 to 39 fractions in 7 to 8 weeks) was delivered to the primary tumor and upper neck in all patients subsequent to surgery. Concurrent chemotherapy with weekly gemcitabine 25 mg/m2 with or without cisplatin 25 mg/m2 were given to 4 patients with residual disease following induction chemotherapy. Specimen collection Of the 31 patients enrolled, pretreatment biopsy specimens were available for 24 patients either in the form of fresh frozen tissue (13 samples) or formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks (11 samples). All frozen specimens were obtained from our institution's tissue bank where samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen within 30 minutes of biopsy and stored at -80° C until use. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumors were obtained from outside facilities where initial biopsies were performed (6 samples) if not available at City of Hope. Histopathologic diagnoses were reviewed by our institution's pathologists. All patients gave informed written consent for collection, storage, and analysis of tissue for this study per the protocol approved by the City of Hope Institutional Review Board. HPV detection and DNA sequencing in fresh frozen tissue DNA and RNA extraction of the fresh frozen samples was accomplished by using the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia CA). HPV detection was performed as previously described (SP Wilczynski 1998). In brief, ?-globin primers were used to confirm the presence of amplifiable DNA in the extracted specimens. The DNA was amplified with consensus primers to the L1 region MY09/MY11 as described by Ting and Manos (Ting Y 1990). All fresh frozen tumor DNAs were also tested for HPV16 and HPV18 by amplification of the viral E7 (HPV16) and E6 (HPV18) region by use of type-specific primers as previously described (Paz IB 1997). HPV subtype was confirmed in all DNA from tumors shown to be HPV-positive by sequencing using BigDye Terminator Sequencing (ABI) at the City of Hope Sequencing core facility. Genomic DNA extraction and HPV detection in FFPE tissue Formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) cancer biopsies from 11 patients were analyzed for HPV status. For each sample, 10 cuts of 10 ?m-thick sections were used for genomic DNA extraction. DNA purification was mainly performed according to a published protocol with slight modification (Chan PK 2001). Briefly, after dewaxing with two washes of 1 ml xylene for 10 min at 37°C, 1 ml of 100% ethanolwas added twice to remove residual xylene. The tissues were dried at room temperature by vacuuming, and resuspended in 300 ?l ofdigestion buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, pH 8, and 400 ?g/ml proteinase K) and incubated 3 h at 55°C. The digested suspension was centrifuged to obtain supernatant. Sodium acetate (final concentration 0.25 M, pH 5.2), 750 ?l of 100% ethanol, and 3ul of 20 mg/ml glycogen were added for an overnight DNA precipitation at -20°C. The DNA pellet was collected by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 4°C, washed with 70% ethanol, air dried at room temperature, and resuspended in 50 ?l of double distilled water, and kept at -20°C until use. TaqMan real-time PCR was employed to detect HPV-16 and HPV-18 in FFPE cancer biopsies. The primers and probes used for real-time PCR are listed in Table 1 . Genotype specific primers and probe for HPV-16 targeted to the E7 gene amplifying a 98 bp product were designed. A HPV18-specific PCR for E6 gene (78 bp product) was also tested. As a positive control for amplification, human ?-globin PCR was performed with gene-specific primers amplifying a 141 bp product. Probes were labeled with 6-FAM at the 5' end and TAMRA at the 3' end. All real-time PCR experiments were run on an ABI 7900HT SDS system (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA). Duplicate reactions for each gene were performed in 20 ?l volume using the TaqMan® Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) containing 250 nm primers, 250 nM probes and 50 ng DNA of template. The PCR procedures were as follows: initial denaturation and hot-start activation at 95 °C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 30 s. Each PCR was performed with negative (genomic DNA of HPV-negative FFPE tissues and as ddH2O samples) and positive controls (genomic DNA of SiHa cells for HPV-16, genomic DNA of Hela cells for HPV-18). Normal liver tissue for beta-globin was also included in each gene amplification. PCR amplification of positive controls displayed a typical amplification curve with a Ct value of ?28; none of the negative controls displayed a measurable amplification for any of the PCR assays. Because of the high sensitivity of the Taqman assay, no sequencing was done to confirm HPV subtype. Of the 11 samples, 7 were HPV-16 positive, and no sample was HPV-18 positive. Immunohistochemical analysis of VEGF expression Immunohistochemical staining was performed on 5-?m thick sections prepared from formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. Tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene followed by 100% ethanol. Samples were then quenched in 3% hydrogen peroxide and pretreated to promote antigen retrieval by steam in DIVA/citrate buffer (pH 6.0) solution for 20 minutes. After antigen retrieval, slides were incubated in 10% normal horse serum for 10 minutes. Slides were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-human VEGF antibody (1:25 dilution in phosphate buffered saline, PBS; R&D Systems, Inc, Minneapolis, MN). The next day, slides were washed in PBS and incubated for 30 minutes in biotinylated anti-goat secondary antibody (1:400 dilution in PBS). After washing in PBS, samples were labeled with ABC Elite streptavidin-peroxidase (Vector Laboratories, Inc, Burlingame, CA) for 30 minutes. After washes in PBS, slides were incubated with the chromogen diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB), counterstained with hematoxylin, and mounted. Immunohistochemical analysis of HIF-1a expression Five ?m-thick sections were prepared from formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. Tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene followed by 100% ethanol, then quenched in 3% hydrogen peroxide. Samples were pretreated to promote antigen retrieval by steam in DIVA/citrate buffer (pH 6.0) solution for 20 minutes. After antigen retrieval, slides were incubated in blocking solution (DakoCytomation, Denmark) for 10 minutes. Slides were then incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-human/mouse HIF-1a antibody (1:25 dilution in buffer; R&D Systems, Inc, clone 241812). The next day, slides were washed in Dako buffer, then incubated in EnVision™+ System Labelled polymer-HRP anti-mouse antibody (Dako) for 30 minutes. After washing in Dako buffer, slides were incubated in Liquid DAB+ Substrate Chromogen System (Dako) for 8 minutes, counterstained with hematoxylin, then mounted. VEGF and HIF expression by immunohistochemistry An experienced pathologist (Y.Y.), blinded to the clinical outcomes, examined multiple microscopic fields to score the tissue sections for tumor VEGF and HIF staining intensity (0 = none, 1 = faint and focal, 2 = moderate, 3 = intense). For the analysis presented in this article, tumor VEGF or HIF positivity was defined as moderate and intense immunohistochemical staining. Quantitative RT-PCR for HIF and VEGF from fresh frozen tissue cDNA was prepared from 3-40 ?g RNA in a 100 ?L volume using MMLV reverse transcriptase enzyme and random hexamers as primers (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). cDNA synthesis was performed for 45 min at 42 °C, followed by 5 minutes denaturation at 75 °C. The reaction was boosted by addition of 1000 units MMLV reverse transcriptase enzyme and repeating the 42 °C step for another 60 minutes. The enzyme was inactivated for 5 minutes at 95 °C, and the cDNA was stored at -20 °C until used. The quantification of the level of gene expression was carried out from the cDNA samples with a real-time PCR method. The primers and probes were designed according to the Applied Biosystems guidelines (Primer Express software, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) to fit the real-time PCR requirements and are listed in Table 1 . Genomic DNA amplification was excluded by designing the primers around the exon-intron splicing sites. PCR reaction was set up in a 20 ?L final volume adding 1 ?L cDNA from each sample, using TaqMan Universal PCR mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). For each target gene, the probe concentration was 0.3 ?mol/L and the primer concentrations for the detection of VEGF-A, HIF-1a genes were 0.4 ?mol/L. The PCR amplification was performed on 384 well plate using the default cycling conditions. During the PCR reaction, the Taq DNA polymerase cleaved the probe and released the 5’ end reporter fluorescence dye (6-FAM) whose fluorescence was detected by the ABI 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). For the absolute calibration curve of the target genes and the housekeeping gene (?-Actin), serial dilutions of the plasmids (107 to 1 copy range) containing the gene insert were used. Relative gene expression was determined as the ratio of the gene of interest to the internal reference gene expression based on the standard curves. Statistics Statistical analyses were performed using the SAS statistical package, release 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina). Tests for association of HPV detection with gender, age, performance status, smoking and alcohol usage, TNM status, treatments received, and response to therapy were performed using a two-sided Fisher's exact test. Statistical significance in median levels of VEGF and HIF expression by HPV status was examined using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Progression-free survival and overall survival were estimated using the Kaplan–Meier method. Multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis of time to disease progression or death was used to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for HPV-positive status with adjustments for patient age, gender, performance status, TNM status, smoking and alcohol usage, and VEGF expression. All tests were considered to be of statistical significance at P < 0.05.  Patients and Therapy Between June 2000 and November 2003, 31 patients with biopsy-proven newly diagnosed squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck were enrolled in a prospective phase II trial of multimodality management at the City of Hope (Duarte, CA). Eligible patients were those with previously untreated, resectable clinical stage III or IV SCC or the oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, or larynx. Stage II cancer of the larynx, hypopharynx, and base of tongue were also eligible. All patients were uniformly treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of the following: docetaxel 60mg/m2, then a 96-hour infusion of cisplatin 25mg/m2/d, 5-fluoruracil 700 mg/m2/d, and leucovorin 500 mg/m2/d administered every 28 days. After 2 courses, those with at least a partial response received a third cycle followed by surgery. Organ preservation was one goal of the protocol. Patients with progressive or stable disease following cycle 2 proceeded directly to surgery. Adjuvant radiation (standard fractionation external beam radiation therapy, total dose 70 Gy in 35 to 39 fractions in 7 to 8 weeks) was delivered to the primary tumor and upper neck in all patients subsequent to surgery. Concurrent chemotherapy with weekly gemcitabine 25 mg/m2 with or without cisplatin 25 mg/m2 were given to 4 patients with residual disease following induction chemotherapy.  Specimen collection Of the 31 patients enrolled, pretreatment biopsy specimens were available for 24 patients either in the form of fresh frozen tissue (13 samples) or formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks (11 samples). All frozen specimens were obtained from our institution's tissue bank where samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen within 30 minutes of biopsy and stored at -80° C until use. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumors were obtained from outside facilities where initial biopsies were performed (6 samples) if not available at City of Hope. Histopathologic diagnoses were reviewed by our institution's pathologists. All patients gave informed written consent for collection, storage, and analysis of tissue for this study per the protocol approved by the City of Hope Institutional Review Board.  HPV detection and DNA sequencing in fresh frozen tissue DNA and RNA extraction of the fresh frozen samples was accomplished by using the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia CA). HPV detection was performed as previously described (SP Wilczynski 1998). In brief, ?-globin primers were used to confirm the presence of amplifiable DNA in the extracted specimens. The DNA was amplified with consensus primers to the L1 region MY09/MY11 as described by Ting and Manos (Ting Y 1990). All fresh frozen tumor DNAs were also tested for HPV16 and HPV18 by amplification of the viral E7 (HPV16) and E6 (HPV18) region by use of type-specific primers as previously described (Paz IB 1997). HPV subtype was confirmed in all DNA from tumors shown to be HPV-positive by sequencing using BigDye Terminator Sequencing (ABI) at the City of Hope Sequencing core facility.  Genomic DNA extraction and HPV detection in FFPE tissue Formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) cancer biopsies from 11 patients were analyzed for HPV status. For each sample, 10 cuts of 10 ?m-thick sections were used for genomic DNA extraction. DNA purification was mainly performed according to a published protocol with slight modification (Chan PK 2001). Briefly, after dewaxing with two washes of 1 ml xylene for 10 min at 37°C, 1 ml of 100% ethanolwas added twice to remove residual xylene. The tissues were dried at room temperature by vacuuming, and resuspended in 300 ?l ofdigestion buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, pH 8, and 400 ?g/ml proteinase K) and incubated 3 h at 55°C. The digested suspension was centrifuged to obtain supernatant. Sodium acetate (final concentration 0.25 M, pH 5.2), 750 ?l of 100% ethanol, and 3ul of 20 mg/ml glycogen were added for an overnight DNA precipitation at -20°C. The DNA pellet was collected by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 4°C, washed with 70% ethanol, air dried at room temperature, and resuspended in 50 ?l of double distilled water, and kept at -20°C until use. TaqMan real-time PCR was employed to detect HPV-16 and HPV-18 in FFPE cancer biopsies. The primers and probes used for real-time PCR are listed in Table 1 . Genotype specific primers and probe for HPV-16 targeted to the E7 gene amplifying a 98 bp product were designed. A HPV18-specific PCR for E6 gene (78 bp product) was also tested. As a positive control for amplification, human ?-globin PCR was performed with gene-specific primers amplifying a 141 bp product. Probes were labeled with 6-FAM at the 5' end and TAMRA at the 3' end. All real-time PCR experiments were run on an ABI 7900HT SDS system (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA). Duplicate reactions for each gene were performed in 20 ?l volume using the TaqMan® Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) containing 250 nm primers, 250 nM probes and 50 ng DNA of template. The PCR procedures were as follows: initial denaturation and hot-start activation at 95 °C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 30 s. Each PCR was performed with negative (genomic DNA of HPV-negative FFPE tissues and as ddH2O samples) and positive controls (genomic DNA of SiHa cells for HPV-16, genomic DNA of Hela cells for HPV-18). Normal liver tissue for beta-globin was also included in each gene amplification. PCR amplification of positive controls displayed a typical amplification curve with a Ct value of ?28; none of the negative controls displayed a measurable amplification for any of the PCR assays. Because of the high sensitivity of the Taqman assay, no sequencing was done to confirm HPV subtype. Of the 11 samples, 7 were HPV-16 positive, and no sample was HPV-18 positive.  Immunohistochemical analysis of VEGF expression Immunohistochemical staining was performed on 5-?m thick sections prepared from formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. Tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene followed by 100% ethanol. Samples were then quenched in 3% hydrogen peroxide and pretreated to promote antigen retrieval by steam in DIVA/citrate buffer (pH 6.0) solution for 20 minutes. After antigen retrieval, slides were incubated in 10% normal horse serum for 10 minutes. Slides were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-human VEGF antibody (1:25 dilution in phosphate buffered saline, PBS; R&D Systems, Inc, Minneapolis, MN). The next day, slides were washed in PBS and incubated for 30 minutes in biotinylated anti-goat secondary antibody (1:400 dilution in PBS). After washing in PBS, samples were labeled with ABC Elite streptavidin-peroxidase (Vector Laboratories, Inc, Burlingame, CA) for 30 minutes. After washes in PBS, slides were incubated with the chromogen diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB), counterstained with hematoxylin, and mounted.  Immunohistochemical analysis of HIF-1a expression Five ?m-thick sections were prepared from formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue. Tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene followed by 100% ethanol, then quenched in 3% hydrogen peroxide. Samples were pretreated to promote antigen retrieval by steam in DIVA/citrate buffer (pH 6.0) solution for 20 minutes. After antigen retrieval, slides were incubated in blocking solution (DakoCytomation, Denmark) for 10 minutes. Slides were then incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-human/mouse HIF-1a antibody (1:25 dilution in buffer; R&D Systems, Inc, clone 241812). The next day, slides were washed in Dako buffer, then incubated in EnVision™+ System Labelled polymer-HRP anti-mouse antibody (Dako) for 30 minutes. After washing in Dako buffer, slides were incubated in Liquid DAB+ Substrate Chromogen System (Dako) for 8 minutes, counterstained with hematoxylin, then mounted.  VEGF and HIF expression by immunohistochemistry An experienced pathologist (Y.Y.), blinded to the clinical outcomes, examined multiple microscopic fields to score the tissue sections for tumor VEGF and HIF staining intensity (0 = none, 1 = faint and focal, 2 = moderate, 3 = intense). For the analysis presented in this article, tumor VEGF or HIF positivity was defined as moderate and intense immunohistochemical staining.  Quantitative RT-PCR for HIF and VEGF from fresh frozen tissue cDNA was prepared from 3-40 ?g RNA in a 100 ?L volume using MMLV reverse transcriptase enzyme and random hexamers as primers (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). cDNA synthesis was performed for 45 min at 42 °C, followed by 5 minutes denaturation at 75 °C. The reaction was boosted by addition of 1000 units MMLV reverse transcriptase enzyme and repeating the 42 °C step for another 60 minutes. The enzyme was inactivated for 5 minutes at 95 °C, and the cDNA was stored at -20 °C until used. The quantification of the level of gene expression was carried out from the cDNA samples with a real-time PCR method. The primers and probes were designed according to the Applied Biosystems guidelines (Primer Express software, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) to fit the real-time PCR requirements and are listed in Table 1 . Genomic DNA amplification was excluded by designing the primers around the exon-intron splicing sites. PCR reaction was set up in a 20 ?L final volume adding 1 ?L cDNA from each sample, using TaqMan Universal PCR mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). For each target gene, the probe concentration was 0.3 ?mol/L and the primer concentrations for the detection of VEGF-A, HIF-1a genes were 0.4 ?mol/L. The PCR amplification was performed on 384 well plate using the default cycling conditions. During the PCR reaction, the Taq DNA polymerase cleaved the probe and released the 5’ end reporter fluorescence dye (6-FAM) whose fluorescence was detected by the ABI 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). For the absolute calibration curve of the target genes and the housekeeping gene (?-Actin), serial dilutions of the plasmids (107 to 1 copy range) containing the gene insert were used. Relative gene expression was determined as the ratio of the gene of interest to the internal reference gene expression based on the standard curves.  Statistics Statistical analyses were performed using the SAS statistical package, release 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina). Tests for association of HPV detection with gender, age, performance status, smoking and alcohol usage, TNM status, treatments received, and response to therapy were performed using a two-sided Fisher's exact test. Statistical significance in median levels of VEGF and HIF expression by HPV status was examined using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Progression-free survival and overall survival were estimated using the Kaplan–Meier method. Multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis of time to disease progression or death was used to calculate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for HPV-positive status with adjustments for patient age, gender, performance status, TNM status, smoking and alcohol usage, and VEGF expression. All tests were considered to be of statistical significance at P < 0.05.  Results Detection of high-risk HPV 16 and risk profile of patients with HPV positive tumors There were 31 patients enrolled into the phase II clinical trial. Of these, tissue (either in the form of fresh frozen tissue or paraffin embedded blocks) was available for 24 patients (77%) for subsequent HPV typing ( Table 2 ). Most tumor specimens were of squamous cell origin with the exception of one diagnosed as an undifferentiated carcinoma, lymphoepithelioma type. HPV-16 was detected in 14 of 24 tumor specimens (58%). HPV-18 was not detected in any tumor. Thirteen of 14 HPV-16 positive tumors (93%) were found in the oropharynx ( Table 2 ; p<0.001). Seven HPV-positive tumors were in the tongue base, six in the tonsillar fossa, and one in the lateral tongue. In addition, 93% of the oropharyngeal tumors were positive for HPV-16. HPV-positivity was also associated with lower T classification (p=0.10) as well as more advanced N stage (p=0.10) although this was not statistically significant. There was no correlation between tobacco, alcohol use, gender, age, tumor grade and HPV positivity. HPV status and response to treatment Thirteen of 14 (93%) HPV-positive patients completed the planned three courses of induction chemotherapy compared to 8 of 10 (80%) for the HPV negative counterparts ( Table 3 ). The majority of patients in each group required dose reductions due to toxicities, 10 (79%) and 4 (40%) in the HPV-positive and negative group, respectively. One patient in each group did not complete chemotherapy due to lack of response while another HPV-negative patient discontinued chemotherapy because of toxicities. No patient progressed during induction therapy. Following induction chemotherapy, surgery most commonly consisted of unilateral or bilateral supraomohyoid neck dissection with biopsy and/or resection of the primary tumor as deemed appropriate by the surgeon. No patient required either laryngectomy or base of tongue resection. In the HPV-positive cohort, 13 of 14 (93%) underwent surgery compared to 7 of 10 (70%) in the HPV-negative group. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not undergo surgery. Another patient with HPV-negative tumor refused surgery following a clinical complete response to chemotherapy. Surgery was not recommended for the remaining two HPV-negative patients with early stage disease following clinical complete responses to induction therapy. Adjuvant radiation was completed in nearly all patients, 11 (79%) and 9 (90%) in the HPV-positive and negative groups, respectively. Concurrent chemotherapy was given to 4 patients (all HPV-positive) with advanced disease or poor response to induction therapy. Radiation was discontinued in 3 patients (2 HPV-positive) due to toxicities. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not receive radiation. There were no treatment-related deaths. Following induction chemotherapy, all patients underwent clinical, radiographic, and if appropriate, surgical evaluation for response. Overall, there was no association with HPV status and response to induction chemotherapy ( Table 4 ). In addition, no difference in the rate of pathologic complete responses were noted in the surgical subset of patients, 5 (38.5%) for tumors harboring HPV-16 and 3 (42.7%) for HPV negative tumors. The Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed a trend for better disease free (p=0.06; Fig. 1A ) and overall survival (p=0.10; Fig. 1B ) for HP- positive tumors. One of 14 (7%) HPV-positive patients died of their disease compared with 4 of 10 (40%) in the HPV-negative group (P=0.17). Recurrence was observed in local or regional sites in 5 patients all of whom died. No distant sites of relapse were noted. VEGF-A and HIF-1a expression The VEGF protein levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry and resulted as follows: 9 of 14 (64.3%) HPV-16 tumors had either none or weak staining compared to 6 of 10 (60%) samples where HPV-16 was absent (p=1.00) ( Fig. 2 ). Because of the limited sample size, VEGF status was dichotomized by the level of staining intensity with overexpressors defined as either moderate or strong staining. Hence, no difference in the rate of VEGF overexpression was seen between the groups; 5 of 14 (35.7%) HPV-positive tumors and 4 of 10 (40%) HPV-negative tumors overexpressed VEGF (p=1.00). Kaplan-Meier survival curves did not reveal a significant difference in either disease-free or overall survival when stratified according to the level of VEGF expression (data not shown). In addition, VEGF mRNA transcript levels were measured by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) in a smaller subset of patients (13 total) with available fresh-frozen tumor specimens. Comparing HPV16-positive and -negative tumors, VEGF mRNA was significantly higher in specimens harboring HPV (p<0.01; Fig. 2A, C ). HIF-1a expression was also evaluated. All samples showed either weak or no staining by immunohistochemistry although the control specimen (renal cell carcinoma tissue) revealed intense staining (consider figure). RT-PCR for HIF mRNA correlated with the low protein expression observed with no difference in the levels measured by HPV status (p=0.88; Fig. 2B, C ).  Results Detection of high-risk HPV 16 and risk profile of patients with HPV positive tumors There were 31 patients enrolled into the phase II clinical trial. Of these, tissue (either in the form of fresh frozen tissue or paraffin embedded blocks) was available for 24 patients (77%) for subsequent HPV typing ( Table 2 ). Most tumor specimens were of squamous cell origin with the exception of one diagnosed as an undifferentiated carcinoma, lymphoepithelioma type. HPV-16 was detected in 14 of 24 tumor specimens (58%). HPV-18 was not detected in any tumor. Thirteen of 14 HPV-16 positive tumors (93%) were found in the oropharynx ( Table 2 ; p<0.001). Seven HPV-positive tumors were in the tongue base, six in the tonsillar fossa, and one in the lateral tongue. In addition, 93% of the oropharyngeal tumors were positive for HPV-16. HPV-positivity was also associated with lower T classification (p=0.10) as well as more advanced N stage (p=0.10) although this was not statistically significant. There was no correlation between tobacco, alcohol use, gender, age, tumor grade and HPV positivity. HPV status and response to treatment Thirteen of 14 (93%) HPV-positive patients completed the planned three courses of induction chemotherapy compared to 8 of 10 (80%) for the HPV negative counterparts ( Table 3 ). The majority of patients in each group required dose reductions due to toxicities, 10 (79%) and 4 (40%) in the HPV-positive and negative group, respectively. One patient in each group did not complete chemotherapy due to lack of response while another HPV-negative patient discontinued chemotherapy because of toxicities. No patient progressed during induction therapy. Following induction chemotherapy, surgery most commonly consisted of unilateral or bilateral supraomohyoid neck dissection with biopsy and/or resection of the primary tumor as deemed appropriate by the surgeon. No patient required either laryngectomy or base of tongue resection. In the HPV-positive cohort, 13 of 14 (93%) underwent surgery compared to 7 of 10 (70%) in the HPV-negative group. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not undergo surgery. Another patient with HPV-negative tumor refused surgery following a clinical complete response to chemotherapy. Surgery was not recommended for the remaining two HPV-negative patients with early stage disease following clinical complete responses to induction therapy. Adjuvant radiation was completed in nearly all patients, 11 (79%) and 9 (90%) in the HPV-positive and negative groups, respectively. Concurrent chemotherapy was given to 4 patients (all HPV-positive) with advanced disease or poor response to induction therapy. Radiation was discontinued in 3 patients (2 HPV-positive) due to toxicities. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not receive radiation. There were no treatment-related deaths. Following induction chemotherapy, all patients underwent clinical, radiographic, and if appropriate, surgical evaluation for response. Overall, there was no association with HPV status and response to induction chemotherapy ( Table 4 ). In addition, no difference in the rate of pathologic complete responses were noted in the surgical subset of patients, 5 (38.5%) for tumors harboring HPV-16 and 3 (42.7%) for HPV negative tumors. The Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed a trend for better disease free (p=0.06; Fig. 1A ) and overall survival (p=0.10; Fig. 1B ) for HP- positive tumors. One of 14 (7%) HPV-positive patients died of their disease compared with 4 of 10 (40%) in the HPV-negative group (P=0.17). Recurrence was observed in local or regional sites in 5 patients all of whom died. No distant sites of relapse were noted. VEGF-A and HIF-1a expression The VEGF protein levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry and resulted as follows: 9 of 14 (64.3%) HPV-16 tumors had either none or weak staining compared to 6 of 10 (60%) samples where HPV-16 was absent (p=1.00) ( Fig. 2 ). Because of the limited sample size, VEGF status was dichotomized by the level of staining intensity with overexpressors defined as either moderate or strong staining. Hence, no difference in the rate of VEGF overexpression was seen between the groups; 5 of 14 (35.7%) HPV-positive tumors and 4 of 10 (40%) HPV-negative tumors overexpressed VEGF (p=1.00). Kaplan-Meier survival curves did not reveal a significant difference in either disease-free or overall survival when stratified according to the level of VEGF expression (data not shown). In addition, VEGF mRNA transcript levels were measured by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) in a smaller subset of patients (13 total) with available fresh-frozen tumor specimens. Comparing HPV16-positive and -negative tumors, VEGF mRNA was significantly higher in specimens harboring HPV (p<0.01; Fig. 2A, C ). HIF-1a expression was also evaluated. All samples showed either weak or no staining by immunohistochemistry although the control specimen (renal cell carcinoma tissue) revealed intense staining (consider figure). RT-PCR for HIF mRNA correlated with the low protein expression observed with no difference in the levels measured by HPV status (p=0.88; Fig. 2B, C ).  Detection of high-risk HPV 16 and risk profile of patients with HPV positive tumors There were 31 patients enrolled into the phase II clinical trial. Of these, tissue (either in the form of fresh frozen tissue or paraffin embedded blocks) was available for 24 patients (77%) for subsequent HPV typing ( Table 2 ). Most tumor specimens were of squamous cell origin with the exception of one diagnosed as an undifferentiated carcinoma, lymphoepithelioma type. HPV-16 was detected in 14 of 24 tumor specimens (58%). HPV-18 was not detected in any tumor. Thirteen of 14 HPV-16 positive tumors (93%) were found in the oropharynx ( Table 2 ; p<0.001). Seven HPV-positive tumors were in the tongue base, six in the tonsillar fossa, and one in the lateral tongue. In addition, 93% of the oropharyngeal tumors were positive for HPV-16. HPV-positivity was also associated with lower T classification (p=0.10) as well as more advanced N stage (p=0.10) although this was not statistically significant. There was no correlation between tobacco, alcohol use, gender, age, tumor grade and HPV positivity.  Detection of high-risk HPV 16 and risk profile of patients with HPV positive tumors There were 31 patients enrolled into the phase II clinical trial. Of these, tissue (either in the form of fresh frozen tissue or paraffin embedded blocks) was available for 24 patients (77%) for subsequent HPV typing ( Table 2 ). Most tumor specimens were of squamous cell origin with the exception of one diagnosed as an undifferentiated carcinoma, lymphoepithelioma type. HPV-16 was detected in 14 of 24 tumor specimens (58%). HPV-18 was not detected in any tumor. Thirteen of 14 HPV-16 positive tumors (93%) were found in the oropharynx ( Table 2 ; p<0.001). Seven HPV-positive tumors were in the tongue base, six in the tonsillar fossa, and one in the lateral tongue. In addition, 93% of the oropharyngeal tumors were positive for HPV-16. HPV-positivity was also associated with lower T classification (p=0.10) as well as more advanced N stage (p=0.10) although this was not statistically significant. There was no correlation between tobacco, alcohol use, gender, age, tumor grade and HPV positivity.  HPV status and response to treatment Thirteen of 14 (93%) HPV-positive patients completed the planned three courses of induction chemotherapy compared to 8 of 10 (80%) for the HPV negative counterparts ( Table 3 ). The majority of patients in each group required dose reductions due to toxicities, 10 (79%) and 4 (40%) in the HPV-positive and negative group, respectively. One patient in each group did not complete chemotherapy due to lack of response while another HPV-negative patient discontinued chemotherapy because of toxicities. No patient progressed during induction therapy. Following induction chemotherapy, surgery most commonly consisted of unilateral or bilateral supraomohyoid neck dissection with biopsy and/or resection of the primary tumor as deemed appropriate by the surgeon. No patient required either laryngectomy or base of tongue resection. In the HPV-positive cohort, 13 of 14 (93%) underwent surgery compared to 7 of 10 (70%) in the HPV-negative group. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not undergo surgery. Another patient with HPV-negative tumor refused surgery following a clinical complete response to chemotherapy. Surgery was not recommended for the remaining two HPV-negative patients with early stage disease following clinical complete responses to induction therapy. Adjuvant radiation was completed in nearly all patients, 11 (79%) and 9 (90%) in the HPV-positive and negative groups, respectively. Concurrent chemotherapy was given to 4 patients (all HPV-positive) with advanced disease or poor response to induction therapy. Radiation was discontinued in 3 patients (2 HPV-positive) due to toxicities. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not receive radiation. There were no treatment-related deaths. Following induction chemotherapy, all patients underwent clinical, radiographic, and if appropriate, surgical evaluation for response. Overall, there was no association with HPV status and response to induction chemotherapy ( Table 4 ). In addition, no difference in the rate of pathologic complete responses were noted in the surgical subset of patients, 5 (38.5%) for tumors harboring HPV-16 and 3 (42.7%) for HPV negative tumors. The Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed a trend for better disease free (p=0.06; Fig. 1A ) and overall survival (p=0.10; Fig. 1B ) for HP- positive tumors. One of 14 (7%) HPV-positive patients died of their disease compared with 4 of 10 (40%) in the HPV-negative group (P=0.17). Recurrence was observed in local or regional sites in 5 patients all of whom died. No distant sites of relapse were noted.  HPV status and response to treatment Thirteen of 14 (93%) HPV-positive patients completed the planned three courses of induction chemotherapy compared to 8 of 10 (80%) for the HPV negative counterparts ( Table 3 ). The majority of patients in each group required dose reductions due to toxicities, 10 (79%) and 4 (40%) in the HPV-positive and negative group, respectively. One patient in each group did not complete chemotherapy due to lack of response while another HPV-negative patient discontinued chemotherapy because of toxicities. No patient progressed during induction therapy. Following induction chemotherapy, surgery most commonly consisted of unilateral or bilateral supraomohyoid neck dissection with biopsy and/or resection of the primary tumor as deemed appropriate by the surgeon. No patient required either laryngectomy or base of tongue resection. In the HPV-positive cohort, 13 of 14 (93%) underwent surgery compared to 7 of 10 (70%) in the HPV-negative group. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not undergo surgery. Another patient with HPV-negative tumor refused surgery following a clinical complete response to chemotherapy. Surgery was not recommended for the remaining two HPV-negative patients with early stage disease following clinical complete responses to induction therapy. Adjuvant radiation was completed in nearly all patients, 11 (79%) and 9 (90%) in the HPV-positive and negative groups, respectively. Concurrent chemotherapy was given to 4 patients (all HPV-positive) with advanced disease or poor response to induction therapy. Radiation was discontinued in 3 patients (2 HPV-positive) due to toxicities. One HPV-positive patient was lost to follow-up and did not receive radiation. There were no treatment-related deaths. Following induction chemotherapy, all patients underwent clinical, radiographic, and if appropriate, surgical evaluation for response. Overall, there was no association with HPV status and response to induction chemotherapy ( Table 4 ). In addition, no difference in the rate of pathologic complete responses were noted in the surgical subset of patients, 5 (38.5%) for tumors harboring HPV-16 and 3 (42.7%) for HPV negative tumors. The Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed a trend for better disease free (p=0.06; Fig. 1A ) and overall survival (p=0.10; Fig. 1B ) for HP- positive tumors. One of 14 (7%) HPV-positive patients died of their disease compared with 4 of 10 (40%) in the HPV-negative group (P=0.17). Recurrence was observed in local or regional sites in 5 patients all of whom died. No distant sites of relapse were noted.  VEGF-A and HIF-1a expression The VEGF protein levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry and resulted as follows: 9 of 14 (64.3%) HPV-16 tumors had either none or weak staining compared to 6 of 10 (60%) samples where HPV-16 was absent (p=1.00) ( Fig. 2 ). Because of the limited sample size, VEGF status was dichotomized by the level of staining intensity with overexpressors defined as either moderate or strong staining. Hence, no difference in the rate of VEGF overexpression was seen between the groups; 5 of 14 (35.7%) HPV-positive tumors and 4 of 10 (40%) HPV-negative tumors overexpressed VEGF (p=1.00). Kaplan-Meier survival curves did not reveal a significant difference in either disease-free or overall survival when stratified according to the level of VEGF expression (data not shown). In addition, VEGF mRNA transcript levels were measured by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) in a smaller subset of patients (13 total) with available fresh-frozen tumor specimens. Comparing HPV16-positive and -negative tumors, VEGF mRNA was significantly higher in specimens harboring HPV (p<0.01; Fig. 2A, C ). HIF-1a expression was also evaluated. All samples showed either weak or no staining by immunohistochemistry although the control specimen (renal cell carcinoma tissue) revealed intense staining (consider figure). RT-PCR for HIF mRNA correlated with the low protein expression observed with no difference in the levels measured by HPV status (p=0.88; Fig. 2B, C ).  VEGF-A and HIF-1a expression The VEGF protein levels were assessed by immunohistochemistry and resulted as follows: 9 of 14 (64.3%) HPV-16 tumors had either none or weak staining compared to 6 of 10 (60%) samples where HPV-16 was absent (p=1.00) ( Fig. 2 ). Because of the limited sample size, VEGF status was dichotomized by the level of staining intensity with overexpressors defined as either moderate or strong staining. Hence, no difference in the rate of VEGF overexpression was seen between the groups; 5 of 14 (35.7%) HPV-positive tumors and 4 of 10 (40%) HPV-negative tumors overexpressed VEGF (p=1.00). Kaplan-Meier survival curves did not reveal a significant difference in either disease-free or overall survival when stratified according to the level of VEGF expression (data not shown). In addition, VEGF mRNA transcript levels were measured by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) in a smaller subset of patients (13 total) with available fresh-frozen tumor specimens. Comparing HPV16-positive and -negative tumors, VEGF mRNA was significantly higher in specimens harboring HPV (p<0.01; Fig. 2A, C ). HIF-1a expression was also evaluated. All samples showed either weak or no staining by immunohistochemistry although the control specimen (renal cell carcinoma tissue) revealed intense staining (consider figure). RT-PCR for HIF mRNA correlated with the low protein expression observed with no difference in the levels measured by HPV status (p=0.88; Fig. 2B, C ).  Discussion There is increasing epidemiologic evidence for a causal association between HPV and a subgroup of head and neck cancers, especially of the oropharynx (Herrero R 2003) (D'Souza G 2007) (Dahlstrom KR 2003). In addition, much of the data suggests HPV-positivity portends a more favorable prognosis (Gillison ML 2000) (Mellin H 2000) albeit the reported outcomes were based on case series of patients who received heterogeneous treatments for their disease. We are one of the first to report on patient outcomes in a prospective phase II trial stratified by HPV status. In a recent systematic review, Kreimer et al. reported that overall HPV prevalence was 25.9% in 5,046 HNSCC cancer specimens from 60 studies conducted worldwide (Kreimer AR 2005). We found a much higher prevalence in our study with 58% of the HNSCC tumors testing positive for HPV16. No HPV18 was detected in any sample. Our finding of only HPV16 in our subjects is likely due to the small sample size, but is consistent with the 90% detection rate of HPV16 among HNSCC tumors (Gillison ML 2000) (Herrero R 2003). The prevalence of HPV-positivity has also been observed to be higher in oropharyngeal tumors compared to other HNSCC primaries (Paz IB 1997) (Gillison ML 2000) (Mellin H 2000). Kreimer et al. reported an overall HPV prevalence of 47.0%, a much higher rate than for any other head and neck site, with HPV16 accounting for the large majority (86.7%) in oropharyngeal SCC from North America (Kreimer AR 2005). In our study, HPV16 DNA was found almost exclusively in oropharyngeal tumors; 93% of HPV-positive tumors were located in the oropharynx. And of the 14 orophayngeal tumors, 13 (93%) were positive for HPV16. The seemingly high rate could have been a selection bias associated with enrollment of patients on an organ preservation protocol at a tertiary referral center. In addition, geographic variation of HPV-positivity was likely a factor. HPV prevalence in oropharyngeal SCC varied from as low as 28.2% in Europe to the highest rate of 47.0% in North America (Kreimer AR 2005). But this finding seems to lend further credence to a strong association between HPV and oropharyngeal cancer (Gillison ML 2000). The risk profile of patients with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer has been extensively studied to further elucidate possible oncogenic pathways for HPV-associated HNSCC (Schwartz SR 2001) (Ringstrom E 2002) (Gillison ML 2000) (Lindel K 2001) (D'Souza G 2007). Tobacco and alcohol use are established etiologic agents for classic HNSCC. In contrast, various reports suggest there is an association with lower consumption of both tobacco and alcohol in HPV-positive HNSCC, especially involving the oropharyngeal site (Fouret P 1997) (Gillison ML 2000) (Herrero R 2003) (D'Souza G 2007). Our study was unable to confirm this association due to small sample size. However, the absence of these classic risk factors seems to suggest that HPV-positive tumors share a distinct pathogenesis apart from a toxin-driven pathway—a mechanism supported by studies demonstrating a lower incidence of the tumor suppressor gene TP53 mutation in tumors that harbor HPV (Hafkamp HC 2003) (Dai M 2004). In addition, there are several reports of a link between female gender, sexual behavior, and HPV-positivity (Mellin H 2000) (Lindel K 2001) (Smith EM 2004). In a recent case-control study, D'Souza et al. reported an increasing degree of association with oropharyngeal cancer and the number of either vaginal or oral-sex partners as well as among patients with a high lifetime number of such partnerss suggesting that oral HPV infection is sexually acquired (D'Souza G 2007). Most of the data investigating the prognostic value of HPV-positivity report better outcomes for HPV-associated tumors, especially of the orophaynx (Mellin H 2000) (Gillison ML 2000) (Lindel K 2001) (Schwartz SR 2001) (Ritchie JM 2003). Until recently, all such prognostic data were derived from various case series which were limited by the retrospective nature of as well as the heterogeneous treatments patients received in these studies. In 2007, Fakhry et al. were the first to report on the prognostic significance of HPV tumor status for patients with HNSCC in a prospective, multi-center phase II clinical trial (Fakhry C 2007). In this study, eligible patients included those with newly diagnosed, resectable, stage III or IV HNSCC of the oropharynx (65%) or larynx (35%). All patients were uniformly treated with two cycles of induction chemotherapy (consisting of paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin AUC 6) followed by chemoradiation (weekly paclitaxel 30 mg/m2 administered concurrently with standard fractionation external beam radiation therapy, total dose of 70 Gy in 35 fractions over 7 weeks). Of 96 pateints included in the analysis, HPV16, 33, or 35 was detected in 40%. After a median follow-up time of 39 months, patients with HPV-positive tumors had a risk of progression that was 72% lower (HR=0.28, 95% CI: 0.07-1.0) and a risk of death that was 79% lower (HR=0.21, 95% CI: 0.06-0.74) than patients with HPV-negative tumors, after adjustment for age, gender, race, smoking, tumor site, and TNM staging. In line with this report, after adjustment for similar confounders including VEGF expression, our study also showed a trend towards better progression-free (HR 0.15; p = 0.06) and overall survival (HR 0.14; p = 0.10) for patients with HPV-positive tumors treated in a phase II study with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by adjuvant radiation with or without chemotherapy. The association was slightly stronger for progression-free survival, although the overall survival benefit was certainly blunted by the limited patient number typical for a phase II study. The reasons for these better outcomes in HPV-positive HNSCC remains elusive. In our study, HPV-positive patients demonstrated better survival despite the finding of a trend towards more advanced nodal stage at diagnosis. Similar associations between the presence of HPV and larger tumor size and nodal involvement have been reported by others (Paz IB 1997) (Schwartz SR 2001). Increased radiosensitivity has been proposed as a possible mechanism. In a retrospective review of HNSCC patients who had undergone curative irradiation, Lindel et al. reported a higher local control rate and a subsequent increased overall survival in HPV-positive patients (Lindel K 2001). Fakhry et al. also reported significantly higher response rates to induction chemotherapy in patients with HPV-positive tumors (82% vs. 55%, p = 0.01; for HPV-positive and negative patients, respectively) (Fakhry C 2007). However, there was no comment on treatment compliance. Interestingly, concurrent chemoradiation did not add significantly to the percentage of responders following induction therapy likely as a result of the already high response rate to chemotherapy in the HPV-positive cohort (response rates following concurrent chemoradiation: 84% vs. 57%, for HPV-positive and -negative patients, respectively). In contrast, although a non-statistically significant higher percentage of HPV-positive patients required a dose reduction during treatment in our study (76.9% vs 50%, for HPV-positive and –negative patients, respectively), there was no difference in the response rates seen following induction chemotherapy when stratified by HPV status (85.7% vs. 90%, for HPV-positive and –negative patients, respectively). This finding is likely explained by the different chemotherapy regimens used as part of induction therapy in each of the phase II protocols. Our study implemented a much more aggressive regimen (TPFL) with reported response rates > 90% in various trials regardless of HPV status (Psyrri A 2004) (Colevas AD 2002). Taken together, the early data suggest that improved survival in HPV-positive HNSCC may be explained, in part, by higher sensitivity to both chemotherapy and radiation. To further explore the role of HPV in the carcinogenesis and clinical behavior of HNSCC, we analyzed the expression of HIF and VEGF, two factors that play an important role in tumor-mediated angiogenesis and may possibly have prognostic implications. The interplay between HPV16, VEGF, and HIF is one that is actively being studied, further characterized, and proving to be quite complex in invasive cervical squamous cell carcinoma models. It is well known that hypoxia is an inducer of VEGF expression under the control of the transcription factor, HIF-1 (Forsythe JA 1996). Preclinical data also show that the HPV16 oncoproteins E5, E6, and E7 are able to induce VEGF expression directly, via a p53 independent manner (López-Ocejo O 2000) or indirectly by way of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (Kim 2006) or HIF (Tang X 2007). Furthermore, VEGF has also been shown to induce expression of E6 in what may be a positive feedback mechanism (Mathur RS 2005). HPV16-related angiogenic pathways are not as well defined in HNSCC. However, the findings of our study are in line with the reported data for cervical cancer models. Despite the fact that there was no difference in the level of VEGF protein expression by IHC, in a smaller subset analysis of frozen biopsy specimens, VEGF mRNA transcript was up-regulated in HPV-positive tumors compared to HPV-negative specimens. Unfortunately, we were not able to assess mRNA transcript levels in all specimens due to the poor quality of RNA in paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. In contrast, there was no difference in HIF expression at either the protein or mRNA transcript level suggesting that in HPV16-positive oropharyngeal cancers, the induction of VEGF expression occurs in a HIF-independent manner. However, these results must be interpreted with caution given the very limited number of patients. Further studies will be required for a more clear interpretation of these complex angiogenic pathways in HPV-associated HNSCC. We are unable to explain why the up-regulation of VEGF mRNA levels did not translate into higher VEGF protein expression, but several studies have demonstrated that the regulation of VEGF occurs at various tiers from the transcriptional to post-translational level (Kim 2006) (Bermont L 2000). In contrast to our study, another group has shown that in HPV16-positive tonsillar cancer specimens, integration of HPV DNA into the host genome was strongly associated with HIF-1a overexpression (Kim SH 2007). However, it is becoming evident that even among the subset of head and neck cancers associated with HPV, there is clearly variability in the cytogenetic characteristics, resulting tumor biology, and clinical behavior in these complex tumors (Weinberger PM 2006) (Smeets SJ 2006) (Boudewijn J 2004). In conclusion, our study demonstrated HPV16 infection in a significant proportion of oropharyngeal cancers. Furthermore, HPV-positivity portended a better prognosis in patients with oropharyngeal SCC treated with induction chemotherapy and adjuvant radiation. The level of VEGF mRNA was up-regulated in HPV16-positive tumors possibly by a HIF-1 independent manner. Larger, prospective studies will be required to further validate our findings. Continued characterization of these complex HPV-associated angiogenic pathways will provide future targets for therapy.  Discussion There is increasing epidemiologic evidence for a causal association between HPV and a subgroup of head and neck cancers, especially of the oropharynx (Herrero R 2003) (D'Souza G 2007) (Dahlstrom KR 2003). In addition, much of the data suggests HPV-positivity portends a more favorable prognosis (Gillison ML 2000) (Mellin H 2000) albeit the reported outcomes were based on case series of patients who received heterogeneous treatments for their disease. We are one of the first to report on patient outcomes in a prospective phase II trial stratified by HPV status. In a recent systematic review, Kreimer et al. reported that overall HPV prevalence was 25.9% in 5,046 HNSCC cancer specimens from 60 studies conducted worldwide (Kreimer AR 2005). We found a much higher prevalence in our study with 58% of the HNSCC tumors testing positive for HPV16. No HPV18 was detected in any sample. Our finding of only HPV16 in our subjects is likely due to the small sample size, but is consistent with the 90% detection rate of HPV16 among HNSCC tumors (Gillison ML 2000) (Herrero R 2003). The prevalence of HPV-positivity has also been observed to be higher in oropharyngeal tumors compared to other HNSCC primaries (Paz IB 1997) (Gillison ML 2000) (Mellin H 2000). Kreimer et al. reported an overall HPV prevalence of 47.0%, a much higher rate than for any other head and neck site, with HPV16 accounting for the large majority (86.7%) in oropharyngeal SCC from North America (Kreimer AR 2005). In our study, HPV16 DNA was found almost exclusively in oropharyngeal tumors; 93% of HPV-positive tumors were located in the oropharynx. And of the 14 orophayngeal tumors, 13 (93%) were positive for HPV16. The seemingly high rate could have been a selection bias associated with enrollment of patients on an organ preservation protocol at a tertiary referral center. In addition, geographic variation of HPV-positivity was likely a factor. HPV prevalence in oropharyngeal SCC varied from as low as 28.2% in Europe to the highest rate of 47.0% in North America (Kreimer AR 2005). But this finding seems to lend further credence to a strong association between HPV and oropharyngeal cancer (Gillison ML 2000). The risk profile of patients with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer has been extensively studied to further elucidate possible oncogenic pathways for HPV-associated HNSCC (Schwartz SR 2001) (Ringstrom E 2002) (Gillison ML 2000) (Lindel K 2001) (D'Souza G 2007). Tobacco and alcohol use are established etiologic agents for classic HNSCC. In contrast, various reports suggest there is an association with lower consumption of both tobacco and alcohol in HPV-positive HNSCC, especially involving the oropharyngeal site (Fouret P 1997) (Gillison ML 2000) (Herrero R 2003) (D'Souza G 2007). Our study was unable to confirm this association due to small sample size. However, the absence of these classic risk factors seems to suggest that HPV-positive tumors share a distinct pathogenesis apart from a toxin-driven pathway—a mechanism supported by studies demonstrating a lower incidence of the tumor suppressor gene TP53 mutation in tumors that harbor HPV (Hafkamp HC 2003) (Dai M 2004). In addition, there are several reports of a link between female gender, sexual behavior, and HPV-positivity (Mellin H 2000) (Lindel K 2001) (Smith EM 2004). In a recent case-control study, D'Souza et al. reported an increasing degree of association with oropharyngeal cancer and the number of either vaginal or oral-sex partners as well as among patients with a high lifetime number of such partnerss suggesting that oral HPV infection is sexually acquired (D'Souza G 2007). Most of the data investigating the prognostic value of HPV-positivity report better outcomes for HPV-associated tumors, especially of the orophaynx (Mellin H 2000) (Gillison ML 2000) (Lindel K 2001) (Schwartz SR 2001) (Ritchie JM 2003). Until recently, all such prognostic data were derived from various case series which were limited by the retrospective nature of as well as the heterogeneous treatments patients received in these studies. In 2007, Fakhry et al. were the first to report on the prognostic significance of HPV tumor status for patients with HNSCC in a prospective, multi-center phase II clinical trial (Fakhry C 2007). In this study, eligible patients included those with newly diagnosed, resectable, stage III or IV HNSCC of the oropharynx (65%) or larynx (35%). All patients were uniformly treated with two cycles of induction chemotherapy (consisting of paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin AUC 6) followed by chemoradiation (weekly paclitaxel 30 mg/m2 administered concurrently with standard fractionation external beam radiation therapy, total dose of 70 Gy in 35 fractions over 7 weeks). Of 96 pateints included in the analysis, HPV16, 33, or 35 was detected in 40%. After a median follow-up time of 39 months, patients with HPV-positive tumors had a risk of progression that was 72% lower (HR=0.28, 95% CI: 0.07-1.0) and a risk of death that was 79% lower (HR=0.21, 95% CI: 0.06-0.74) than patients with HPV-negative tumors, after adjustment for age, gender, race, smoking, tumor site, and TNM staging. In line with this report, after adjustment for similar confounders including VEGF expression, our study also showed a trend towards better progression-free (HR 0.15; p = 0.06) and overall survival (HR 0.14; p = 0.10) for patients with HPV-positive tumors treated in a phase II study with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by adjuvant radiation with or without chemotherapy. The association was slightly stronger for progression-free survival, although the overall survival benefit was certainly blunted by the limited patient number typical for a phase II study. The reasons for these better outcomes in HPV-positive HNSCC remains elusive. In our study, HPV-positive patients demonstrated better survival despite the finding of a trend towards more advanced nodal stage at diagnosis. Similar associations between the presence of HPV and larger tumor size and nodal involvement have been reported by others (Paz IB 1997) (Schwartz SR 2001). Increased radiosensitivity has been proposed as a possible mechanism. In a retrospective review of HNSCC patients who had undergone curative irradiation, Lindel et al. reported a higher local control rate and a subsequent increased overall survival in HPV-positive patients (Lindel K 2001). Fakhry et al. also reported significantly higher response rates to induction chemotherapy in patients with HPV-positive tumors (82% vs. 55%, p = 0.01; for HPV-positive and negative patients, respectively) (Fakhry C 2007). However, there was no comment on treatment compliance. Interestingly, concurrent chemoradiation did not add significantly to the percentage of responders following induction therapy likely as a result of the already high response rate to chemotherapy in the HPV-positive cohort (response rates following concurrent chemoradiation: 84% vs. 57%, for HPV-positive and -negative patients, respectively). In contrast, although a non-statistically significant higher percentage of HPV-positive patients required a dose reduction during treatment in our study (76.9% vs 50%, for HPV-positive and –negative patients, respectively), there was no difference in the response rates seen following induction chemotherapy when stratified by HPV status (85.7% vs. 90%, for HPV-positive and –negative patients, respectively). This finding is likely explained by the different chemotherapy regimens used as part of induction therapy in each of the phase II protocols. Our study implemented a much more aggressive regimen (TPFL) with reported response rates > 90% in various trials regardless of HPV status (Psyrri A 2004) (Colevas AD 2002). Taken together, the early data suggest that improved survival in HPV-positive HNSCC may be explained, in part, by higher sensitivity to both chemotherapy and radiation. To further explore the role of HPV in the carcinogenesis and clinical behavior of HNSCC, we analyzed the expression of HIF and VEGF, two factors that play an important role in tumor-mediated angiogenesis and may possibly have prognostic implications. The interplay between HPV16, VEGF, and HIF is one that is actively being studied, further characterized, and proving to be quite complex in invasive cervical squamous cell carcinoma models. It is well known that hypoxia is an inducer of VEGF expression under the control of the transcription factor, HIF-1 (Forsythe JA 1996). Preclinical data also show that the HPV16 oncoproteins E5, E6, and E7 are able to induce VEGF expression directly, via a p53 independent manner (López-Ocejo O 2000) or indirectly by way of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (Kim 2006) or HIF (Tang X 2007). Furthermore, VEGF has also been shown to induce expression of E6 in what may be a positive feedback mechanism (Mathur RS 2005). HPV16-related angiogenic pathways are not as well defined in HNSCC. However, the findings of our study are in line with the reported data for cervical cancer models. Despite the fact that there was no difference in the level of VEGF protein expression by IHC, in a smaller subset analysis of frozen biopsy specimens, VEGF mRNA transcript was up-regulated in HPV-positive tumors compared to HPV-negative specimens. Unfortunately, we were not able to assess mRNA transcript levels in all specimens due to the poor quality of RNA in paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. In contrast, there was no difference in HIF expression at either the protein or mRNA transcript level suggesting that in HPV16-positive oropharyngeal cancers, the induction of VEGF expression occurs in a HIF-independent manner. However, these results must be interpreted with caution given the very limited number of patients. Further studies will be required for a more clear interpretation of these complex angiogenic pathways in HPV-associated HNSCC. We are unable to explain why the up-regulation of VEGF mRNA levels did not translate into higher VEGF protein expression, but several studies have demonstrated that the regulation of VEGF occurs at various tiers from the transcriptional to post-translational level (Kim 2006) (Bermont L 2000). In contrast to our study, another group has shown that in HPV16-positive tonsillar cancer specimens, integration of HPV DNA into the host genome was strongly associated with HIF-1a overexpression (Kim SH 2007). However, it is becoming evident that even among the subset of head and neck cancers associated with HPV, there is clearly variability in the cytogenetic characteristics, resulting tumor biology, and clinical behavior in these complex tumors (Weinberger PM 2006) (Smeets SJ 2006) (Boudewijn J 2004). In conclusion, our study demonstrated HPV16 infection in a significant proportion of oropharyngeal cancers. Furthermore, HPV-positivity portended a better prognosis in patients with oropharyngeal SCC treated with induction chemotherapy and adjuvant radiation. The level of VEGF mRNA was up-regulated in HPV16-positive tumors possibly by a HIF-1 independent manner. Larger, prospective studies will be required to further validate our findings. Continued characterization of these complex HPV-associated angiogenic pathways will provide future targets for therapy. 