Molecular Analysis of PIK3CA , BRAF , and RAS Oncogenes in Periampullary and Ampullary Adenomas and Carcinomas Background Mutations of KRAS are known to occur in periampullary and ampullary adenomas and carcinomas. However, nothing is known about NRAS , HRAS , BRAF , and PIK3CA mutations in these tumors. While oncogenic BRAF contributes to the tumorigenesis of both pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms/carcinomas (IPMN/IPMC), PIK3CA mutations were only detected in IPMN/IPMC. This study aimed to elucidate possible roles of BRAF and PIK3CA in the development of ampullary and periampullary adenomas and carcinomas. Methods Mutations of BRAF , NRAS , HRAS , KRAS , and PIK3CA were evaluated in seven adenomas, seven adenomas with carcinoma in situ, and 21 adenocarcinomas of the periampullary duodenal region and the ampulla of Vater. Exons 1 of KRAS ; 2 and 3 of NRAS and HRAS ; 5, 11, and 15 of BRAF ; and 9 and 20 of PIK3CA were examined by direct genomic sequencing. Results In total, we identified ten (28.6%) KRAS mutations in exon 1 (nine in codon 12 and one in codon 13), two missense mutations of BRAF (6%), one within exon 11 (G469A), and one V600E hot spot mutation in exon 15 of BRAF . BRAF mutations were present in two of five periampullary tumors. All mutations appear to be somatic since the same alterations were not detected in the corresponding normal tissues. Conclusion Our data provide evidence that oncogenic properties of KRAS and BRAF but not NRAS , HRAS , and PIK3CA contribute to the tumorigenesis of periampullary and ampullary tumors; BRAF mutations occur more frequently in periampullary than ampullary neoplasms.  Materials and Methods Patients and Tissue Samples Surgical paraffin-embedded adenoma and carcinoma samples from 31 patients (female n = 17, male n = 14, median age 63.6 years, range 40–85 years) were obtained from the archival tissue collection of the Columbia University Medical Center. Acquisition of the tissue specimens was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Columbia University Medical Center and performed in accordance with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations. In detail, we analyzed 35 tumor areas including seven adenomas, seven adenomas with carcinoma in situ (CIS), and 21 carcinomas of the periampullary and ampullary region. The anatomic distribution of the tumors included 24 ampullary tumors, sox tumors involving both ampulla and periampullary duodenal region, and five periampullary duodenal tumors. Of the five periampullary tumors analyzed, two tumors involved the papilla of Vater whereas three tumors were located within 2 cm of the papilla and were classified as periampullary tumors of duodenal origin (see Table 1 for a more detailed register.) DNA Samples for Mutation Analysis All tissue samples were handled in an environment free of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products. Paraffin-embedded tumor samples were microdissected by hand. Surrounding nontumorous tissue or tissue derived from a tumor-free specimen of the same patient served as the corresponding normal control. Genomic DNA was extracted using QIAmp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). The procedures were performed according to the manufacturers' instructions for paraffin-embedded tissues. Exons 1 of KRAS , 2 and 3 of NRAS and HRAS , exons 5, 11, and 15 of BRAF , and exons 9 and 20 of PIK3CA were analyzed by PCR amplification of genomic DNA and direct sequencing of the PCR products. Genomic DNA (40 ng per sample) was amplified with primers that had been designed to specifically amplify the codons 12 and 13 of KRAS or each exon and its exon/intron boundaries in the NRAS , HRAS , BRAF , and PIK3CA loci, respectively. The primers were adopted from those published in the literature to omit analyzing the BRAF and KRAS pseudogenes. 31 – 33 Before sequencing, all PCR products were purified, using QIA-quick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Sequencing was performed with ABI's 3100 capillary automated sequencers at the DNA core facility of Columbia University Medical Center. All samples found to have genetic alteration in the target genes were subsequently sequenced in the reverse direction to confirm the mutation. The mutations were then further verified by sequencing of a second PCR product derived independently from the original template.  Patients and Tissue Samples Surgical paraffin-embedded adenoma and carcinoma samples from 31 patients (female n = 17, male n = 14, median age 63.6 years, range 40–85 years) were obtained from the archival tissue collection of the Columbia University Medical Center. Acquisition of the tissue specimens was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Columbia University Medical Center and performed in accordance with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations. In detail, we analyzed 35 tumor areas including seven adenomas, seven adenomas with carcinoma in situ (CIS), and 21 carcinomas of the periampullary and ampullary region. The anatomic distribution of the tumors included 24 ampullary tumors, sox tumors involving both ampulla and periampullary duodenal region, and five periampullary duodenal tumors. Of the five periampullary tumors analyzed, two tumors involved the papilla of Vater whereas three tumors were located within 2 cm of the papilla and were classified as periampullary tumors of duodenal origin (see Table 1 for a more detailed register.)  DNA Samples for Mutation Analysis All tissue samples were handled in an environment free of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products. Paraffin-embedded tumor samples were microdissected by hand. Surrounding nontumorous tissue or tissue derived from a tumor-free specimen of the same patient served as the corresponding normal control. Genomic DNA was extracted using QIAmp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). The procedures were performed according to the manufacturers' instructions for paraffin-embedded tissues. Exons 1 of KRAS , 2 and 3 of NRAS and HRAS , exons 5, 11, and 15 of BRAF , and exons 9 and 20 of PIK3CA were analyzed by PCR amplification of genomic DNA and direct sequencing of the PCR products. Genomic DNA (40 ng per sample) was amplified with primers that had been designed to specifically amplify the codons 12 and 13 of KRAS or each exon and its exon/intron boundaries in the NRAS , HRAS , BRAF , and PIK3CA loci, respectively. The primers were adopted from those published in the literature to omit analyzing the BRAF and KRAS pseudogenes. 31 – 33 Before sequencing, all PCR products were purified, using QIA-quick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Sequencing was performed with ABI's 3100 capillary automated sequencers at the DNA core facility of Columbia University Medical Center. All samples found to have genetic alteration in the target genes were subsequently sequenced in the reverse direction to confirm the mutation. The mutations were then further verified by sequencing of a second PCR product derived independently from the original template.  Results In the present study, 35 periampullary and ampullary adenomas and carcinomas were analyzed for mutations in the BRAF , NRAS , HRAS , KRAS , and PIK3CA genes. We performed sequencing analyses of codons 12 and 13 of exon 1 of KRAS , the entire exons 2 and 3 of HRAS and NRAS , exons 5, 11, and 15 of BRAF , and exons 9 and 20 of PIK3CA in all these specimens. These regions included the most common HRAS , NRAS , KRAS , BRAF , and PIK3CA mutations previously observed in human cancers. 23 , 31 – 33 Two BRAF mutations (6% of all samples, 66% of periampullary tumors originating from the duodenum) were identified in our set of samples: one exon 15 hot spot mutation at nucleotide 1799 (G T G?G A G), leading to an amino acid change from valine to glutamic acid (V600E) and one exon 11 mutation at nucleotide 1406 (G G A?G C A), leading to an amino acid change from glycine to alanine (G469A), which has also been described previously ( Fig. 1 and Table 1 ). Interestingly, both mutations were found in periampullary adenomas with CIS originating from the duodenal mucosa. We did not identify any mutation in exon 5. KRAS mutations were found in ten (28.6%) of the 35 samples ( Fig. 2 and Table 1 ). Nine tumors carried a mutation of codon 12 and one a mutation of codon 13. In detail, we identified four KRAS mutations within the 14 adenomas (28.6%) and six mutations in the 21 ampullary and periampullary carcinomas (28.6%). The distribution of KRAS mutations showed a single mutation in all observed cases. The coexistence of KRAS and BRAF mutations was observed in a periampullary adenoma sample (see Table 1 ). All mutations proved to be somatic since none of them was detected within the matching normal tissues ( Fig. 1 ). No mutation was detected in the HRAS , NRAS , and PIK3CA loci.  Results In the present study, 35 periampullary and ampullary adenomas and carcinomas were analyzed for mutations in the BRAF , NRAS , HRAS , KRAS , and PIK3CA genes. We performed sequencing analyses of codons 12 and 13 of exon 1 of KRAS , the entire exons 2 and 3 of HRAS and NRAS , exons 5, 11, and 15 of BRAF , and exons 9 and 20 of PIK3CA in all these specimens. These regions included the most common HRAS , NRAS , KRAS , BRAF , and PIK3CA mutations previously observed in human cancers. 23 , 31 – 33 Two BRAF mutations (6% of all samples, 66% of periampullary tumors originating from the duodenum) were identified in our set of samples: one exon 15 hot spot mutation at nucleotide 1799 (G T G?G A G), leading to an amino acid change from valine to glutamic acid (V600E) and one exon 11 mutation at nucleotide 1406 (G G A?G C A), leading to an amino acid change from glycine to alanine (G469A), which has also been described previously ( Fig. 1 and Table 1 ). Interestingly, both mutations were found in periampullary adenomas with CIS originating from the duodenal mucosa. We did not identify any mutation in exon 5. KRAS mutations were found in ten (28.6%) of the 35 samples ( Fig. 2 and Table 1 ). Nine tumors carried a mutation of codon 12 and one a mutation of codon 13. In detail, we identified four KRAS mutations within the 14 adenomas (28.6%) and six mutations in the 21 ampullary and periampullary carcinomas (28.6%). The distribution of KRAS mutations showed a single mutation in all observed cases. The coexistence of KRAS and BRAF mutations was observed in a periampullary adenoma sample (see Table 1 ). All mutations proved to be somatic since none of them was detected within the matching normal tissues ( Fig. 1 ). No mutation was detected in the HRAS , NRAS , and PIK3CA loci.  Discussion Carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater and the periampullary region are distinguished from conventional pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma clinically and pathologically, but the relationship of these tumor types at the genetic level is still being investigated. KRAS gene mutations have been demonstrated in periampullary and ampullary adenomas, even in areas of low-grade dysplasia. In addition, there is a strong correlation (93%) between the KRAS gene mutation found in ampullary adenomas and their associated infiltrating carcinomas, 34 , 35 indicating that KRAS gene mutations in ampullary cancer, when present, occur early in tumorigenesis. Mutant Kras constitutively activates the Raf–MEK–ERK–MAP kinase pathway, which mediates cellular response to various growth signals. 36 , 37 Unlike pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, where KRAS is mutated at a frequency close to 100%. 38 , 39 approximately 60% of ampullary carcinomas do not harbor an active KRAS mutation. This suggests that a relatively large percentage of periampullary and ampullary adenomas and carcinomas might use alternative ways to activate the RAS–RAF–MEK–ERK–MAP kinase pathway. BRAF , a serine/threonine kinase located immediately downstream in RAS signaling, has been examined and found to be mutated in a variety of human malignant neoplasms. Here, we report two somatic BRAF mutations out of 35 (6%) periampullary and ampullary neoplasms examined. Our data are in concordance with the literature, which described a trend for BRAF mutations in cancer types harboring KRAS mutations. 31 BRAF is known to have a mutational hot spot at nucleotide 1799, which is reported to account for 91% of BRAF mutations in human cancers 15 , 31 , 33 , 40 (V600E). All mutations observed in our set of neoplasms were within exon 11 and 15. These mutations are not only the predominant type in melanoma but also in colon cancer and sarcoma. 31 Transfection assays revealed that these mutations were active in vitro and stimulate the activity of the ERK pathway in vivo. 31 Davies et al. showed that Ras function was not required for the growth of cancer cell lines with the V600E mutation. Mutations at exon 11, codon 469, of BRAF have been found in several tumors and appear to be the second most frequent mutation of BRAF in human cancers. 15 The G469A BRAF mutant in particular has been shown to have similar activity to V600E BRAF and is also generated through a single-nucleotide substitution but accounts for less than 1% of mutations. 31 In our study, KRAS and the G469A BRAF mutation occur simultaneously in one periampullary adenoma of duodenal origin. It has been observed previously that BRAF mutations, other than BRAF V600E, coexisted with RAS mutations. 31 The BRAF V600E mutation seems to uncouple cells from their proliferation requirement of RAS , and mutation of RAS was not detected in any of the tumors carrying this particular mutation. 31 However, in vitro data indicated that V600E BRAF mutants can be further activated by mutant RAS , whereas other BRAF mutants remain dependent on RAS function. 31 A previous study on pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma revealed that the V600E mutation occurred in two of nine xenografted tumors retaining wild-type copies of the KRAS , NRAS , and HRAS genes, but none in 72 xenografted carcinomas with KRAS mutations within exons 11 and 15. 16 In contrast, another study on pancreatic adenocarcinoma found both KRAS and BRAF V600E mutations coexisting in two cases. 17 Previously, we were able to show that, in IPMN, KRAS mutations coexist with BRAF mutations, other than the V600 mutation. 18 Cells with activating mutations in both KRAS and BRAF had a substantially higher B-Raf kinase activity and ERK 1/2 phosphorylation activities than those with BRAF mutation alone. 31 So tumors with both BRAF and KRAS mutations might have an accelerated course in terms of development or progression. BRAF mutations have been detected in the early stages of colon cancer and melanoma development. 41 , 42 These observations are in concordance with our results, where both BRAF mutations occurred in periampullary adenomas with CIS, indicating that BRAF mutation, when present, is an early event in tumorigenesis. In summary, we found two BRAF and ten KRAS and no mutations of HRAS , NRAS , and PIK3CA in 35 periampullary and ampullary adenoma and carcinoma samples. The rarity of PIK3CA mutation in periampullary and ampullary adenoma and carcinoma is potentially significant, given that PIK3CA mutations was previously reported in 10% of IPMN but not in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. 23 , 29 , 30 There appears to be a divergent role for PIK3CA in the tumorigenesis of IPMN/IPMC and adenocarcinoma. Another intriguing aspect of our results is that both BRAF mutations were found in two of a total of three (66%) periampullary adenomas of duodenal origin and none in ampullary cancer. All mutations found proved to be somatic. This is the first mutational study of BRAF , in periampullary and ampullary neoplasms. Our data indicate that BRAF mutations do not play a major role in the tumorigenesis of ampullary carcinomas but are of importance in periampullary lesions, specifically those of duodenal origin. Targeted mutation of BRAF is an early event, which suggests that alteration of RAS–RAF–MEK–ERK–MAP kinase pathway by BRAF mutation together with RAS mutation plays an important role in periampullary tumorigenesis.  Discussion Carcinomas of the ampulla of Vater and the periampullary region are distinguished from conventional pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma clinically and pathologically, but the relationship of these tumor types at the genetic level is still being investigated. KRAS gene mutations have been demonstrated in periampullary and ampullary adenomas, even in areas of low-grade dysplasia. In addition, there is a strong correlation (93%) between the KRAS gene mutation found in ampullary adenomas and their associated infiltrating carcinomas, 34 , 35 indicating that KRAS gene mutations in ampullary cancer, when present, occur early in tumorigenesis. Mutant Kras constitutively activates the Raf–MEK–ERK–MAP kinase pathway, which mediates cellular response to various growth signals. 36 , 37 Unlike pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, where KRAS is mutated at a frequency close to 100%. 38 , 39 approximately 60% of ampullary carcinomas do not harbor an active KRAS mutation. This suggests that a relatively large percentage of periampullary and ampullary adenomas and carcinomas might use alternative ways to activate the RAS–RAF–MEK–ERK–MAP kinase pathway. BRAF , a serine/threonine kinase located immediately downstream in RAS signaling, has been examined and found to be mutated in a variety of human malignant neoplasms. Here, we report two somatic BRAF mutations out of 35 (6%) periampullary and ampullary neoplasms examined. Our data are in concordance with the literature, which described a trend for BRAF mutations in cancer types harboring KRAS mutations. 31 BRAF is known to have a mutational hot spot at nucleotide 1799, which is reported to account for 91% of BRAF mutations in human cancers 15 , 31 , 33 , 40 (V600E). All mutations observed in our set of neoplasms were within exon 11 and 15. These mutations are not only the predominant type in melanoma but also in colon cancer and sarcoma. 31 Transfection assays revealed that these mutations were active in vitro and stimulate the activity of the ERK pathway in vivo. 31 Davies et al. showed that Ras function was not required for the growth of cancer cell lines with the V600E mutation. Mutations at exon 11, codon 469, of BRAF have been found in several tumors and appear to be the second most frequent mutation of BRAF in human cancers. 15 The G469A BRAF mutant in particular has been shown to have similar activity to V600E BRAF and is also generated through a single-nucleotide substitution but accounts for less than 1% of mutations. 31 In our study, KRAS and the G469A BRAF mutation occur simultaneously in one periampullary adenoma of duodenal origin. It has been observed previously that BRAF mutations, other than BRAF V600E, coexisted with RAS mutations. 31 The BRAF V600E mutation seems to uncouple cells from their proliferation requirement of RAS , and mutation of RAS was not detected in any of the tumors carrying this particular mutation. 31 However, in vitro data indicated that V600E BRAF mutants can be further activated by mutant RAS , whereas other BRAF mutants remain dependent on RAS function. 31 A previous study on pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma revealed that the V600E mutation occurred in two of nine xenografted tumors retaining wild-type copies of the KRAS , NRAS , and HRAS genes, but none in 72 xenografted carcinomas with KRAS mutations within exons 11 and 15. 16 In contrast, another study on pancreatic adenocarcinoma found both KRAS and BRAF V600E mutations coexisting in two cases. 17 Previously, we were able to show that, in IPMN, KRAS mutations coexist with BRAF mutations, other than the V600 mutation. 18 Cells with activating mutations in both KRAS and BRAF had a substantially higher B-Raf kinase activity and ERK 1/2 phosphorylation activities than those with BRAF mutation alone. 31 So tumors with both BRAF and KRAS mutations might have an accelerated course in terms of development or progression. BRAF mutations have been detected in the early stages of colon cancer and melanoma development. 41 , 42 These observations are in concordance with our results, where both BRAF mutations occurred in periampullary adenomas with CIS, indicating that BRAF mutation, when present, is an early event in tumorigenesis. In summary, we found two BRAF and ten KRAS and no mutations of HRAS , NRAS , and PIK3CA in 35 periampullary and ampullary adenoma and carcinoma samples. The rarity of PIK3CA mutation in periampullary and ampullary adenoma and carcinoma is potentially significant, given that PIK3CA mutations was previously reported in 10% of IPMN but not in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. 23 , 29 , 30 There appears to be a divergent role for PIK3CA in the tumorigenesis of IPMN/IPMC and adenocarcinoma. Another intriguing aspect of our results is that both BRAF mutations were found in two of a total of three (66%) periampullary adenomas of duodenal origin and none in ampullary cancer. All mutations found proved to be somatic. This is the first mutational study of BRAF , in periampullary and ampullary neoplasms. Our data indicate that BRAF mutations do not play a major role in the tumorigenesis of ampullary carcinomas but are of importance in periampullary lesions, specifically those of duodenal origin. Targeted mutation of BRAF is an early event, which suggests that alteration of RAS–RAF–MEK–ERK–MAP kinase pathway by BRAF mutation together with RAS mutation plays an important role in periampullary tumorigenesis. 