Plasminogen activator inhibitor -1 (PAI-1) Facilitates Retinal Angiogenesis in a Model of Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy Purpose Angiogenesis, or the formation of new retinal blood vessels is a key feature of many proliferative retinal diseases including diabetic retinopathy, retinal vein occlusions, and retinopathy of prematurity. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of the serine proteinase inhibitor PAI-1 in facilitating retinal angiogenesis. Methods The temporal expression of PAI-1 was examined by real time PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry in retinal tissues from mice with oxygen-induced retinopathy. The requirement for PAI-1 in facilitating the retinal angiogenic response in this model was examined by quantitating the angiogenic response using both wildtype and PAI-1 null mice. The mechanism by which PAI-1 mediates angiogenesis was further investigated using isolated human retinal vascular endothelial cells. Results PAI-1 expression is up regulated in the retina of mice with oxygen-induced retinopathy. This coincides with a significant increase in the expression of vitronectin in the retina of the experimental mice. There was significant reduction in the angiogenic response of PAI-1?/? mice as compared to wild type mice. PAI-1 promotes endothelial cell migration in vitro and facilitates migration of cells on a vitronectin substrate by regulating ?v integrin cell surface expression. Conclusions These observations suggest a role for PAI-1 during retinal angiogenesis and point to a potential new therapeutic target in the prevention or treatment of retinal neovascularization seen in many ocular diseases.  Materials and Methods Animal Models Wild type C57BL/6J and genetically modified PAI-1?/? mice were bred at the University of New Mexico Animal Research Facility. The homozygous PAI-1?/? mice (B6.129S2- Serpine1 tm1Mlg /J) were originally obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine). All experiments were consistent with the ARVO (Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology) Statement for the use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research. Oxygen Induced Retinopathy Retinal angiogenesis was induced in wild type and PAI-1?/? mice using the oxygen induced retinopathy (OIR) model described by Smith and co-workers 23 Briefly, 7 day-old pups were placed with their nursing mothers in a chamber (BioSpherix ProOx model 110; Redfield, NY) at 75% O2 until postnatal day 12 (P12). Mice were then placed at room air until postnatal day 17 during which time angiogenesis occurred at the junction of the vascularized and non-vascularized regions of the retina. By day 17, retinal neovascularization was achieved in 100% of the experimental mice. Age matched mice, housed only in room air served as controls. Quantitation of Vaso-obliteration and Retinal Neovascularization To characterize the response of wildtype and PAI-1 deficient mice to the OIR protocol, blood vessels were stained in retinal whole mounts from untreated P7 and oxygen-treated P12 animals. The eyes were fixed for 2 hours with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS and the retinas removed. The retinas were incubated in cold 70% ethanol followed by 1% triton X-100 and finally incubated overnight in PBS containing 5?g/ml of FITC-labeled Isolectin GSA-IB4 (InVitrogen). For quantitation of retinal angiogenesis, eyes from control and experimental animals were fixed overnight in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (6 ?m) parallel to the optic nerve were mounted on gelatin-coated slides. After deparaffinization, sections were treated with 0.0125% Trypsin at 37°C for 10 minutes. Sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum and stained for Type IV collagen (Rockland Inc., Gilbertsville, PA) to label the vessels. The sections were mounted with Vectashield containing diamidinophenylindole (DAPI) to stain the nuclei. Nuclei associated with type IV collagen positive vessels on the vitreous side of the inner limiting membrane of the retina were counted in every third section using a Zeiss inverted fluorescence microscope. Cell Culture Human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (ACBRI-181) were obtained from Cell Systems (Kirkland, WA) and grown on fibronectin-coated cell culture dishes in MCDB-131 supplemented with 10 % FBS, 10ng/ml EGF, 1 ?g/ml Hydrocortisone, 0.2mg/ml EndoGro and 0.09mg/ml Heparin (VEC Technologies, Rensselaer, NY). Quantitative Real Time PCR Retinas were collected from the oxygen-treated and room air control mice on postnatal days 12, 15, and 17. Total mRNA was extracted using Trizol and first-strand cDNA was synthesized with 2 ?g of total RNA using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). The following TaqMan assays for real-time RT-PCR were obtained from Applied Biosystems: PAI-1: Mm00435860 and 18s RNA Hs99999901. Amplification was performed using the Applied Biosystems 7500 Fast system. Data were derived using the comparative Ct method for duplicate reactions. 24 Western blot analysis Retinal extracts were analyzed for both PAI-1 and vitronectin proteins by Western blot analysis. Retinas were collected from control and oxygen-treated mice on days 15 and 17 and extracted with 1X SDS PAGE sample buffer in a boiling water bath. Total protein was quantitated using the Micro BCA method (Pierce). Equal amounts of total protein were separated on a 10% gel and transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5 % milk in 1 X TBST and incubated with either anti- PAI-1 (BD Bioscience; San Jose, CA) or anti-vitronectin (AbCam; Cambridge, MA), antibody at 4°C overnight. After washing, the membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody and developed with enhanced chemiluminescence reagents. Immunostaining Eyes from experimental and control mice were collected on days 15 and 17 and fixed overnight with either HistoChoice fixative for frozen sections or 4% paraformaldehyde for paraffin embedding. The sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum for 30 minutes and incubated with either anti-PAI-1 antibody for 60 minutes or anti-vitronectin antibody. Sections were washed with 1 X TBST and incubated with a fluorescently-labeled secondary antibody for 30 minutes. After a final wash the sections were cover slipped with Vectashield and examined using fluorescence microscopy. Cell Migration Assay Cell migration assays were performed using Falcon cell culture inserts containing a membrane with 8.0?m pores. Human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (2X104 cells) were plated onto membranes coated with either vitronectin or type I collagen in serum-free MCDB-131 media. The lower chamber contained serum-free media with or without 40 ng/ml vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) added as a chemo-attractant. Some wells contained anti-PAI-1 antibody (BD Bioscience; San Jose, CA) at 6.25 ?g/ml, 12.5 ?g/ml or 37.5 ?g/ml. The cells were allowed to migrate for 18 hours and the cells on the upper surface of the membrane were removed with a cotton swab. The cells that migrated to the lower chamber and attached to the lower surface of the membrane were fixed with 100% methanol for 5 minutes and rinsed with PBS. The membranes were excised, mounted on glass slides with vectashield containing DAPI to stain the cell nucleus. The number of migrated cells was determined at 10X magnification in four peripheral fields and one central field. The number of migrated cells was averaged from 5 fields per membrane. Flow Cytometry Human retinal microvascular endothelial cells were plated at a subconfluent density (~70%) onto vitronectin coated substrates and grown in MCDB-131 in the presence of VEGF (40ng/ml). Anti-PAI-1 antibody (12.5?g/ml) or normal mouse IgG was added for 16 hours and the cells were processed for immunostaining and flow cytometry. The cells were detached from the culture plate using EDTA for 30 minutes at 4° C and incubated with anti-?v/CD51 antibody (R&D Systems Inc. Minneapolis, MN) for 30 minutes. Cells were washed and incubated with an Alexa-568 conjugated secondary antibody for 30 minutes and washed again. After resuspension in 1X PBS, the cells were analyzed using a FACS Calibur system (Beckton Dickinson; Franklin Lakes, NJ) and the Cell Quest Software. Statistical Analysis All statistical analysis was performed using Graph-pad prism software. Data were analyzed by either Students t-test or by one way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s Multiple Comparison test.  Animal Models Wild type C57BL/6J and genetically modified PAI-1?/? mice were bred at the University of New Mexico Animal Research Facility. The homozygous PAI-1?/? mice (B6.129S2- Serpine1 tm1Mlg /J) were originally obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine). All experiments were consistent with the ARVO (Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology) Statement for the use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research.  Oxygen Induced Retinopathy Retinal angiogenesis was induced in wild type and PAI-1?/? mice using the oxygen induced retinopathy (OIR) model described by Smith and co-workers 23 Briefly, 7 day-old pups were placed with their nursing mothers in a chamber (BioSpherix ProOx model 110; Redfield, NY) at 75% O2 until postnatal day 12 (P12). Mice were then placed at room air until postnatal day 17 during which time angiogenesis occurred at the junction of the vascularized and non-vascularized regions of the retina. By day 17, retinal neovascularization was achieved in 100% of the experimental mice. Age matched mice, housed only in room air served as controls.  Quantitation of Vaso-obliteration and Retinal Neovascularization To characterize the response of wildtype and PAI-1 deficient mice to the OIR protocol, blood vessels were stained in retinal whole mounts from untreated P7 and oxygen-treated P12 animals. The eyes were fixed for 2 hours with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS and the retinas removed. The retinas were incubated in cold 70% ethanol followed by 1% triton X-100 and finally incubated overnight in PBS containing 5?g/ml of FITC-labeled Isolectin GSA-IB4 (InVitrogen). For quantitation of retinal angiogenesis, eyes from control and experimental animals were fixed overnight in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (6 ?m) parallel to the optic nerve were mounted on gelatin-coated slides. After deparaffinization, sections were treated with 0.0125% Trypsin at 37°C for 10 minutes. Sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum and stained for Type IV collagen (Rockland Inc., Gilbertsville, PA) to label the vessels. The sections were mounted with Vectashield containing diamidinophenylindole (DAPI) to stain the nuclei. Nuclei associated with type IV collagen positive vessels on the vitreous side of the inner limiting membrane of the retina were counted in every third section using a Zeiss inverted fluorescence microscope.  Cell Culture Human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (ACBRI-181) were obtained from Cell Systems (Kirkland, WA) and grown on fibronectin-coated cell culture dishes in MCDB-131 supplemented with 10 % FBS, 10ng/ml EGF, 1 ?g/ml Hydrocortisone, 0.2mg/ml EndoGro and 0.09mg/ml Heparin (VEC Technologies, Rensselaer, NY).  Quantitative Real Time PCR Retinas were collected from the oxygen-treated and room air control mice on postnatal days 12, 15, and 17. Total mRNA was extracted using Trizol and first-strand cDNA was synthesized with 2 ?g of total RNA using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). The following TaqMan assays for real-time RT-PCR were obtained from Applied Biosystems: PAI-1: Mm00435860 and 18s RNA Hs99999901. Amplification was performed using the Applied Biosystems 7500 Fast system. Data were derived using the comparative Ct method for duplicate reactions. 24  Western blot analysis Retinal extracts were analyzed for both PAI-1 and vitronectin proteins by Western blot analysis. Retinas were collected from control and oxygen-treated mice on days 15 and 17 and extracted with 1X SDS PAGE sample buffer in a boiling water bath. Total protein was quantitated using the Micro BCA method (Pierce). Equal amounts of total protein were separated on a 10% gel and transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5 % milk in 1 X TBST and incubated with either anti- PAI-1 (BD Bioscience; San Jose, CA) or anti-vitronectin (AbCam; Cambridge, MA), antibody at 4°C overnight. After washing, the membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody and developed with enhanced chemiluminescence reagents.  Immunostaining Eyes from experimental and control mice were collected on days 15 and 17 and fixed overnight with either HistoChoice fixative for frozen sections or 4% paraformaldehyde for paraffin embedding. The sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum for 30 minutes and incubated with either anti-PAI-1 antibody for 60 minutes or anti-vitronectin antibody. Sections were washed with 1 X TBST and incubated with a fluorescently-labeled secondary antibody for 30 minutes. After a final wash the sections were cover slipped with Vectashield and examined using fluorescence microscopy.  Cell Migration Assay Cell migration assays were performed using Falcon cell culture inserts containing a membrane with 8.0?m pores. Human retinal microvascular endothelial cells (2X104 cells) were plated onto membranes coated with either vitronectin or type I collagen in serum-free MCDB-131 media. The lower chamber contained serum-free media with or without 40 ng/ml vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) added as a chemo-attractant. Some wells contained anti-PAI-1 antibody (BD Bioscience; San Jose, CA) at 6.25 ?g/ml, 12.5 ?g/ml or 37.5 ?g/ml. The cells were allowed to migrate for 18 hours and the cells on the upper surface of the membrane were removed with a cotton swab. The cells that migrated to the lower chamber and attached to the lower surface of the membrane were fixed with 100% methanol for 5 minutes and rinsed with PBS. The membranes were excised, mounted on glass slides with vectashield containing DAPI to stain the cell nucleus. The number of migrated cells was determined at 10X magnification in four peripheral fields and one central field. The number of migrated cells was averaged from 5 fields per membrane.  Flow Cytometry Human retinal microvascular endothelial cells were plated at a subconfluent density (~70%) onto vitronectin coated substrates and grown in MCDB-131 in the presence of VEGF (40ng/ml). Anti-PAI-1 antibody (12.5?g/ml) or normal mouse IgG was added for 16 hours and the cells were processed for immunostaining and flow cytometry. The cells were detached from the culture plate using EDTA for 30 minutes at 4° C and incubated with anti-?v/CD51 antibody (R&D Systems Inc. Minneapolis, MN) for 30 minutes. Cells were washed and incubated with an Alexa-568 conjugated secondary antibody for 30 minutes and washed again. After resuspension in 1X PBS, the cells were analyzed using a FACS Calibur system (Beckton Dickinson; Franklin Lakes, NJ) and the Cell Quest Software.  Statistical Analysis All statistical analysis was performed using Graph-pad prism software. Data were analyzed by either Students t-test or by one way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s Multiple Comparison test.  RESULTS The Expression of PAI-1 is Increased in the Retinas of mice with Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy The retinas of P7 wildtype mice, at the beginning of high oxygen exposure, have a well developed vascular bed as seen in GSA lectin-labeled whole mounts ( Figure 1A ). After 5 days of oxygen exposure, the central portion of the retina has undergone vaso-obliteration ( Figure 1B ) that is followed over the next five days by new vessel formation at the interface of the vascularized and non-vascularized portions of the retina in 100% of the animals. These new vessels grow abnormally crossing the inner limiting membrane and invade the vitreous space. 23 The level of PAI-1 mRNA was determined by real time RT-PCR during the oxygen-induced retinopathy process in these animals ( Figure 2A ). PAI-1 mRNA in day 12 experimental retinas was significantly less than that seen in the control retinas at this age. As PAI-1 is expressed primarily by endothelial cells, this decrease in mRNA expression may be due simply to the significant degree of vaso-obliteration and endothelial cell loss occurring in these animals at this time. Despite the difference in vascular density between control and experimental retinas, the level of PAI-1 mRNA was found to significantly increase in the experimental retinas compared to controls during the subsequent active stages of angiogenesis in this model (days 15 and 17). The increased level of PAI-1 mRNA correlated with an increase in the level of protein as determined by Western blotting analysis ( Figure 2B ). PAI-1 protein in the experimental retina was localized by immunostaining and was found specifically associated with the neovascular tufts present on the surface of the retina and on vessel profiles just below the surface ( Figure 3 ). The staining appeared to be localized primarily to the endothelial cells of the new vessels. The Expression of Vitronectin is Increased in the Retinas during OIR Induced Angiogenesis PAI-1 has previously been shown to mediate the attachment of cells to vitronectin in the extracellular matrix (22). A role for PAI-1 in mediating the angiogenic response in the OIR model would be supported if vitronectin were present in the retina where it could provide a suitable migratory substrate for the newly forming vessels during the angiogenic process. Retinas were examined for the expression of vitronectin during the preangiogenic and angiogenic phases in the OIR model (P12 and P15 respectively) and compared to control retinas of the same age. A significant increase in the amount of vitronectin was seen in the retinas of P15 OIR mice as compared with retinas at the beginning of the angiogenic process (P12 OIR) and was also significantly greater than that seen in the P15 control animals ( Fig 4A ). The vitronectin protein was localized by immunostaining in day 15 experimental mice to the vitreoretinal interface. Staining was localized to the region of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) as well as some portions of the nerve fiber layer adjacent to the ILM ( Figure 4B ). The Loss of PAI-1 Reduces the Extent of Retinal Neovascularization in Mice with Oxygen Induced Retinopathy To determine a role for PAI-1 in retinal angiogenesis, wildtype and PAI-1?/? mice were subjected to the OIR protocol and analyzed for the extent of retinal neovascularization as described. Mice with a genetic loss of PAI-1 demonstrated a similar response to the initial high oxygen treatment as the wildtype mice. The retinas of P7 PAI-1?/? mice demonstrated a dense pattern of retinal vessels that were equally susceptible to vaso-obliteration as demonstrated in the P12 PAI-1?/? OIR mice when compared to the wildtype animals ( Figure 5 ). A role for the elevated levels of PAI-1 in mediating angiogenesis in the retina was confirmed as the genetic loss of PAI-1 resulted in a significant decrease in the extent of retinal angiogenesis ( Figure 6 ). Retinas from PAI-1?/? mice had a significantly decreased number of neovascular tufts on the vitreal side of the inner limiting membrane as compared to the retinas from the wildtype mice (average of 33 nuclei vs. 62 nuclei respectively). This result demonstrates a 53% reduction in retinal angiogenesis when PAI-1 is absent. Blocking PAI-1 Inhibits the Migration of Retinal Endothelial Cells <italic>in vitro</italic> We next examined whether the inhibition of new vessel formation seen in the PAI-1?/? mice might be due to a migration defect in the endothelial cells. The migration of human retinal endothelial cells was examined in vitro as described above. Cells plated onto vitronectin or collagen-coated migration inserts and stimulated with VEGF showed extensive migration after 18 hours. When a PAI-1 neutralizing antibody was added at the time of plating the cells showed a significant reduction in the extent of migration, and this effect was dose dependent. In addition, the effect was also found to be substrate dependent as the PAI-1 antibody had no effect when cells were migrating on a collagen substrate ( Figure 7 ). One potential mechanism by which PAI-1 facilitates cell migration is by regulating the surface expression of integrins. 25 We utilized flow cytometry to examine the surface expression of the ?v integrin in human retinal endothelial cells growing on a vitronectin substrate in the presence and absence of anti-PAI-1 antibody. Cells exposed to the antibody for 16 hours demonstrated significantly more cell surface ?v integrin compared to cells in the absence of antibody ( Figure 8 ). When the activity of PAI-1 was reduced with the PAI-1 antibody, 20.26 % of the cells expressed ?v integrin on the cell surface. When cells were grown in the absence of antibody only 5.37 % demonstrated surface ?v integrin. These results suggest that PAI-1 activity can regulate the interaction of endothelial cells with a vitronectin substrate by facilitating the turnover of the ?v integrin.  RESULTS The Expression of PAI-1 is Increased in the Retinas of mice with Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy The retinas of P7 wildtype mice, at the beginning of high oxygen exposure, have a well developed vascular bed as seen in GSA lectin-labeled whole mounts ( Figure 1A ). After 5 days of oxygen exposure, the central portion of the retina has undergone vaso-obliteration ( Figure 1B ) that is followed over the next five days by new vessel formation at the interface of the vascularized and non-vascularized portions of the retina in 100% of the animals. These new vessels grow abnormally crossing the inner limiting membrane and invade the vitreous space. 23 The level of PAI-1 mRNA was determined by real time RT-PCR during the oxygen-induced retinopathy process in these animals ( Figure 2A ). PAI-1 mRNA in day 12 experimental retinas was significantly less than that seen in the control retinas at this age. As PAI-1 is expressed primarily by endothelial cells, this decrease in mRNA expression may be due simply to the significant degree of vaso-obliteration and endothelial cell loss occurring in these animals at this time. Despite the difference in vascular density between control and experimental retinas, the level of PAI-1 mRNA was found to significantly increase in the experimental retinas compared to controls during the subsequent active stages of angiogenesis in this model (days 15 and 17). The increased level of PAI-1 mRNA correlated with an increase in the level of protein as determined by Western blotting analysis ( Figure 2B ). PAI-1 protein in the experimental retina was localized by immunostaining and was found specifically associated with the neovascular tufts present on the surface of the retina and on vessel profiles just below the surface ( Figure 3 ). The staining appeared to be localized primarily to the endothelial cells of the new vessels. The Expression of Vitronectin is Increased in the Retinas during OIR Induced Angiogenesis PAI-1 has previously been shown to mediate the attachment of cells to vitronectin in the extracellular matrix (22). A role for PAI-1 in mediating the angiogenic response in the OIR model would be supported if vitronectin were present in the retina where it could provide a suitable migratory substrate for the newly forming vessels during the angiogenic process. Retinas were examined for the expression of vitronectin during the preangiogenic and angiogenic phases in the OIR model (P12 and P15 respectively) and compared to control retinas of the same age. A significant increase in the amount of vitronectin was seen in the retinas of P15 OIR mice as compared with retinas at the beginning of the angiogenic process (P12 OIR) and was also significantly greater than that seen in the P15 control animals ( Fig 4A ). The vitronectin protein was localized by immunostaining in day 15 experimental mice to the vitreoretinal interface. Staining was localized to the region of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) as well as some portions of the nerve fiber layer adjacent to the ILM ( Figure 4B ). The Loss of PAI-1 Reduces the Extent of Retinal Neovascularization in Mice with Oxygen Induced Retinopathy To determine a role for PAI-1 in retinal angiogenesis, wildtype and PAI-1?/? mice were subjected to the OIR protocol and analyzed for the extent of retinal neovascularization as described. Mice with a genetic loss of PAI-1 demonstrated a similar response to the initial high oxygen treatment as the wildtype mice. The retinas of P7 PAI-1?/? mice demonstrated a dense pattern of retinal vessels that were equally susceptible to vaso-obliteration as demonstrated in the P12 PAI-1?/? OIR mice when compared to the wildtype animals ( Figure 5 ). A role for the elevated levels of PAI-1 in mediating angiogenesis in the retina was confirmed as the genetic loss of PAI-1 resulted in a significant decrease in the extent of retinal angiogenesis ( Figure 6 ). Retinas from PAI-1?/? mice had a significantly decreased number of neovascular tufts on the vitreal side of the inner limiting membrane as compared to the retinas from the wildtype mice (average of 33 nuclei vs. 62 nuclei respectively). This result demonstrates a 53% reduction in retinal angiogenesis when PAI-1 is absent. Blocking PAI-1 Inhibits the Migration of Retinal Endothelial Cells <italic>in vitro</italic> We next examined whether the inhibition of new vessel formation seen in the PAI-1?/? mice might be due to a migration defect in the endothelial cells. The migration of human retinal endothelial cells was examined in vitro as described above. Cells plated onto vitronectin or collagen-coated migration inserts and stimulated with VEGF showed extensive migration after 18 hours. When a PAI-1 neutralizing antibody was added at the time of plating the cells showed a significant reduction in the extent of migration, and this effect was dose dependent. In addition, the effect was also found to be substrate dependent as the PAI-1 antibody had no effect when cells were migrating on a collagen substrate ( Figure 7 ). One potential mechanism by which PAI-1 facilitates cell migration is by regulating the surface expression of integrins. 25 We utilized flow cytometry to examine the surface expression of the ?v integrin in human retinal endothelial cells growing on a vitronectin substrate in the presence and absence of anti-PAI-1 antibody. Cells exposed to the antibody for 16 hours demonstrated significantly more cell surface ?v integrin compared to cells in the absence of antibody ( Figure 8 ). When the activity of PAI-1 was reduced with the PAI-1 antibody, 20.26 % of the cells expressed ?v integrin on the cell surface. When cells were grown in the absence of antibody only 5.37 % demonstrated surface ?v integrin. These results suggest that PAI-1 activity can regulate the interaction of endothelial cells with a vitronectin substrate by facilitating the turnover of the ?v integrin.  The Expression of PAI-1 is Increased in the Retinas of mice with Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy The retinas of P7 wildtype mice, at the beginning of high oxygen exposure, have a well developed vascular bed as seen in GSA lectin-labeled whole mounts ( Figure 1A ). After 5 days of oxygen exposure, the central portion of the retina has undergone vaso-obliteration ( Figure 1B ) that is followed over the next five days by new vessel formation at the interface of the vascularized and non-vascularized portions of the retina in 100% of the animals. These new vessels grow abnormally crossing the inner limiting membrane and invade the vitreous space. 23 The level of PAI-1 mRNA was determined by real time RT-PCR during the oxygen-induced retinopathy process in these animals ( Figure 2A ). PAI-1 mRNA in day 12 experimental retinas was significantly less than that seen in the control retinas at this age. As PAI-1 is expressed primarily by endothelial cells, this decrease in mRNA expression may be due simply to the significant degree of vaso-obliteration and endothelial cell loss occurring in these animals at this time. Despite the difference in vascular density between control and experimental retinas, the level of PAI-1 mRNA was found to significantly increase in the experimental retinas compared to controls during the subsequent active stages of angiogenesis in this model (days 15 and 17). The increased level of PAI-1 mRNA correlated with an increase in the level of protein as determined by Western blotting analysis ( Figure 2B ). PAI-1 protein in the experimental retina was localized by immunostaining and was found specifically associated with the neovascular tufts present on the surface of the retina and on vessel profiles just below the surface ( Figure 3 ). The staining appeared to be localized primarily to the endothelial cells of the new vessels.  The Expression of PAI-1 is Increased in the Retinas of mice with Oxygen-Induced Retinopathy The retinas of P7 wildtype mice, at the beginning of high oxygen exposure, have a well developed vascular bed as seen in GSA lectin-labeled whole mounts ( Figure 1A ). After 5 days of oxygen exposure, the central portion of the retina has undergone vaso-obliteration ( Figure 1B ) that is followed over the next five days by new vessel formation at the interface of the vascularized and non-vascularized portions of the retina in 100% of the animals. These new vessels grow abnormally crossing the inner limiting membrane and invade the vitreous space. 23 The level of PAI-1 mRNA was determined by real time RT-PCR during the oxygen-induced retinopathy process in these animals ( Figure 2A ). PAI-1 mRNA in day 12 experimental retinas was significantly less than that seen in the control retinas at this age. As PAI-1 is expressed primarily by endothelial cells, this decrease in mRNA expression may be due simply to the significant degree of vaso-obliteration and endothelial cell loss occurring in these animals at this time. Despite the difference in vascular density between control and experimental retinas, the level of PAI-1 mRNA was found to significantly increase in the experimental retinas compared to controls during the subsequent active stages of angiogenesis in this model (days 15 and 17). The increased level of PAI-1 mRNA correlated with an increase in the level of protein as determined by Western blotting analysis ( Figure 2B ). PAI-1 protein in the experimental retina was localized by immunostaining and was found specifically associated with the neovascular tufts present on the surface of the retina and on vessel profiles just below the surface ( Figure 3 ). The staining appeared to be localized primarily to the endothelial cells of the new vessels.  The Expression of Vitronectin is Increased in the Retinas during OIR Induced Angiogenesis PAI-1 has previously been shown to mediate the attachment of cells to vitronectin in the extracellular matrix (22). A role for PAI-1 in mediating the angiogenic response in the OIR model would be supported if vitronectin were present in the retina where it could provide a suitable migratory substrate for the newly forming vessels during the angiogenic process. Retinas were examined for the expression of vitronectin during the preangiogenic and angiogenic phases in the OIR model (P12 and P15 respectively) and compared to control retinas of the same age. A significant increase in the amount of vitronectin was seen in the retinas of P15 OIR mice as compared with retinas at the beginning of the angiogenic process (P12 OIR) and was also significantly greater than that seen in the P15 control animals ( Fig 4A ). The vitronectin protein was localized by immunostaining in day 15 experimental mice to the vitreoretinal interface. Staining was localized to the region of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) as well as some portions of the nerve fiber layer adjacent to the ILM ( Figure 4B ).  The Expression of Vitronectin is Increased in the Retinas during OIR Induced Angiogenesis PAI-1 has previously been shown to mediate the attachment of cells to vitronectin in the extracellular matrix (22). A role for PAI-1 in mediating the angiogenic response in the OIR model would be supported if vitronectin were present in the retina where it could provide a suitable migratory substrate for the newly forming vessels during the angiogenic process. Retinas were examined for the expression of vitronectin during the preangiogenic and angiogenic phases in the OIR model (P12 and P15 respectively) and compared to control retinas of the same age. A significant increase in the amount of vitronectin was seen in the retinas of P15 OIR mice as compared with retinas at the beginning of the angiogenic process (P12 OIR) and was also significantly greater than that seen in the P15 control animals ( Fig 4A ). The vitronectin protein was localized by immunostaining in day 15 experimental mice to the vitreoretinal interface. Staining was localized to the region of the inner limiting membrane (ILM) as well as some portions of the nerve fiber layer adjacent to the ILM ( Figure 4B ).  The Loss of PAI-1 Reduces the Extent of Retinal Neovascularization in Mice with Oxygen Induced Retinopathy To determine a role for PAI-1 in retinal angiogenesis, wildtype and PAI-1?/? mice were subjected to the OIR protocol and analyzed for the extent of retinal neovascularization as described. Mice with a genetic loss of PAI-1 demonstrated a similar response to the initial high oxygen treatment as the wildtype mice. The retinas of P7 PAI-1?/? mice demonstrated a dense pattern of retinal vessels that were equally susceptible to vaso-obliteration as demonstrated in the P12 PAI-1?/? OIR mice when compared to the wildtype animals ( Figure 5 ). A role for the elevated levels of PAI-1 in mediating angiogenesis in the retina was confirmed as the genetic loss of PAI-1 resulted in a significant decrease in the extent of retinal angiogenesis ( Figure 6 ). Retinas from PAI-1?/? mice had a significantly decreased number of neovascular tufts on the vitreal side of the inner limiting membrane as compared to the retinas from the wildtype mice (average of 33 nuclei vs. 62 nuclei respectively). This result demonstrates a 53% reduction in retinal angiogenesis when PAI-1 is absent.  The Loss of PAI-1 Reduces the Extent of Retinal Neovascularization in Mice with Oxygen Induced Retinopathy To determine a role for PAI-1 in retinal angiogenesis, wildtype and PAI-1?/? mice were subjected to the OIR protocol and analyzed for the extent of retinal neovascularization as described. Mice with a genetic loss of PAI-1 demonstrated a similar response to the initial high oxygen treatment as the wildtype mice. The retinas of P7 PAI-1?/? mice demonstrated a dense pattern of retinal vessels that were equally susceptible to vaso-obliteration as demonstrated in the P12 PAI-1?/? OIR mice when compared to the wildtype animals ( Figure 5 ). A role for the elevated levels of PAI-1 in mediating angiogenesis in the retina was confirmed as the genetic loss of PAI-1 resulted in a significant decrease in the extent of retinal angiogenesis ( Figure 6 ). Retinas from PAI-1?/? mice had a significantly decreased number of neovascular tufts on the vitreal side of the inner limiting membrane as compared to the retinas from the wildtype mice (average of 33 nuclei vs. 62 nuclei respectively). This result demonstrates a 53% reduction in retinal angiogenesis when PAI-1 is absent.  Blocking PAI-1 Inhibits the Migration of Retinal Endothelial Cells <italic>in vitro</italic> We next examined whether the inhibition of new vessel formation seen in the PAI-1?/? mice might be due to a migration defect in the endothelial cells. The migration of human retinal endothelial cells was examined in vitro as described above. Cells plated onto vitronectin or collagen-coated migration inserts and stimulated with VEGF showed extensive migration after 18 hours. When a PAI-1 neutralizing antibody was added at the time of plating the cells showed a significant reduction in the extent of migration, and this effect was dose dependent. In addition, the effect was also found to be substrate dependent as the PAI-1 antibody had no effect when cells were migrating on a collagen substrate ( Figure 7 ). One potential mechanism by which PAI-1 facilitates cell migration is by regulating the surface expression of integrins. 25 We utilized flow cytometry to examine the surface expression of the ?v integrin in human retinal endothelial cells growing on a vitronectin substrate in the presence and absence of anti-PAI-1 antibody. Cells exposed to the antibody for 16 hours demonstrated significantly more cell surface ?v integrin compared to cells in the absence of antibody ( Figure 8 ). When the activity of PAI-1 was reduced with the PAI-1 antibody, 20.26 % of the cells expressed ?v integrin on the cell surface. When cells were grown in the absence of antibody only 5.37 % demonstrated surface ?v integrin. These results suggest that PAI-1 activity can regulate the interaction of endothelial cells with a vitronectin substrate by facilitating the turnover of the ?v integrin.  Blocking PAI-1 Inhibits the Migration of Retinal Endothelial Cells <italic>in vitro</italic> We next examined whether the inhibition of new vessel formation seen in the PAI-1?/? mice might be due to a migration defect in the endothelial cells. The migration of human retinal endothelial cells was examined in vitro as described above. Cells plated onto vitronectin or collagen-coated migration inserts and stimulated with VEGF showed extensive migration after 18 hours. When a PAI-1 neutralizing antibody was added at the time of plating the cells showed a significant reduction in the extent of migration, and this effect was dose dependent. In addition, the effect was also found to be substrate dependent as the PAI-1 antibody had no effect when cells were migrating on a collagen substrate ( Figure 7 ). One potential mechanism by which PAI-1 facilitates cell migration is by regulating the surface expression of integrins. 25 We utilized flow cytometry to examine the surface expression of the ?v integrin in human retinal endothelial cells growing on a vitronectin substrate in the presence and absence of anti-PAI-1 antibody. Cells exposed to the antibody for 16 hours demonstrated significantly more cell surface ?v integrin compared to cells in the absence of antibody ( Figure 8 ). When the activity of PAI-1 was reduced with the PAI-1 antibody, 20.26 % of the cells expressed ?v integrin on the cell surface. When cells were grown in the absence of antibody only 5.37 % demonstrated surface ?v integrin. These results suggest that PAI-1 activity can regulate the interaction of endothelial cells with a vitronectin substrate by facilitating the turnover of the ?v integrin.  DISCUSSION This study addresses the role of the proteinase inhibitor PAI-1 in the regulation of new vessel formation in a model of oxygen-induced retinal angiogenesis. The expression of PAI-1 is significantly elevated during the most active phases of new vessel growth in this model and localizes to the newly forming vessels. Animals lacking a functional PAI-1 gene, exhibited a 53% reduction in the retinal neovascular response as compared to wildtype animals. The level of the permissive migratory substrate vitronectin, to which PAI-1 has been shown to bind, was increased in the inner portion of the retina of animals undergoing angiogenesis. Vitronectin forms a suitable substrate for the migration of isolated retinal endothelial cells in response to VEGF stimulation and this migratory activity could be blocked using an anti-PAI-1 antibody. Decreasing PAI-1 function appeared to alter cell migration by retaining higher levels of ?v integrin on the cell surface that may lead to increased cell-substrate adhesion. PAI-1 is a 50kDa protein whose primary function is the inhibition of plasminogen activator. The active form of PAI-1 is generally unstable with a short half-life but can be stabilized by interaction with components of the extracellular matrix including vitronectin. 22 , 26 Although PAI-1 binds to vitronectin, it has a significantly higher affinity for the serine proteinase uPA which can be localized to the cell surface by binding to its receptor uPAR. 27 , 28 The binding of PAI-1 to uPA at the cell surface leads to the internalization of the uPA:PAI-1:uPAR complex followed by degradation of uPA and PAI-1 and recycling of uPAR back to the cell surface. 29 , 30 We have utilized the oxygen-induced retinopathy model to examine the role of PAI-1 in retinal neovascularization. In this model, exposure of mice to 75% oxygen results in a significant regression of the superficial vascular network in the central portion of the retina. A condition of relative hypoxia ensues resulting in the upregulation of VEGF and other growth factors followed by the formation of abnormal preretinal neovascular tufts at the interface of the vascularized and nonvascularized retina. These new vessels are formed by the process of angiogenesis and their formation can be aided by the infiltration of bone marrow derived myeloid progenitor cells that differentiate into microglia. 31 The hypoxia which develops in the retinal tissues of this model likely drives the expression of PAI-1 mRNA by the remaining endothelial cells and associated pericytes. In the present study we have demonstrated a significant increase in PAI-1 mRNA in the retinas during the active angiogenic period (days 15 to 17) and a corresponding increase in PAI-1 protein. The increase in PAI-1 is seen following an initial decrease in expression most likely due to the vaso-obliteration and the significant delay in the development of the deep vascular plexus that occurs at this time in the model. 31 Other studies have reported that the PAI-1 gene is responsive to hypoxia and under these conditions its activity is regulated by specific transcription factors including HIF-1?. 32 Previous studies have examined the expression and function of PAI-1 in ocular tissues. A study using the rat model of retinal neovascularization found that treatment with high doses of recombinant PAI-1 could inhibit the formation of new vessels. 33 Decreased retinal angiogenesis was also observed in the present study in mice lacking PAI-1 and suggests that an optimal physiological level of PAI-1 is necessary to facilitate angiogenesis in the retina. Excessively high or excessively low levels of PAI-1 would thus lead to inhibition. This hypothesis is further supported in studies of choroidal angiogenesis, where a dose-dependent modulation of choroidal neovascularization by PAI-1 was observed. 16 , 17 Mice lacking PAI-1 demonstrate a deficient angiogenic response following choroidal laser photocoagulation. The response could be reversed by injection of recombinant PAI-1 protein or by treatment with adenovirus expressing human PAI-1. If PAI-1 levels were increased above the normal physiological levels found in this model the degree of neovascularization was again reduced. A role for PAI-1 in retinal angiogenesis is strengthened by the demonstrated presence of vitronectin in the region of the experimental retinas in which the new vessels will form. Although the cell types responsible for production of the vitronectin substrate are unknown, because of its location at the vitreoretinal interface, one can speculate that vitronectin may be produced by glial cells or ganglion cells. Astrocytes in the superficial layers of the retina have been shown to form a meshwork and to secrete VEGF that facilitates the outgrowth of retinal vessels during normal development of the retinal vasculature. 33 , 34 Alternatively, retinal ganglion cells may respond to the hypoxic environment by expression of vitronectin. These cells have been shown to express VEGF in an ROP model following the selective loss of astrocytes in the ischemic retina. 36 In this study we have demonstrated that isolated retinal vascular endothelial cells rely on PAI-1 to migrate efficiently on a vitronectin substrate in vitro. PAI-1 could function by two independent or complementary mechanisms in this situation. PAI-1 may protect the matrix from excessive degradation by regulating the production of plasmin thereby maintaining the migratory substrate. 37 In addition, PAI-1 may function by regulating cell-substrate interactions independent of its anti-proteolytic activity. PAI-1 has been shown to demonstrate high-affinity binding to vitronectin in a region referred to as the somatomedin B domain. 38 , 39 Binding of PAI-1 in this region not only stabilizes the active form of PAI-1 but also regulates the interaction of both uPAR and integrin with vitronectin that would be expected to impact the adhesive and migratory behavior of cells. 40 – 42 During cell migration, PAI-1 may be important for the normal detachment of cells from the matrix through the internalization and recycling of cell surface receptors. Since the ?v integrin interacts with uPAR on the cell surface, the internalization of the uPA:uPAR:PAI-1 complex would be expected to decrease the overall density of ?v receptors on the cell surface and promote cell detachment and subsequent migration. 24 , 42 In this study we have demonstrated that a PAI-1 blocking antibody decreased migration of retinal endothelial cells on vitronectin and increased the amount of ?v integrin on the cell surface. This data would support the hypothesis that inhibition or loss of PAI-1 would decrease overall retinal angiogenesis by increasing cell adhesion to a vitronectin-containing substrate, and identifies PAI-1 as a potential therapeutic target for retinal neovascularization.  DISCUSSION This study addresses the role of the proteinase inhibitor PAI-1 in the regulation of new vessel formation in a model of oxygen-induced retinal angiogenesis. The expression of PAI-1 is significantly elevated during the most active phases of new vessel growth in this model and localizes to the newly forming vessels. Animals lacking a functional PAI-1 gene, exhibited a 53% reduction in the retinal neovascular response as compared to wildtype animals. The level of the permissive migratory substrate vitronectin, to which PAI-1 has been shown to bind, was increased in the inner portion of the retina of animals undergoing angiogenesis. Vitronectin forms a suitable substrate for the migration of isolated retinal endothelial cells in response to VEGF stimulation and this migratory activity could be blocked using an anti-PAI-1 antibody. Decreasing PAI-1 function appeared to alter cell migration by retaining higher levels of ?v integrin on the cell surface that may lead to increased cell-substrate adhesion. PAI-1 is a 50kDa protein whose primary function is the inhibition of plasminogen activator. The active form of PAI-1 is generally unstable with a short half-life but can be stabilized by interaction with components of the extracellular matrix including vitronectin. 22 , 26 Although PAI-1 binds to vitronectin, it has a significantly higher affinity for the serine proteinase uPA which can be localized to the cell surface by binding to its receptor uPAR. 27 , 28 The binding of PAI-1 to uPA at the cell surface leads to the internalization of the uPA:PAI-1:uPAR complex followed by degradation of uPA and PAI-1 and recycling of uPAR back to the cell surface. 29 , 30 We have utilized the oxygen-induced retinopathy model to examine the role of PAI-1 in retinal neovascularization. In this model, exposure of mice to 75% oxygen results in a significant regression of the superficial vascular network in the central portion of the retina. A condition of relative hypoxia ensues resulting in the upregulation of VEGF and other growth factors followed by the formation of abnormal preretinal neovascular tufts at the interface of the vascularized and nonvascularized retina. These new vessels are formed by the process of angiogenesis and their formation can be aided by the infiltration of bone marrow derived myeloid progenitor cells that differentiate into microglia. 31 The hypoxia which develops in the retinal tissues of this model likely drives the expression of PAI-1 mRNA by the remaining endothelial cells and associated pericytes. In the present study we have demonstrated a significant increase in PAI-1 mRNA in the retinas during the active angiogenic period (days 15 to 17) and a corresponding increase in PAI-1 protein. The increase in PAI-1 is seen following an initial decrease in expression most likely due to the vaso-obliteration and the significant delay in the development of the deep vascular plexus that occurs at this time in the model. 31 Other studies have reported that the PAI-1 gene is responsive to hypoxia and under these conditions its activity is regulated by specific transcription factors including HIF-1?. 32 Previous studies have examined the expression and function of PAI-1 in ocular tissues. A study using the rat model of retinal neovascularization found that treatment with high doses of recombinant PAI-1 could inhibit the formation of new vessels. 33 Decreased retinal angiogenesis was also observed in the present study in mice lacking PAI-1 and suggests that an optimal physiological level of PAI-1 is necessary to facilitate angiogenesis in the retina. Excessively high or excessively low levels of PAI-1 would thus lead to inhibition. This hypothesis is further supported in studies of choroidal angiogenesis, where a dose-dependent modulation of choroidal neovascularization by PAI-1 was observed. 16 , 17 Mice lacking PAI-1 demonstrate a deficient angiogenic response following choroidal laser photocoagulation. The response could be reversed by injection of recombinant PAI-1 protein or by treatment with adenovirus expressing human PAI-1. If PAI-1 levels were increased above the normal physiological levels found in this model the degree of neovascularization was again reduced. A role for PAI-1 in retinal angiogenesis is strengthened by the demonstrated presence of vitronectin in the region of the experimental retinas in which the new vessels will form. Although the cell types responsible for production of the vitronectin substrate are unknown, because of its location at the vitreoretinal interface, one can speculate that vitronectin may be produced by glial cells or ganglion cells. Astrocytes in the superficial layers of the retina have been shown to form a meshwork and to secrete VEGF that facilitates the outgrowth of retinal vessels during normal development of the retinal vasculature. 33 , 34 Alternatively, retinal ganglion cells may respond to the hypoxic environment by expression of vitronectin. These cells have been shown to express VEGF in an ROP model following the selective loss of astrocytes in the ischemic retina. 36 In this study we have demonstrated that isolated retinal vascular endothelial cells rely on PAI-1 to migrate efficiently on a vitronectin substrate in vitro. PAI-1 could function by two independent or complementary mechanisms in this situation. PAI-1 may protect the matrix from excessive degradation by regulating the production of plasmin thereby maintaining the migratory substrate. 37 In addition, PAI-1 may function by regulating cell-substrate interactions independent of its anti-proteolytic activity. PAI-1 has been shown to demonstrate high-affinity binding to vitronectin in a region referred to as the somatomedin B domain. 38 , 39 Binding of PAI-1 in this region not only stabilizes the active form of PAI-1 but also regulates the interaction of both uPAR and integrin with vitronectin that would be expected to impact the adhesive and migratory behavior of cells. 40 – 42 During cell migration, PAI-1 may be important for the normal detachment of cells from the matrix through the internalization and recycling of cell surface receptors. Since the ?v integrin interacts with uPAR on the cell surface, the internalization of the uPA:uPAR:PAI-1 complex would be expected to decrease the overall density of ?v receptors on the cell surface and promote cell detachment and subsequent migration. 24 , 42 In this study we have demonstrated that a PAI-1 blocking antibody decreased migration of retinal endothelial cells on vitronectin and increased the amount of ?v integrin on the cell surface. This data would support the hypothesis that inhibition or loss of PAI-1 would decrease overall retinal angiogenesis by increasing cell adhesion to a vitronectin-containing substrate, and identifies PAI-1 as a potential therapeutic target for retinal neovascularization. 