Coping with Cancer : A Web-based Educational Program for Early and Middle Adolescents Educating patients is a primary responsibility of all nurses, however due to time constraints and staff shortages, pediatric oncology nurses are often unable to adequately prepare patients for cancer treatment. Instead, patients frequently rely on the Internet as a source of information about cancer, some of which can be outdated and inaccurate. Adolescents regard the Internet to be a valuable source of health information as it is easily accessible, less threatening and confidential. Considering the need for accurate, readily available information for adolescents with cancer, the purpose of this study was to develop and validate an innovative, interactive web-based educational program to prepare early and middle adolescents for cancer treatment. Entitled Coping with Cancer , this program was developed by the investigator after conducting in-depth interviews of adolescent cancer survivors and their parents. Based on the Transactional Model of Coping, the program focuses on enhancing the adolescent’s knowledge of cancer, cancer treatment, and healthy coping strategies. Coping with Cancer can be an effective resource for pediatric oncology nurses in providing ongoing education for adolescents with cancer.  Procedure Participants and parents who voiced an interest in the study were referred to the investigator who explained the study. Parents provided written consent, and adolescents provided written assent for participation in the study. The Institutional Review Board at the study site approved this study. Four adolescents and their parent(s) participated in the interviews ( Table 1 ). A semi-structured interview guide was used to focus on (a) the adolescent’s experience of cancer, (b) cancer treatment, and (c) their recommendations for essential content for the web-based program and (d) effective coping strategies. Interviews were conducted at a location and time convenient for the adolescent and parent(s). The investigator conducted all of the interviews except for one. In that case, a master’s prepared research assistant with expert interview skills interviewed a mother of one of the female adolescents who requested to be interviewed at the same time as her mother, but in separate rooms. Interviews with adolescents ranged from 25 to 60 minutes; interviews with parents ranged from 40 to 70 minutes. All interviews were audio taped and later transcribed verbatim by a professional health care transcriptionist. At the conclusion of the interview, each adolescent was asked to select from four website homepage prototypes, each with a different layout of colors and design. Each of the 4 adolescents independently selected the same prototype because of its graphic appeal.  Data analysis Content analysis ( Krippendorff, 2004 ) was used to analyze the interview data. Data were summarized and organized to reflect the issues and recommendations for essential content and coping strategies presented by the adolescents and their parents. The investigator and research assistant first examined the interview data separately and then worked together to systematically categorize the adolescents’ experiences of cancer and cancer treatment, and recommendations for content and coping strategies  Methods Phase 1: Review of Literature The development of the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program was based on an extensive review of the pediatric cancer literature. Key components from the literature review that were included in this program were informational needs of adolescents, a variety of healthy coping strategies, interventions to facilitate understanding and normalizing feelings, advice from adolescent cancer survivors, and professional pediatric cancer resources for adolescents and parents. Phase 2: Guiding Framework Findings from the review of the pediatric cancer literature subsequently led to the selection of a guiding framework for the web-based program. The Transactional Model of Coping developed by Lazarus and colleagues ( Lazarus & Folkman, 1984 ) served as a basis for designing the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program as it was created to enhance adolescents’ coping with the stress of cancer and cancer treatment. It was hypothesized that increasing the adolescent’s knowledge of cancer, cancer treatment, and healthy coping skills would result in decreased situational anxiety and stress, and ultimately improved quality of life for the adolescent undergoing cancer treatment. Phase 3: Interviews of Adolescent Experts Sample Children diagnosed with cancer often seek information about their cancer from other children and not from health care professionals or their parents ( Hymovich, 1995 ). Receiving advice and support from peers with cancer can be helpful and encouraging ( Suzuki & Kato, 2003 ). Thus, a convenience sample of early and middle adolescents who had completed cancer treatment were invited to be key informant experts for the development of the web-based program. Potential adolescent participants for the study were recruited from an outpatient pediatric oncology clinic at a university medical center in the Midwest. A pediatric nurse practitioner at the clinic screened adolescents for their eligibility for the study. Inclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents ages 10 to 16 years, (2) who had completed cancer treatment within the past 12 months, and (3) were able to read and speak English. Exclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents who were unable to give assent due to physical or cognitive impairment and / or (2) adolescents whose parents would not give consent for participation. Procedure Participants and parents who voiced an interest in the study were referred to the investigator who explained the study. Parents provided written consent, and adolescents provided written assent for participation in the study. The Institutional Review Board at the study site approved this study. Four adolescents and their parent(s) participated in the interviews ( Table 1 ). A semi-structured interview guide was used to focus on (a) the adolescent’s experience of cancer, (b) cancer treatment, and (c) their recommendations for essential content for the web-based program and (d) effective coping strategies. Interviews were conducted at a location and time convenient for the adolescent and parent(s). The investigator conducted all of the interviews except for one. In that case, a master’s prepared research assistant with expert interview skills interviewed a mother of one of the female adolescents who requested to be interviewed at the same time as her mother, but in separate rooms. Interviews with adolescents ranged from 25 to 60 minutes; interviews with parents ranged from 40 to 70 minutes. All interviews were audio taped and later transcribed verbatim by a professional health care transcriptionist. At the conclusion of the interview, each adolescent was asked to select from four website homepage prototypes, each with a different layout of colors and design. Each of the 4 adolescents independently selected the same prototype because of its graphic appeal. Data analysis Content analysis ( Krippendorff, 2004 ) was used to analyze the interview data. Data were summarized and organized to reflect the issues and recommendations for essential content and coping strategies presented by the adolescents and their parents. The investigator and research assistant first examined the interview data separately and then worked together to systematically categorize the adolescents’ experiences of cancer and cancer treatment, and recommendations for content and coping strategies Results The results of the content analysis revealed 4 dimensions of experiences with cancer and cancer treatment: (1) physical, (2) psychological, (3) social, and (4) spiritual. Sample comments from the adolescents are presented in Table 2 . Recommendations for web-based content included: (a) definitions of medical terms, (b) an explanation of the role of each member of the health care team, and (c) adding humor and games. Adolescents wanted the content to be explained “so I can understand it”. Recommended coping strategies included: (a) listening to music, (b) taking deep breaths during procedures, (c) spending time with family and friends, (d) watching funny movies, (e) playing cards, board games and video games, (f) staying connected with friends online, (g) asking for EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) before procedures, and (h) sharing your feelings. Parents spoke freely about their experiences of going through cancer treatment with their son or daughter. Every parent spoke of the need for accurate pediatric cancer resources. Nate’s mother commented, “When he was first diagnosed I headed right to the computer. Bad thing to do – terrifying. There are a lot of sites out there that are scary. They tell the worst-case scenarios. Everyone with his type of cancer died. Most were about adult cancers and we did not know the difference.’ Zoe’s father noted, “The Internet is always there when the doctors are busy, but there’s a lot of information and you have to be careful what you read.” All of the parents spoke of being their child’s advocate through the process of cancer treatment. Nora’s parents stated, “You need to be proactive. Not only about your kid’s physical health, but mental health too.” Zoe’s father recommended, “Pulling in everyone and anything that is available. We used the child life specialists, social worker and psychologist.” Lastly, all of the parents shared the importance of hope. Annie’s mother told the oncologists “I just want to hear you say she can be cured. We need that hope.” Phase 4: Construction of the Coping with Cancer Website The investigator developed the scope and plan for the web-based program. Content for the program was derived from the pediatric oncology research literature and data from the adolescent and parent interviews (see Table 3 ). Core components of the program include information about (a) cancer, (b) cancer treatment, (c) feelings about having cancer, (d) dealing with friends and school, (e) healthy coping strategies, and (f) advice from the adolescent cancer experts. The program also includes a glossary of cancer related medical terms, a description of the role of each member of the health care team and a list of professional pediatric cancer Internet resources. The investigator ensured that the program content was consistent with the standard educational materials received by adolescent patients and families at the pediatric oncology clinic. The web-based program was constructed on an Apple Macintosh computer using Adobe Illustrator 10, Photoshop 7 and Adobe GoLive 8, all three applications by Adobe Systems (San Jose, CA). The program homepage ( Figure 1 ) displays a navigation menu located in a column on the left side of the page, with corresponding icons in the center of the homepage. Directions for navigating the web-based program are located on the homepage. To keep the adolescent engaged throughout the program, information is presented through interactive activities. For example, in the Journal ( Figure 2 ) a fictional character named “Brian” who is an adolescent cancer survivor, uses text messaging to answer questions from a newly diagnosed adolescent female about cancer and cancer treatment. Rollovers and interactive games were added to the web program to prevent boredom. Phase 5: Content Validity After construction of a preliminary version of the web-based program, two expert panels reviewed the program for content validity. One panel consisted of the same 4 adolescent experts who participated in the interviews. The other panel was a multidisciplinary group of 4 (2 women and 2 men) pediatric oncology experts. Two of these experts were from the same outpatient pediatric oncology clinic as the adolescent experts. The 4 experts consisted of a pediatric nurse practitioner in pediatric oncology, a pediatric oncologist, a pediatric cancer epidemiologist, and an internationally known pediatric nurse expert in pain, pediatric cancer, and web-based technology. Both panels of experts were given access to the web-based program for one month. Each expert was asked to independently complete a rating form of the program and to mail the form to the investigator’s private mailbox in a provided stamped envelope. Adolescent experts were asked four questions: (a) What did you think of the Coping with Cancer website? (b) Do you think that the website would have been helpful when you were going through cancer treatment? (c) If you answered “yes”, what about the website would have been helpful to you? and (d) Can you think of anything that should be added to or removed from the program? ( Table 4 ). Pediatric oncology experts were asked to rate the Coping with Cancer program on (a) ease of access and navigating the program, (b) accuracy of information, and (c) appropriateness for age (early and middle adolescents). The scale developed was a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). All of the experts responded positively with ratings of a 4 (agree) or 5 (strongly agree). The rating form included an open-end question for additional comments and suggestions for improvement of the web-based program. The following are sample comments: “This direct, fresh approach with a terrific graphic interface will encourage them to explore and interact”, “I like the general upbeat nature of the website as a whole”, “The look of the site will entice the kids and make it easy to come back to”. All recommendations for revision were taken into consideration and changes to the web program were made accordingly. None of the adolescent or pediatric oncology experts reported problems with gaining access to or navigating the web program. Phase 6: Field Test of the Coping with Cancer Website: Clinical Validity The next step in the development and evaluation of the Coping with Cancer program is a field test of the program which is currently underway with a sample of 20 early and middle adolescents who are actively undergoing cancer treatment.  Methods Phase 1: Review of Literature The development of the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program was based on an extensive review of the pediatric cancer literature. Key components from the literature review that were included in this program were informational needs of adolescents, a variety of healthy coping strategies, interventions to facilitate understanding and normalizing feelings, advice from adolescent cancer survivors, and professional pediatric cancer resources for adolescents and parents. Phase 2: Guiding Framework Findings from the review of the pediatric cancer literature subsequently led to the selection of a guiding framework for the web-based program. The Transactional Model of Coping developed by Lazarus and colleagues ( Lazarus & Folkman, 1984 ) served as a basis for designing the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program as it was created to enhance adolescents’ coping with the stress of cancer and cancer treatment. It was hypothesized that increasing the adolescent’s knowledge of cancer, cancer treatment, and healthy coping skills would result in decreased situational anxiety and stress, and ultimately improved quality of life for the adolescent undergoing cancer treatment. Phase 3: Interviews of Adolescent Experts Sample Children diagnosed with cancer often seek information about their cancer from other children and not from health care professionals or their parents ( Hymovich, 1995 ). Receiving advice and support from peers with cancer can be helpful and encouraging ( Suzuki & Kato, 2003 ). Thus, a convenience sample of early and middle adolescents who had completed cancer treatment were invited to be key informant experts for the development of the web-based program. Potential adolescent participants for the study were recruited from an outpatient pediatric oncology clinic at a university medical center in the Midwest. A pediatric nurse practitioner at the clinic screened adolescents for their eligibility for the study. Inclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents ages 10 to 16 years, (2) who had completed cancer treatment within the past 12 months, and (3) were able to read and speak English. Exclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents who were unable to give assent due to physical or cognitive impairment and / or (2) adolescents whose parents would not give consent for participation. Procedure Participants and parents who voiced an interest in the study were referred to the investigator who explained the study. Parents provided written consent, and adolescents provided written assent for participation in the study. The Institutional Review Board at the study site approved this study. Four adolescents and their parent(s) participated in the interviews ( Table 1 ). A semi-structured interview guide was used to focus on (a) the adolescent’s experience of cancer, (b) cancer treatment, and (c) their recommendations for essential content for the web-based program and (d) effective coping strategies. Interviews were conducted at a location and time convenient for the adolescent and parent(s). The investigator conducted all of the interviews except for one. In that case, a master’s prepared research assistant with expert interview skills interviewed a mother of one of the female adolescents who requested to be interviewed at the same time as her mother, but in separate rooms. Interviews with adolescents ranged from 25 to 60 minutes; interviews with parents ranged from 40 to 70 minutes. All interviews were audio taped and later transcribed verbatim by a professional health care transcriptionist. At the conclusion of the interview, each adolescent was asked to select from four website homepage prototypes, each with a different layout of colors and design. Each of the 4 adolescents independently selected the same prototype because of its graphic appeal. Data analysis Content analysis ( Krippendorff, 2004 ) was used to analyze the interview data. Data were summarized and organized to reflect the issues and recommendations for essential content and coping strategies presented by the adolescents and their parents. The investigator and research assistant first examined the interview data separately and then worked together to systematically categorize the adolescents’ experiences of cancer and cancer treatment, and recommendations for content and coping strategies Results The results of the content analysis revealed 4 dimensions of experiences with cancer and cancer treatment: (1) physical, (2) psychological, (3) social, and (4) spiritual. Sample comments from the adolescents are presented in Table 2 . Recommendations for web-based content included: (a) definitions of medical terms, (b) an explanation of the role of each member of the health care team, and (c) adding humor and games. Adolescents wanted the content to be explained “so I can understand it”. Recommended coping strategies included: (a) listening to music, (b) taking deep breaths during procedures, (c) spending time with family and friends, (d) watching funny movies, (e) playing cards, board games and video games, (f) staying connected with friends online, (g) asking for EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) before procedures, and (h) sharing your feelings. Parents spoke freely about their experiences of going through cancer treatment with their son or daughter. Every parent spoke of the need for accurate pediatric cancer resources. Nate’s mother commented, “When he was first diagnosed I headed right to the computer. Bad thing to do – terrifying. There are a lot of sites out there that are scary. They tell the worst-case scenarios. Everyone with his type of cancer died. Most were about adult cancers and we did not know the difference.’ Zoe’s father noted, “The Internet is always there when the doctors are busy, but there’s a lot of information and you have to be careful what you read.” All of the parents spoke of being their child’s advocate through the process of cancer treatment. Nora’s parents stated, “You need to be proactive. Not only about your kid’s physical health, but mental health too.” Zoe’s father recommended, “Pulling in everyone and anything that is available. We used the child life specialists, social worker and psychologist.” Lastly, all of the parents shared the importance of hope. Annie’s mother told the oncologists “I just want to hear you say she can be cured. We need that hope.” Phase 4: Construction of the Coping with Cancer Website The investigator developed the scope and plan for the web-based program. Content for the program was derived from the pediatric oncology research literature and data from the adolescent and parent interviews (see Table 3 ). Core components of the program include information about (a) cancer, (b) cancer treatment, (c) feelings about having cancer, (d) dealing with friends and school, (e) healthy coping strategies, and (f) advice from the adolescent cancer experts. The program also includes a glossary of cancer related medical terms, a description of the role of each member of the health care team and a list of professional pediatric cancer Internet resources. The investigator ensured that the program content was consistent with the standard educational materials received by adolescent patients and families at the pediatric oncology clinic. The web-based program was constructed on an Apple Macintosh computer using Adobe Illustrator 10, Photoshop 7 and Adobe GoLive 8, all three applications by Adobe Systems (San Jose, CA). The program homepage ( Figure 1 ) displays a navigation menu located in a column on the left side of the page, with corresponding icons in the center of the homepage. Directions for navigating the web-based program are located on the homepage. To keep the adolescent engaged throughout the program, information is presented through interactive activities. For example, in the Journal ( Figure 2 ) a fictional character named “Brian” who is an adolescent cancer survivor, uses text messaging to answer questions from a newly diagnosed adolescent female about cancer and cancer treatment. Rollovers and interactive games were added to the web program to prevent boredom. Phase 5: Content Validity After construction of a preliminary version of the web-based program, two expert panels reviewed the program for content validity. One panel consisted of the same 4 adolescent experts who participated in the interviews. The other panel was a multidisciplinary group of 4 (2 women and 2 men) pediatric oncology experts. Two of these experts were from the same outpatient pediatric oncology clinic as the adolescent experts. The 4 experts consisted of a pediatric nurse practitioner in pediatric oncology, a pediatric oncologist, a pediatric cancer epidemiologist, and an internationally known pediatric nurse expert in pain, pediatric cancer, and web-based technology. Both panels of experts were given access to the web-based program for one month. Each expert was asked to independently complete a rating form of the program and to mail the form to the investigator’s private mailbox in a provided stamped envelope. Adolescent experts were asked four questions: (a) What did you think of the Coping with Cancer website? (b) Do you think that the website would have been helpful when you were going through cancer treatment? (c) If you answered “yes”, what about the website would have been helpful to you? and (d) Can you think of anything that should be added to or removed from the program? ( Table 4 ). Pediatric oncology experts were asked to rate the Coping with Cancer program on (a) ease of access and navigating the program, (b) accuracy of information, and (c) appropriateness for age (early and middle adolescents). The scale developed was a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). All of the experts responded positively with ratings of a 4 (agree) or 5 (strongly agree). The rating form included an open-end question for additional comments and suggestions for improvement of the web-based program. The following are sample comments: “This direct, fresh approach with a terrific graphic interface will encourage them to explore and interact”, “I like the general upbeat nature of the website as a whole”, “The look of the site will entice the kids and make it easy to come back to”. All recommendations for revision were taken into consideration and changes to the web program were made accordingly. None of the adolescent or pediatric oncology experts reported problems with gaining access to or navigating the web program. Phase 6: Field Test of the Coping with Cancer Website: Clinical Validity The next step in the development and evaluation of the Coping with Cancer program is a field test of the program which is currently underway with a sample of 20 early and middle adolescents who are actively undergoing cancer treatment.  Phase 1: Review of Literature The development of the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program was based on an extensive review of the pediatric cancer literature. Key components from the literature review that were included in this program were informational needs of adolescents, a variety of healthy coping strategies, interventions to facilitate understanding and normalizing feelings, advice from adolescent cancer survivors, and professional pediatric cancer resources for adolescents and parents.  Phase 1: Review of Literature The development of the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program was based on an extensive review of the pediatric cancer literature. Key components from the literature review that were included in this program were informational needs of adolescents, a variety of healthy coping strategies, interventions to facilitate understanding and normalizing feelings, advice from adolescent cancer survivors, and professional pediatric cancer resources for adolescents and parents.  Phase 2: Guiding Framework Findings from the review of the pediatric cancer literature subsequently led to the selection of a guiding framework for the web-based program. The Transactional Model of Coping developed by Lazarus and colleagues ( Lazarus & Folkman, 1984 ) served as a basis for designing the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program as it was created to enhance adolescents’ coping with the stress of cancer and cancer treatment. It was hypothesized that increasing the adolescent’s knowledge of cancer, cancer treatment, and healthy coping skills would result in decreased situational anxiety and stress, and ultimately improved quality of life for the adolescent undergoing cancer treatment.  Phase 2: Guiding Framework Findings from the review of the pediatric cancer literature subsequently led to the selection of a guiding framework for the web-based program. The Transactional Model of Coping developed by Lazarus and colleagues ( Lazarus & Folkman, 1984 ) served as a basis for designing the Coping with Cancer web-based educational program as it was created to enhance adolescents’ coping with the stress of cancer and cancer treatment. It was hypothesized that increasing the adolescent’s knowledge of cancer, cancer treatment, and healthy coping skills would result in decreased situational anxiety and stress, and ultimately improved quality of life for the adolescent undergoing cancer treatment.  Phase 3: Interviews of Adolescent Experts Sample Children diagnosed with cancer often seek information about their cancer from other children and not from health care professionals or their parents ( Hymovich, 1995 ). Receiving advice and support from peers with cancer can be helpful and encouraging ( Suzuki & Kato, 2003 ). Thus, a convenience sample of early and middle adolescents who had completed cancer treatment were invited to be key informant experts for the development of the web-based program. Potential adolescent participants for the study were recruited from an outpatient pediatric oncology clinic at a university medical center in the Midwest. A pediatric nurse practitioner at the clinic screened adolescents for their eligibility for the study. Inclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents ages 10 to 16 years, (2) who had completed cancer treatment within the past 12 months, and (3) were able to read and speak English. Exclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents who were unable to give assent due to physical or cognitive impairment and / or (2) adolescents whose parents would not give consent for participation. Procedure Participants and parents who voiced an interest in the study were referred to the investigator who explained the study. Parents provided written consent, and adolescents provided written assent for participation in the study. The Institutional Review Board at the study site approved this study. Four adolescents and their parent(s) participated in the interviews ( Table 1 ). A semi-structured interview guide was used to focus on (a) the adolescent’s experience of cancer, (b) cancer treatment, and (c) their recommendations for essential content for the web-based program and (d) effective coping strategies. Interviews were conducted at a location and time convenient for the adolescent and parent(s). The investigator conducted all of the interviews except for one. In that case, a master’s prepared research assistant with expert interview skills interviewed a mother of one of the female adolescents who requested to be interviewed at the same time as her mother, but in separate rooms. Interviews with adolescents ranged from 25 to 60 minutes; interviews with parents ranged from 40 to 70 minutes. All interviews were audio taped and later transcribed verbatim by a professional health care transcriptionist. At the conclusion of the interview, each adolescent was asked to select from four website homepage prototypes, each with a different layout of colors and design. Each of the 4 adolescents independently selected the same prototype because of its graphic appeal. Data analysis Content analysis ( Krippendorff, 2004 ) was used to analyze the interview data. Data were summarized and organized to reflect the issues and recommendations for essential content and coping strategies presented by the adolescents and their parents. The investigator and research assistant first examined the interview data separately and then worked together to systematically categorize the adolescents’ experiences of cancer and cancer treatment, and recommendations for content and coping strategies Results The results of the content analysis revealed 4 dimensions of experiences with cancer and cancer treatment: (1) physical, (2) psychological, (3) social, and (4) spiritual. Sample comments from the adolescents are presented in Table 2 . Recommendations for web-based content included: (a) definitions of medical terms, (b) an explanation of the role of each member of the health care team, and (c) adding humor and games. Adolescents wanted the content to be explained “so I can understand it”. Recommended coping strategies included: (a) listening to music, (b) taking deep breaths during procedures, (c) spending time with family and friends, (d) watching funny movies, (e) playing cards, board games and video games, (f) staying connected with friends online, (g) asking for EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) before procedures, and (h) sharing your feelings. Parents spoke freely about their experiences of going through cancer treatment with their son or daughter. Every parent spoke of the need for accurate pediatric cancer resources. Nate’s mother commented, “When he was first diagnosed I headed right to the computer. Bad thing to do – terrifying. There are a lot of sites out there that are scary. They tell the worst-case scenarios. Everyone with his type of cancer died. Most were about adult cancers and we did not know the difference.’ Zoe’s father noted, “The Internet is always there when the doctors are busy, but there’s a lot of information and you have to be careful what you read.” All of the parents spoke of being their child’s advocate through the process of cancer treatment. Nora’s parents stated, “You need to be proactive. Not only about your kid’s physical health, but mental health too.” Zoe’s father recommended, “Pulling in everyone and anything that is available. We used the child life specialists, social worker and psychologist.” Lastly, all of the parents shared the importance of hope. Annie’s mother told the oncologists “I just want to hear you say she can be cured. We need that hope.”  Phase 3: Interviews of Adolescent Experts Sample Children diagnosed with cancer often seek information about their cancer from other children and not from health care professionals or their parents ( Hymovich, 1995 ). Receiving advice and support from peers with cancer can be helpful and encouraging ( Suzuki & Kato, 2003 ). Thus, a convenience sample of early and middle adolescents who had completed cancer treatment were invited to be key informant experts for the development of the web-based program. Potential adolescent participants for the study were recruited from an outpatient pediatric oncology clinic at a university medical center in the Midwest. A pediatric nurse practitioner at the clinic screened adolescents for their eligibility for the study. Inclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents ages 10 to 16 years, (2) who had completed cancer treatment within the past 12 months, and (3) were able to read and speak English. Exclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents who were unable to give assent due to physical or cognitive impairment and / or (2) adolescents whose parents would not give consent for participation. Procedure Participants and parents who voiced an interest in the study were referred to the investigator who explained the study. Parents provided written consent, and adolescents provided written assent for participation in the study. The Institutional Review Board at the study site approved this study. Four adolescents and their parent(s) participated in the interviews ( Table 1 ). A semi-structured interview guide was used to focus on (a) the adolescent’s experience of cancer, (b) cancer treatment, and (c) their recommendations for essential content for the web-based program and (d) effective coping strategies. Interviews were conducted at a location and time convenient for the adolescent and parent(s). The investigator conducted all of the interviews except for one. In that case, a master’s prepared research assistant with expert interview skills interviewed a mother of one of the female adolescents who requested to be interviewed at the same time as her mother, but in separate rooms. Interviews with adolescents ranged from 25 to 60 minutes; interviews with parents ranged from 40 to 70 minutes. All interviews were audio taped and later transcribed verbatim by a professional health care transcriptionist. At the conclusion of the interview, each adolescent was asked to select from four website homepage prototypes, each with a different layout of colors and design. Each of the 4 adolescents independently selected the same prototype because of its graphic appeal. Data analysis Content analysis ( Krippendorff, 2004 ) was used to analyze the interview data. Data were summarized and organized to reflect the issues and recommendations for essential content and coping strategies presented by the adolescents and their parents. The investigator and research assistant first examined the interview data separately and then worked together to systematically categorize the adolescents’ experiences of cancer and cancer treatment, and recommendations for content and coping strategies Results The results of the content analysis revealed 4 dimensions of experiences with cancer and cancer treatment: (1) physical, (2) psychological, (3) social, and (4) spiritual. Sample comments from the adolescents are presented in Table 2 . Recommendations for web-based content included: (a) definitions of medical terms, (b) an explanation of the role of each member of the health care team, and (c) adding humor and games. Adolescents wanted the content to be explained “so I can understand it”. Recommended coping strategies included: (a) listening to music, (b) taking deep breaths during procedures, (c) spending time with family and friends, (d) watching funny movies, (e) playing cards, board games and video games, (f) staying connected with friends online, (g) asking for EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) before procedures, and (h) sharing your feelings. Parents spoke freely about their experiences of going through cancer treatment with their son or daughter. Every parent spoke of the need for accurate pediatric cancer resources. Nate’s mother commented, “When he was first diagnosed I headed right to the computer. Bad thing to do – terrifying. There are a lot of sites out there that are scary. They tell the worst-case scenarios. Everyone with his type of cancer died. Most were about adult cancers and we did not know the difference.’ Zoe’s father noted, “The Internet is always there when the doctors are busy, but there’s a lot of information and you have to be careful what you read.” All of the parents spoke of being their child’s advocate through the process of cancer treatment. Nora’s parents stated, “You need to be proactive. Not only about your kid’s physical health, but mental health too.” Zoe’s father recommended, “Pulling in everyone and anything that is available. We used the child life specialists, social worker and psychologist.” Lastly, all of the parents shared the importance of hope. Annie’s mother told the oncologists “I just want to hear you say she can be cured. We need that hope.”  Sample Children diagnosed with cancer often seek information about their cancer from other children and not from health care professionals or their parents ( Hymovich, 1995 ). Receiving advice and support from peers with cancer can be helpful and encouraging ( Suzuki & Kato, 2003 ). Thus, a convenience sample of early and middle adolescents who had completed cancer treatment were invited to be key informant experts for the development of the web-based program. Potential adolescent participants for the study were recruited from an outpatient pediatric oncology clinic at a university medical center in the Midwest. A pediatric nurse practitioner at the clinic screened adolescents for their eligibility for the study. Inclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents ages 10 to 16 years, (2) who had completed cancer treatment within the past 12 months, and (3) were able to read and speak English. Exclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents who were unable to give assent due to physical or cognitive impairment and / or (2) adolescents whose parents would not give consent for participation.  Sample Children diagnosed with cancer often seek information about their cancer from other children and not from health care professionals or their parents ( Hymovich, 1995 ). Receiving advice and support from peers with cancer can be helpful and encouraging ( Suzuki & Kato, 2003 ). Thus, a convenience sample of early and middle adolescents who had completed cancer treatment were invited to be key informant experts for the development of the web-based program. Potential adolescent participants for the study were recruited from an outpatient pediatric oncology clinic at a university medical center in the Midwest. A pediatric nurse practitioner at the clinic screened adolescents for their eligibility for the study. Inclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents ages 10 to 16 years, (2) who had completed cancer treatment within the past 12 months, and (3) were able to read and speak English. Exclusion criteria were: (1) early and middle adolescents who were unable to give assent due to physical or cognitive impairment and / or (2) adolescents whose parents would not give consent for participation.  Results The results of the content analysis revealed 4 dimensions of experiences with cancer and cancer treatment: (1) physical, (2) psychological, (3) social, and (4) spiritual. Sample comments from the adolescents are presented in Table 2 . Recommendations for web-based content included: (a) definitions of medical terms, (b) an explanation of the role of each member of the health care team, and (c) adding humor and games. Adolescents wanted the content to be explained “so I can understand it”. Recommended coping strategies included: (a) listening to music, (b) taking deep breaths during procedures, (c) spending time with family and friends, (d) watching funny movies, (e) playing cards, board games and video games, (f) staying connected with friends online, (g) asking for EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) before procedures, and (h) sharing your feelings. Parents spoke freely about their experiences of going through cancer treatment with their son or daughter. Every parent spoke of the need for accurate pediatric cancer resources. Nate’s mother commented, “When he was first diagnosed I headed right to the computer. Bad thing to do – terrifying. There are a lot of sites out there that are scary. They tell the worst-case scenarios. Everyone with his type of cancer died. Most were about adult cancers and we did not know the difference.’ Zoe’s father noted, “The Internet is always there when the doctors are busy, but there’s a lot of information and you have to be careful what you read.” All of the parents spoke of being their child’s advocate through the process of cancer treatment. Nora’s parents stated, “You need to be proactive. Not only about your kid’s physical health, but mental health too.” Zoe’s father recommended, “Pulling in everyone and anything that is available. We used the child life specialists, social worker and psychologist.” Lastly, all of the parents shared the importance of hope. Annie’s mother told the oncologists “I just want to hear you say she can be cured. We need that hope.”  Results The results of the content analysis revealed 4 dimensions of experiences with cancer and cancer treatment: (1) physical, (2) psychological, (3) social, and (4) spiritual. Sample comments from the adolescents are presented in Table 2 . Recommendations for web-based content included: (a) definitions of medical terms, (b) an explanation of the role of each member of the health care team, and (c) adding humor and games. Adolescents wanted the content to be explained “so I can understand it”. Recommended coping strategies included: (a) listening to music, (b) taking deep breaths during procedures, (c) spending time with family and friends, (d) watching funny movies, (e) playing cards, board games and video games, (f) staying connected with friends online, (g) asking for EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) before procedures, and (h) sharing your feelings. Parents spoke freely about their experiences of going through cancer treatment with their son or daughter. Every parent spoke of the need for accurate pediatric cancer resources. Nate’s mother commented, “When he was first diagnosed I headed right to the computer. Bad thing to do – terrifying. There are a lot of sites out there that are scary. They tell the worst-case scenarios. Everyone with his type of cancer died. Most were about adult cancers and we did not know the difference.’ Zoe’s father noted, “The Internet is always there when the doctors are busy, but there’s a lot of information and you have to be careful what you read.” All of the parents spoke of being their child’s advocate through the process of cancer treatment. Nora’s parents stated, “You need to be proactive. Not only about your kid’s physical health, but mental health too.” Zoe’s father recommended, “Pulling in everyone and anything that is available. We used the child life specialists, social worker and psychologist.” Lastly, all of the parents shared the importance of hope. Annie’s mother told the oncologists “I just want to hear you say she can be cured. We need that hope.”  Phase 4: Construction of the Coping with Cancer Website The investigator developed the scope and plan for the web-based program. Content for the program was derived from the pediatric oncology research literature and data from the adolescent and parent interviews (see Table 3 ). Core components of the program include information about (a) cancer, (b) cancer treatment, (c) feelings about having cancer, (d) dealing with friends and school, (e) healthy coping strategies, and (f) advice from the adolescent cancer experts. The program also includes a glossary of cancer related medical terms, a description of the role of each member of the health care team and a list of professional pediatric cancer Internet resources. The investigator ensured that the program content was consistent with the standard educational materials received by adolescent patients and families at the pediatric oncology clinic. The web-based program was constructed on an Apple Macintosh computer using Adobe Illustrator 10, Photoshop 7 and Adobe GoLive 8, all three applications by Adobe Systems (San Jose, CA). The program homepage ( Figure 1 ) displays a navigation menu located in a column on the left side of the page, with corresponding icons in the center of the homepage. Directions for navigating the web-based program are located on the homepage. To keep the adolescent engaged throughout the program, information is presented through interactive activities. For example, in the Journal ( Figure 2 ) a fictional character named “Brian” who is an adolescent cancer survivor, uses text messaging to answer questions from a newly diagnosed adolescent female about cancer and cancer treatment. Rollovers and interactive games were added to the web program to prevent boredom.  Phase 4: Construction of the Coping with Cancer Website The investigator developed the scope and plan for the web-based program. Content for the program was derived from the pediatric oncology research literature and data from the adolescent and parent interviews (see Table 3 ). Core components of the program include information about (a) cancer, (b) cancer treatment, (c) feelings about having cancer, (d) dealing with friends and school, (e) healthy coping strategies, and (f) advice from the adolescent cancer experts. The program also includes a glossary of cancer related medical terms, a description of the role of each member of the health care team and a list of professional pediatric cancer Internet resources. The investigator ensured that the program content was consistent with the standard educational materials received by adolescent patients and families at the pediatric oncology clinic. The web-based program was constructed on an Apple Macintosh computer using Adobe Illustrator 10, Photoshop 7 and Adobe GoLive 8, all three applications by Adobe Systems (San Jose, CA). The program homepage ( Figure 1 ) displays a navigation menu located in a column on the left side of the page, with corresponding icons in the center of the homepage. Directions for navigating the web-based program are located on the homepage. To keep the adolescent engaged throughout the program, information is presented through interactive activities. For example, in the Journal ( Figure 2 ) a fictional character named “Brian” who is an adolescent cancer survivor, uses text messaging to answer questions from a newly diagnosed adolescent female about cancer and cancer treatment. Rollovers and interactive games were added to the web program to prevent boredom.  Phase 5: Content Validity After construction of a preliminary version of the web-based program, two expert panels reviewed the program for content validity. One panel consisted of the same 4 adolescent experts who participated in the interviews. The other panel was a multidisciplinary group of 4 (2 women and 2 men) pediatric oncology experts. Two of these experts were from the same outpatient pediatric oncology clinic as the adolescent experts. The 4 experts consisted of a pediatric nurse practitioner in pediatric oncology, a pediatric oncologist, a pediatric cancer epidemiologist, and an internationally known pediatric nurse expert in pain, pediatric cancer, and web-based technology. Both panels of experts were given access to the web-based program for one month. Each expert was asked to independently complete a rating form of the program and to mail the form to the investigator’s private mailbox in a provided stamped envelope. Adolescent experts were asked four questions: (a) What did you think of the Coping with Cancer website? (b) Do you think that the website would have been helpful when you were going through cancer treatment? (c) If you answered “yes”, what about the website would have been helpful to you? and (d) Can you think of anything that should be added to or removed from the program? ( Table 4 ). Pediatric oncology experts were asked to rate the Coping with Cancer program on (a) ease of access and navigating the program, (b) accuracy of information, and (c) appropriateness for age (early and middle adolescents). The scale developed was a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). All of the experts responded positively with ratings of a 4 (agree) or 5 (strongly agree). The rating form included an open-end question for additional comments and suggestions for improvement of the web-based program. The following are sample comments: “This direct, fresh approach with a terrific graphic interface will encourage them to explore and interact”, “I like the general upbeat nature of the website as a whole”, “The look of the site will entice the kids and make it easy to come back to”. All recommendations for revision were taken into consideration and changes to the web program were made accordingly. None of the adolescent or pediatric oncology experts reported problems with gaining access to or navigating the web program.  Phase 5: Content Validity After construction of a preliminary version of the web-based program, two expert panels reviewed the program for content validity. One panel consisted of the same 4 adolescent experts who participated in the interviews. The other panel was a multidisciplinary group of 4 (2 women and 2 men) pediatric oncology experts. Two of these experts were from the same outpatient pediatric oncology clinic as the adolescent experts. The 4 experts consisted of a pediatric nurse practitioner in pediatric oncology, a pediatric oncologist, a pediatric cancer epidemiologist, and an internationally known pediatric nurse expert in pain, pediatric cancer, and web-based technology. Both panels of experts were given access to the web-based program for one month. Each expert was asked to independently complete a rating form of the program and to mail the form to the investigator’s private mailbox in a provided stamped envelope. Adolescent experts were asked four questions: (a) What did you think of the Coping with Cancer website? (b) Do you think that the website would have been helpful when you were going through cancer treatment? (c) If you answered “yes”, what about the website would have been helpful to you? and (d) Can you think of anything that should be added to or removed from the program? ( Table 4 ). Pediatric oncology experts were asked to rate the Coping with Cancer program on (a) ease of access and navigating the program, (b) accuracy of information, and (c) appropriateness for age (early and middle adolescents). The scale developed was a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). All of the experts responded positively with ratings of a 4 (agree) or 5 (strongly agree). The rating form included an open-end question for additional comments and suggestions for improvement of the web-based program. The following are sample comments: “This direct, fresh approach with a terrific graphic interface will encourage them to explore and interact”, “I like the general upbeat nature of the website as a whole”, “The look of the site will entice the kids and make it easy to come back to”. All recommendations for revision were taken into consideration and changes to the web program were made accordingly. None of the adolescent or pediatric oncology experts reported problems with gaining access to or navigating the web program.  Phase 6: Field Test of the Coping with Cancer Website: Clinical Validity The next step in the development and evaluation of the Coping with Cancer program is a field test of the program which is currently underway with a sample of 20 early and middle adolescents who are actively undergoing cancer treatment.  Phase 6: Field Test of the Coping with Cancer Website: Clinical Validity The next step in the development and evaluation of the Coping with Cancer program is a field test of the program which is currently underway with a sample of 20 early and middle adolescents who are actively undergoing cancer treatment.  Discussion This article describes the development of a web-based educational program for early and middle adolescents undergoing cancer treatment. The program was developed in accordance with the recommendations from the Research Working Group meeting titled “Moving the Research Agenda Forward for Children with Cancer” (National Institutes of Health) and the State of the Science Summit II for Pediatric Oncology Nursing, as the adolescent’s voice was included and careful attention was paid to growth and development ( Hare, 2005 ). Vital to the development of the program were the adolescent experts’ insights and recommendations for essential content. Although only a small sample of adolescent experts and their parents were included, the in-depth interviews provided invaluable information. Moreover, all of the adolescents and their parents shared the desire to help others who were embarking upon the “cancer journey”. Similar to the findings of Cassano, Nagel, and O’Mara (2008) , the adolescent experts hoped to inspire others going through cancer treatment and were eager to share their words of encouragement and ideas about ways to cope with cancer and cancer treatment while trying to maintain a “normal” life. In terms of coping strategies, all of the adolescent experts spoke of the importance of learning about their cancer and cancer treatment as a way of coping ( Decker, Phillips, & Haase, 2004 ; Kyngas, 2003 ) and the use of some type of expressive therapy (music, art, journaling) in order to find meaning in their cancer experience ( Hinds & Haase, 2003 ). Lastly, acknowledging the wide spread use of the Internet as a means of finding health care information, web-based education gives pediatric oncology nurses the opportunity to meet the challenge of providing ongoing education for patients and families that is accurate and current as content can be added or changed as needed. Considering the improved rates of survival for adolescents with cancer, education about the importance of self-care, screening, transition to adult care, and healthy coping skills could potentially last a life time.  Discussion This article describes the development of a web-based educational program for early and middle adolescents undergoing cancer treatment. The program was developed in accordance with the recommendations from the Research Working Group meeting titled “Moving the Research Agenda Forward for Children with Cancer” (National Institutes of Health) and the State of the Science Summit II for Pediatric Oncology Nursing, as the adolescent’s voice was included and careful attention was paid to growth and development ( Hare, 2005 ). Vital to the development of the program were the adolescent experts’ insights and recommendations for essential content. Although only a small sample of adolescent experts and their parents were included, the in-depth interviews provided invaluable information. Moreover, all of the adolescents and their parents shared the desire to help others who were embarking upon the “cancer journey”. Similar to the findings of Cassano, Nagel, and O’Mara (2008) , the adolescent experts hoped to inspire others going through cancer treatment and were eager to share their words of encouragement and ideas about ways to cope with cancer and cancer treatment while trying to maintain a “normal” life. In terms of coping strategies, all of the adolescent experts spoke of the importance of learning about their cancer and cancer treatment as a way of coping ( Decker, Phillips, & Haase, 2004 ; Kyngas, 2003 ) and the use of some type of expressive therapy (music, art, journaling) in order to find meaning in their cancer experience ( Hinds & Haase, 2003 ). Lastly, acknowledging the wide spread use of the Internet as a means of finding health care information, web-based education gives pediatric oncology nurses the opportunity to meet the challenge of providing ongoing education for patients and families that is accurate and current as content can be added or changed as needed. Considering the improved rates of survival for adolescents with cancer, education about the importance of self-care, screening, transition to adult care, and healthy coping skills could potentially last a life time.  Conclusion The web-based educational program Coping with Cancer is an innovative approach to assisting early and middle adolescents as they undergo cancer treatment. This program provides a safe place for adolescents to find accurate information about cancer, cancer treatment, and coping strategies, along with receiving advice and encouragement from peers who have completed cancer treatment. The ongoing development and refinement of this program will ensure a trusted web-based resource designed to improve the quality of life for adolescents with cancer.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Coping with Cancer Homepage Note. A navigation menu appears in a column on the left side of the home page. Adolescents can also access information by clicking on the 6 corresponding icons in the center of the homepage. Figure 2 Coping with Cancer Journal Page 1 Note. Multiple rollovers appear throughout the program. For example, using your computer’s mouse to rollover the word “oncologist” on the left side of journal page 1, displays the pronunciation and definition of oncologist in the right margin of screen. Table 1 Sample Characteristics Adolescent experts (pseudonym) Age (years) Gender Type of cancer Parent participant 1. Nora 11 Female melanoma mother & father 2. Annie 12 Female synovial cell sarcoma mother 3. Zoe 14 Female osteosarcoma father 4. Nate 16 Male lymphoma mother Table 2 Experiences of Cancer and Cancer Treatment Identified by Adolescent Experts Dimensions Sample Comments 1. Physical Could not sleep. Pain from getting poked. Getting stuck with needles was the worst thing. I got sick of getting poked. After chemo I didn’t have any energy. 2. Psychological I needed to have my family with me during procedures so I wasn’t so scared. When I finally realized what was going on it was kind of shocking, it hits you and its weird. You worry about getting cancer again, it’s like every little ache and I was thinking, it’s back. I didn’t fully understand cancer, so it was a scary feeling. Everyone needs to tell the truth and in words I can understand. 3. Social Looked forward to going home to be with family and friends. I stayed connected with my friends at school. My teachers helped me stay in school. I talked with my sisters on the phone when they could not visit me in the hospital. 4. Spiritual Stay strong, don’t give up hope. You need to stay positive. I would pray with my mom. At first I asked why me? Then my faith pulled me though. We usually listened to Christian music, it made me feel good. Every day I said, I can get through this. Table 3 Coping with Cancer Web-based Program Content Program component Content the journal Using a fictional peer mentor “Brian” the journal guides a newly diagnosed adolescent through the initial shock of diagnosis of cancer, treatment options, possible side effects of cancer treatment, coping strategies, interacting with friends, dealing with school, normalizing feelings and using professional resources. kid advice Inspirational quotes and words of advice from the adolescent experts who have completed cancer treatment. who’s who Health care team members and their roles. glossary Medical terminology with definitions and correct pronunciation. parent stuff Professional pediatric cancer resources. coping tools Using developmentally appropriate information in static and interactive forms, a variety of healthy coping strategies are introduced and described that can be used during cancer treatment (for example, listening to music, talking with friends, forms of distraction, deep breathing exercises). Adolescents are encouraged to practice these strategies at home and to ask a parent or friend to accompany them during procedures to be their “coach” while using these coping strategies. Table 4 Evaluation of Coping with Cancer Website by Adolescent Experts Question Response 1. What did you think of the Coping with     Cancer website? a) I liked it. I liked the colors and how you     made the journal was so cool. I also liked     how it was more like a teen site instead of a     little kid site. b) It was really fun to look at it. c) I loved the colors and graphics. It provided     great resources and knowledge.     Very creative! d) This website is amazing! I wish I had a tool     as effective as this when I was diagnosed     and going through treatment. 2. Do you think that the website would have     been helpful when you were going through     cancer treatment? a) yes b) yes c) yes d) yes 3. If you answered “yes”, what about the     website would have been helpful to you? a) I would have known all the terms before-     hand. Also the advice would have been     really nice too. b) Coping with cancer; I felt like a freak. c) The information about cancer and the     helpful advice. d) Everything is helpful, most important the     resources for my parents to get information     that is accurate and up to date. 4. Can you think of anything that should be     added to or removed from the website? a) No, not really. b) Maybe add some more games. c) No, it is great the way it is!! I loved it!! d) It’s perfect! 