Clinical implications of microsatellite instability in sporadic colon cancers Purpose of review To review data demonstrating the prognostic and predictive impact of microsatellite instability (MSI) in human colon carcinomas. Recent findings MSI is a molecular marker of defective DNA mismatch repair that is detected in approximately 15% of sporadic colon cancers. Most, but not all retrospective studies, have shown that colon cancers with MSI have better stage-adjusted survival rates compared with non-MSI tumors. Furthermore, analyses of colon cancers from participants in randomized adjuvant therapy trials have suggested that MSI tumors do not benefit from treatment with 5-fluorouracil. Recent studies, including a pooled analysis, validate prior data demonstrating the prognostic and predictive impact of MSI status in colon cancer. Summary MSI is a molecular marker that can provide valuable prognostic and predictive information in colon cancer patients. In the appropriate clinical setting, MSI data can be used in clinical decision-making. Specifically, the favorable outcome of stage II colon cancers with MSI indicates that such patients should not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Although data for stage III colon cancers with MSI suggest a lack of benefit from 5-fluorouracil alone, the benefit of the current standard treatment, 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin, in this subgroup remains unknown and awaits further study.  Conclusion Accumulated evidence demonstrates the prognostic and predictive utility of MSI status, including a recent study validating the clinical utility of defective MMR (MSI-H or loss of MMR protein expression) in colon cancers from patients treated in adjuvant therapy trials [ 17 •• ]. We believe that the current evidence is sufficient to utilize MSI results for prognosis and to influence clinical decision-making regarding the use of adjuvant chemotherapy in stage II colon cancer patients. At present, we restrict our recommendations to stage II patients. While patients with stage III MSI-H tumors have a better prognosis and may not benefit from 5-FU, data regarding the benefit of FOLFOX in such patients are lacking. Therefore, all stage III patients should continue to receive standard adjuvant chemotherapy as of this writing. An analysis of MMR status in colon cancers from completed adjuvant studies that evaluated FOLFOX, for example, the Multicenter International Study of Oxaliplatin/5-Fluorouracil/Leucovorin in the Adjuvant Treatment of Colon Cancer (MOSAIC) [ 45 • ], as well as ongoing adjuvant studies (NSABP C-08, NCCTG N0147) could shed further light on this issue. Going forward, prospective clinical trials are needed to evaluate non-5-FU-based regimens in patients with MSI-H stage III colon cancers. In summary, MSI is an important molecular marker of tumor biology that can provide clinically useful information and represents one further step toward individualized cancer therapy. 