Role of endothelin-1 in acute lung injury The alveolar–capillary membrane serves as a barrier that prevents the accumulation of fluid in the alveolar space and restricts the diffusion of large solutes while facilitating an efficient gas exchange. When this barrier becomes dysfunctional, patients develop acute lung injury (ALI), which is characterized by pulmonary edema and increased lung inflammation that leads to a life-threatening impairment of gas exchange. In addition to the increase of inflammatory cytokines, plasma levels of endothelin-1 (ET-1), which is a primarily endothelium-derived vasoconstrictor, are increased in patients with ALI. As patients recover, ET-1 levels decrease, which suggests that ET-1 may not only be a marker of endothelial dysfunction but may have a role in the pathogenesis of ALI. While pulmonary edema accumulates, alveolar fluid clearance (AFC) is of critical importance, as failure to return to normal clearance is associated with poor prognosis in patients with pulmonary edema. AFC involves active transport mechanisms where sodium (Na+) is actively transported from the alveolar airspaces, across the alveolar epithelium, and into the pulmonary circulation, which creates an osmotic gradient that is responsible for the clearance of lung edema. In this article, we review the relevance of ET-1 in the development of ALI, not only as a vasoconstrictor molecule but also by inhibiting AFC via the activation of endothelial ET-B receptors and generation. Furthermore, this review highlights the therapeutic role of drugs such as beta-adrenergic agonists and, in particular, of endothelin receptor antagonists in patients with ALI.  CONCLUSION In summary, clinical data suggest that ET-1 plays a role in the development of ALI, and experimental data, both in vivo and in vitro , demonstrates that ET-1 induces the formation of pulmonary edema via both ET-A and ET-B receptors. Also, endothelin receptor antagonists prevent the development of ALI, either via decreasing the permeability of the endothelial and epithelial barrier, or via reconstituting the ability of the alveolar epithelium to clear edema. Finally, based on all these findings, we propose that additional clinical trials will consider the use of endothelin receptor antagonists as a therapeutic tool in the treatment of patients with ALI.  Figures Fig 1 Schematic representation of the effect of both ET-1 and ? -adrenergic agonist on the Na, K-ATPase abundance at the basolateral membrane in alveolar epithelial cells. ET-1 activates endothelial ET-B receptors that lead to NO generation, which in turn causes endocytosis of the Na, K-ATPase in alveolar epithelial cells. Conversely, activation of ? -adrenergic receptors by isoproterenol leads to the translocation of the Na, K-ATPase to the basolateral membrane in alveolar epithelial cells. ?-AR , beta-adrenergic receptor. Fig 2 Iso prevents ET-1 decrease in alveolar fluid clearance in isolated perfused rat lungs. Isolated rat lungs were treated for 1 h with vehicle (CT), ET-1 (10?7 mol/L in perfusate), Iso (10?6 mol/L in the instillate); Iso in the instillate (10?6) for 30 min, followed by ET-1 in the perfusate (10?7) for 30 min (Iso + ET-1); and ET-1 in the perfusate (10?7) for 30 min, followed by Iso in the instillate (10?6) for 30 min. AFC was measured as described previously 34 , 126 (n = 6). Graph represents mean ± standard error of the mean. ** P < 0.01. NS = nonstatistically significant. 