ProtEx™ technology for the generation of novel therapeutic cancer vaccines Therapeutic vaccines present an attractive alternative to conventional treatments for cancer. However, tumors have evolved various immune evasion mechanisms to modulate innate, adaptive, and regulatory immunity for survival. Therefore, successful vaccine formulations may require a non-toxic immunomodulator or adjuvant that not only induces/stimulates innate and adaptive tumor-specific immune responses, but also overcome immune evasion mechanisms. Given the paramount role costimulation plays in modulating innate, adaptive, and regulatory immune responses, costimulatory ligands may serve as effective immunomodulating components of therapeutic cancer vaccines. Our laboratory has developed a novel technology designated as ProtEx™ that allows for the generation of recombinant costimulatory ligands with potent immunomodulatory activities and the display of these molecules on the cell surface in a rapid and efficient manner as a practical and safe alternative to gene therapy for immunomodulation. Importantly, the costimulatory ligands not only function when displayed on tumor cells, but also as soluble proteins that can be used as immunomodulatory components of conventional vaccine formulations containing tumor-associated antigens (TAAs). We herein discuss the application of the ProtEx™ technology to the development of effective cell-based as well as cell-free conventional therapeutic cancer vaccines.  Conclusions and future prospects Conventional vaccines based on TAA/TSAs present an attractive choice for the prevention and treatment of cancer due to their cost-effectiveness, ease of production, storage, distribution, and broad applicability to a wide range of tumor types. However, the efficacy of therapeutic cancer vaccines will depend on not only their ability to boost the existing immune responses in cancer patients, but also to generate new immune responses and most importantly overcome various immune evasion mechanisms that allow tumor growth to begin with. This will require vaccine formulations that modulate innate, adaptive, and regulatory immunity that impact tumor progression vs elimination. In this context, the development/discovery of immune modulators with pleiotropic effects on a broad range of immune cells with defined mechanisms of action and lack of toxicity in humans will be an important step forward. Novel costimulatory molecules, such as streptavidin chimeric proteins described herein, and TLR agonists are such promising immunomodulatory candidates. Moreover, the next generation vaccines may benefit from the targeted delivery of TAA/TSAs into DCs given the importance of these cells in the initiation of immune responses to tumors. In particular, therapeutic cancer vaccine formulations employing immunomodulators that not only regulate the function of DCs, T cells, and other critical cells of innate and regulatory immunity, but also serve as vehicles to specifically deliver TAA/TSAs to DCs in vivo may have potential to succeed in the clinic.  Figures Figure 1 ProtEx™ technology generates novel recombinant chimeric proteins consisting of core streptavidin that allows for the formation of functional tetramers/oligomers. These novel chimeric proteins can be displayed on the cell surface of biotinylated cells for the use of whole cell tumor vaccines (A) or used in soluble form as an immunomodulator in combination with any TAA/TSAs for use in classical TAA-based cancer vaccines. Figure 2 Co-display of exogenous proteins on the cell surface. Confocal microscopy pictures of bone marrow cells (left) and tumor cells (right) engineered to co-display on their surface streptavidin in combination with SA-FasL (left) or CD80-SA (right). 