Post-injury niches induce temporal shifts in progenitor fates to direct lesion repair after spinal cord injury Progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan are the predominant self-renewing cell within the CNS. NG2-progenitors replenish oligodendrocyte populations within the intact stem-cell niche, and cycling NG2-cells are among the first cells to react to CNS insults. We investigated the role of NG2-progenitors after spinal cord injury (SCI) and how bone morphogen protein (BMP) signals remodel the progressive post-injury niche. Progeny labeled by an NG2-specific reporter virus undergo a coordinated shift in differentiation profile. NG2-progeny born 24-hours post-injury (PI) produce scar-forming astrocytes and transient populations of novel phagocytic astrocytes shown to contain denatured myelin within cathepsin-D labeled endosomes, but NG2-progenitors born 7-days PI differentiate into oligodendrocytes and express myelin on processes that wrap axons. Analysis of spinal cord mRNA shows a temporal-shift in the niche-transcriptome of ligands that affect post-injury remodeling and direct progenitor differentiation. We conclude that NG2-progeny are diverse lineages that obey progressive-cues after trauma to replenish the injured niche.  Introduction The microenvironments that regulate stem cells/progenitors serve to maintain homeostasis in adult tissue. The support cells and molecular cues within these microenvironments comprise the niches that instruct progenitors within the central nervous system (CNS) ( J. D. Jordan et al., 2007 ; J. Ninkovic and M. Götz, 2007 ). While the importance of niches has been realized, little information has been presented to describe how injuries feedback and stimulate progenitors, or how cellular deficits are replenished within the damaged nervous system to facilitate niche succession ( E. Fuchs et al., 2004 ). Despite limited post-traumatic regeneration, the spinal cord is known to contain endogenous neural progenitor cells (NPCs) that support plasticity in the mammalian CNS ( S. Weiss et al., 1996 ; C. B. Johansson et al., 1999 ; J. Namiki and C. H. Tator, 1999 ; P. J. Horner et al., 2000 ; L. S. Shihabuddin et al., 2000 ). Stem cell niches have been characterized for several CNS regions ( F. Doetsch et al., 1999 ; T. D. Palmer, 2002 ; G. Kempermann et al., 2004 ). Within these regions, niche succession is characterized by asymmetric cell division of stem cells to produce one stem cell and one daughter cell. The daughter cell progresses to differentiate terminally and replenish tissue requirements as directed by the intact niche ( A. Alvarez-Buylla and D. A. Lim, 2004 ). Pigment epilethium ( C. Ramirez-Castillejo et al., 2006 ) promotes self-renewal while sonic hedgehog (Shh) ( S. Ahn and A. L. Joyner, 2004 ) and bone morphogen protein (BMP) ( D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ) signals maintain stemness as molecular cues evolve within the NSC niche to direct differentiation within neurogenic versus gliogenic regions ( H. Song et al., 2002 ; H. J. Song et al., 2002 ; Q. Shen et al., 2004 ). Thus, the NSC niche is a refined microenvironment evolved to facilitate communication between tissues and stem cells to sustain homeostasis. Analogous processes occur in hematopoesis, hair follicle, and germ cell niches. Yet, a stem cell niche has not been defined within the spinal cord, despite the observation of proliferative zones ( C. B. Johansson et al., 1999 ; P. J. Horner et al., 2000 ). Spinal cord injury (SCI) produces a structural perturbation to the homeostasis of a NSC niche known to stimulate the proliferation of reactive cells and produce an inhibitory scar that restricts regeneration ( J. Silver and J. H. Miller, 2004 ). Numerous studies have examined how injuries to the brain or spinal cord affect NSCs, and how NSCs respond to growth factors injected into the CNS after injury. While informative, intervention studies fail to examine how the niche evolves post-injury (PI) to rebuild damaged tissue: the process of post-injury niche succession. To investigate how a progressive niche recovers after injury, we targeted CNS progenitors marked by NG2 proteoglycan expression. Cycling-cells that express NG2 are the most abundant progenitor in the rodent CNS ( P. J. Horner et al., 2002 ; M. R. Dawson et al., 2003 ), and NG2 cells are known to respond to injury and are thought to be restricted oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) ( J. M. Levine and R. Reynolds, 1999 ). However, a clear impediment to conducting lineage studies within the injured niche is the dramatic deposition of proteoglycans throughout the injury zone making the determination of the cellular source and the phenotypic fate of NG2-expressing cells equivocal. Therefore, we engineered a retroviral reporter virus to specifically target NG2-expressing cells to determine how traumatized microenvironments feedback to instruct progenitors after injury.  Methods Spinal Cord Injury (SCI, hemi-section) and tissue processing Adult mice (8 weeks) were anesthetized with avertin (12.6% tribromo-ethanal, 0.6% tert-amyl alcohol; Sigma, St Louis, MO) in order to perform a T9-T10 laminectomy. Following exposure of the dorsal cord, iridectomy scissors were used to create a hemi-section lesion by cutting the dorsal spinal cord tissue until the central canal can be visualized (?300 ?m deep). After a successful lesion, the muscle and skin was sutured in layers to close the wound. Post-operatively, lactated Ringer's solution was administered sub-cutaneously to rehydrate the animals. Analgesics (buprenorphine, 0.05 mg/kg) and antibiotics (4.8 ?g/g gentamicin, Abraxis Pharmaceutical Products, Schaumburg, IL) were administered as needed and animals recovered from surgery in warmed cages. To harvest spinal cords, anesthetized mice were killed via intra-cardiac perfusion. Animals were exsanguinated with saline and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (containing 4% sucrose). Perfused tissue was equilibrated in 30% sucrose for cyroprotection in OTC and serially sectioned (1:6, 20 ?m coronal/cross-sections) with a Leica SM1850 cryostat. For BMP ligand injection and progenitor transplantation, similar methods were followed. Each study was coded and blinded. BMP4 and Noggin (carrier free, R&D Systems) was administered by intraspinal injection (1 ?l of 50 ?g/ml stock, within 1 mm rostral to the lesion, respectively). After amplification, 26Sor*-cells were harvested with custom ATV and resuspended in HBSS (1×108 cells/ml). Cells were transplanted by injection, 1mm rostral to the hemisection lesion, with a pulled glass micro-pipette into the spinal cord (1-2 ?l injection administered over the course of 2 min. with a 2 min. dwell time after completion: 4 minutes total). Glass micropipettes minimize injuries incurred by Hamilton syringes. NG2 promoter cloning (gene-walking) and validation Murine genomic DNA was purified from adult neural progenitor cells lysed with Trizol (Invitrogen). To clone the DNA sequence that regulates NG2 expression, a targeted anti-sense PCR primer was designed to target a region encoding the NG2 protein, approximately 80 bp downstream of the ATG start-site. The targeted primer was used in conjunction with random primers to amplify segments of genomic DNA that could regulate NG2 expression. The products isolated from the primary reaction were used as templates for a second PCR. In the secondary reaction, a nested primer, directed against the 5-prime untranslated region (UTR) of NG2, was used to confirm which isolates are derived from the regions upstream of NG2. Positive isolates are cloned and confirmed by DNA sequencing. Each sequence is BLAST searched (NCBI Blast) and subsequent primers designed to target and isolate 1584 base-pairs up stream of the NG2 translational start-site (5?-GGAGGGGAAAGTCAAAGGTTCACAGAAGACCCTC-3?; Operon Technologies). Following sequence confirmation and analysis, a series of NG2-promoter truncations (9 total; 3-prime and 5-prime mutants) evaluated promoter activity and isolated the regions required to regulate transcription stringently. Each truncation created by PCR mutagenesis was subcloned into pGL3-basic (promoterless mammalian expression-vector; Promega, Madison, WI) to regulate luciferase expression. Thus, pGL3 vectors report promoter activity according to luciferase activity. Consequently, COS and PC12 cells (ATCC, Bethesda, MD.) transfected with the recombinant promoter plasmid quantified transcriptional activation as a function of the luminescence produced by luciferase activity, in cell lysates. Using bright-lite (PerkinElmer Life Sciences) as the substrate, luminescence was measured (in a 96-well plate; NUNC) using a Packard Fusion plate analyzer (PerkinElmer) and normalized against control (promoterless) to evaluate NG2 promoter activity. NG2-reporter maloney virus construct and production A mouse maloney retrovirus, constructed to express green fluorescent protein, tracked the proliferation and differentiation of NG2-expressing progenitors. Within the confirmed NG2 promoter sequence in a TOPO-PCR2.1 plasmid (Invitrogen), PCR mutagenesis inserted and NcoI endoneclease site at the NG2 ATG-start site, and the product was cloned into pBR322 (New England Biolabs). The mutant NcoI site permitted EGFP to be inserted into the translational start-site regulated by the NG2 promoter. DNA sequencing confirmed the reading-frame and placement of the chimeric EGFP reporter (NG2pEGFP), with respect to the NG2 promoter. After confirmation, a standard T4 Ligase (New England Biolabs) reaction inserted the excised NG2pEGFP expression-cassette (EcoRI and EcoRV digest from pBR322; the full-length 1580 base-pairs NG2 promoter with EGFP) into the pLAPSN retroviral vector (EcoRI and HpaI sites, Invitrogen). Positive colonies that harbor the recombinant plasmid were selected from ampicillin (Sigma) agar plates (50 ?g/ml), and the plasmid was amplified and isolated according to standard recombinant DNA techniques. Within pLAPSN, NG2pEGFP was inserted 3-prime of the LTR and in reverse orientation of the alkaline phosphatase (AP) gene. Therefore, the recombinant vector is designated pLrNpEAPSN. Similar methods were used to produce a cre-recombinase expression vector: pLNpCRESN. Phoenix-GP packaging cells (ATCC, Bathesda, Maryland) were used to package and produced recombinant viral particles. Briefly, pLrNpEAPSN was co-transfected with the VSVG envelope vector into Phoenix-GP cells. In DMEM (Gibco), Fugene 6 (Roche) was mixed at a 3:1 ration with the vector constructs (1 ?g each). The transfection cocktail was added to cells (60% confluent) with gentle shaking in 4.5 mls of serum free media (10 cm dish) supplemented with 1 ?g/ml Polybrene (Sigma). After 18-24 hours, cell media was supplemented with serum (10%), hygromycin (0.3 mg/ml, Invitrogen,) and G418 (30 ?g/ml, Omega Scientific, Irvine, CA.). Infectious virus particles harvested from the media are concentrated to 1×109 infectious particles per microliter (high-titer) via ultra-centrifugation (Beckman Ultracentrifuge, 24,000× g, 70.1 Ti rotor at 4°C for 2 hours, Palo Alto, CA) In vivo experiments required high-titer virus for injection (1 ?l), 1 mm rostral to the lesion, into the dorsal columns of adult mice, at 24 hours post-injury (PI) or 7 days PI. Seven and three days after each injection, spinal cord tissue was harvested from perfusion fixed mice for subsequent analysis (above). To evaluate the stringency of EGFP expression from the viral genome, and other molecular phenotypes confocal microscopy quantified and characterized the coincidence of EGFP with phenotypic markers and NG2 proteoglycan in immunologically stained tissue (detailed below). Spinal cord tissue was embedded in OTC media and frozen to be cyrosectioned. Coronal Spinal cord sections were mounted on permafrost slides (Fisher Scientific) and stored at -80°C for future use. In vitro infection of isolate cells used high-titer virus diluted into culture in growth media (approx 10,000 cells per 106 particles) with greater than 80% efficiency. Viral was insured by antibiotic selection with G418 (50?g/ml, a dose known to kill untransfected NPCs). Infection and recombination was monitored fluorescently and via RT-PCR. Cells were purified by EGFP expression, driven by CRE infection, by FACS (described below). Immunofluorescence Molecular markers expression was evaluated by immunofluorescence to determine the cellular phenotype of virally labeled (EGFP) cells in SCI tissue. Primary antibodies previously shown to identify reactive astrocytes (glial fibrillary acidic protein, GFAP), immature and mature astrocytes (s100® polypeptide), immature oligodendrocytes (adenomatosis polyposis coli tumor suppresser gene, APC, CC1 clone), and EGFP are combined to elucidate cell phenotype. It is important to note the CC1 clone antibody is directed against the amino terminus of APC and is specific for glial cells (CalBiochem, La Jolla, CA), but CC1 does not cross react with neurons, as reported with antibodies directed against the c-terminus of APC. Combined in blocking buffer (TBS + 0.3%Triton +5% donkey serum), three compatible primary antibodies were applied to tissue and incubated overnight at 4°C. The optimum antibody concentration had been determined by a dilution series: guinea pig ?-GFAP (1:2500, Advanced Immunochemical, Long Beach, CA), rabbit ?-s100? (1:5,000, Swant, Switzerland) or mouse ?-s100? (1:1000, clone SB6, Abcam), mouse ?-CathD (1:200, Chemicon), rabbit ?-Caspase 3 (cleaved Caspase 3, Cell Signaling Technologies) mouse ?-APC (1:500, CalBiochem, La Jolla, CA), rabbit ?-NG2 (1:500, Chemicon, Inc.), and chicken or rabbit ?-EGFP (1:2500 or 1:500, respectively, Chemicon, Inc.). CSPG was detected by a monoclonal Anti-CSPG (Clone CS-56, Sigma Inc.) and mouse IgG was added to the primary block to reduce non-specific binding. Following the primary incubation, sections were rinsed twice in 0.1 M TBS pH 7.5 and once in blocking buffer. Secondary antibodies were applied in blocking buffer for 2 hours at room temperature, or overnight at 4°C: donkey ?-mouse IgG conjugated to CY3 (1:250; Jackson Labs West Grove, PA), ?-rabbit IgG conjugated to CY2 (1:250, Jackson Labs), donkey ?-guinea pig conjugated to CY5 (1:250, Jackson Labs), and donkey ?-chicken Alexa-488 (Invitrogen). Unbound antibody was removed by extensive washes with blocking buffer. All immunostains were verified by a “no primary” secondary antibody stain. Cell and Molecular Phenotype Quantification Images of multiple-label immunofluorescence are collected and quantified using confocal microscopy (Bio-Rad Radiance, Carl Zeiss Inc., Thornwood, NY). Confocal z-stack images permit optically sectioned stains to be examined to determine which phenotypic markers (outlined above) co-localize with EGFP. The dorsal half of SCI tissue was sampled randomly to quantify the phenotypes of virally labeled cells. Antigen co-localization with EGFP was quantified in serial tissue sections, 1-in-6 series (2 mm rostral of the dorsal hemi-section), from 4 or 5 animals per time-point. Phenotypes were designated in accordance with antigen (detailed above) co-localization with the well-defined cytoplasm of an EGFP labeled-cell, followed through the z-axis. A minimum of 100 EGFP-cells was examined from 12 to 16 sections. Quantitative real-time PCR Tissue sections (1-2 mm) rostral to a hemi-section lesion were dissected and snapped froze in liquid nitrogen. Trizol was used to isolate RNA from harvested tissues and cDNA was synthesized with Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) from 500 ng total RNA. Using random hexamer primers, reverse-transcription reactions incubated at 50°C for 90 minutes. Each sample was RNase H treated (30 min. at 37°C) followed by 30 min incubation at 65°C. Each template was used in subsequent real-time PCR reactions. Real-time PCR was performed with an ABI 7000 cycler. Sybr-Green PCR master mix (ABI) was used to monitor each amplicon and ROX served as the passive dye to control for pipette errors. Each primer set was validated and showed a single peak in the dissociation curves, and amplicon size was confirmed electrophoretically ( X. Wang and B. Seed, 2003 ). Relative changes in expression levels for each amplicon was normalized against GAPDH expression and each experimental group was compared against sham controls (5-7 animals each), and all reactions performed in triplicate and repeated 2 times. Stated changes were quantified as changes in threshold cycle (?Ct) compared to controls (??Ct) and reported as fold changes (2-??Ct). Flow Cytometry After infection of 26Sor-cells (isolated from the spinal cords of ROSA:GFP mice), FACS was performed on a MoFlow cell cytometer (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) to separate GFP-positive from GFP negative cells. Dissociated cells were suspended in HBSS supplemented with EDTA (5 ?M) and Penn-strep (1X). Cell sorts were gated according to forward-scatter (FSC) versus fluorescent intensity (488 nm excitation). After isolation, 26Sor* cells were grown in growth media supplemented with pen-strep. Data Analysis Differences among experimental groups were evaluated by a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). A non-paired students t-test evaluated differences in cell phenotypes between the 24-hours and 7-day group and real-time PCR data. For all statistical analyses, significance was accepted at a p value of 0.05 and lower for a one-tailed t-test.  Spinal Cord Injury (SCI, hemi-section) and tissue processing Adult mice (8 weeks) were anesthetized with avertin (12.6% tribromo-ethanal, 0.6% tert-amyl alcohol; Sigma, St Louis, MO) in order to perform a T9-T10 laminectomy. Following exposure of the dorsal cord, iridectomy scissors were used to create a hemi-section lesion by cutting the dorsal spinal cord tissue until the central canal can be visualized (?300 ?m deep). After a successful lesion, the muscle and skin was sutured in layers to close the wound. Post-operatively, lactated Ringer's solution was administered sub-cutaneously to rehydrate the animals. Analgesics (buprenorphine, 0.05 mg/kg) and antibiotics (4.8 ?g/g gentamicin, Abraxis Pharmaceutical Products, Schaumburg, IL) were administered as needed and animals recovered from surgery in warmed cages. To harvest spinal cords, anesthetized mice were killed via intra-cardiac perfusion. Animals were exsanguinated with saline and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (containing 4% sucrose). Perfused tissue was equilibrated in 30% sucrose for cyroprotection in OTC and serially sectioned (1:6, 20 ?m coronal/cross-sections) with a Leica SM1850 cryostat. For BMP ligand injection and progenitor transplantation, similar methods were followed. Each study was coded and blinded. BMP4 and Noggin (carrier free, R&D Systems) was administered by intraspinal injection (1 ?l of 50 ?g/ml stock, within 1 mm rostral to the lesion, respectively). After amplification, 26Sor*-cells were harvested with custom ATV and resuspended in HBSS (1×108 cells/ml). Cells were transplanted by injection, 1mm rostral to the hemisection lesion, with a pulled glass micro-pipette into the spinal cord (1-2 ?l injection administered over the course of 2 min. with a 2 min. dwell time after completion: 4 minutes total). Glass micropipettes minimize injuries incurred by Hamilton syringes.  NG2 promoter cloning (gene-walking) and validation Murine genomic DNA was purified from adult neural progenitor cells lysed with Trizol (Invitrogen). To clone the DNA sequence that regulates NG2 expression, a targeted anti-sense PCR primer was designed to target a region encoding the NG2 protein, approximately 80 bp downstream of the ATG start-site. The targeted primer was used in conjunction with random primers to amplify segments of genomic DNA that could regulate NG2 expression. The products isolated from the primary reaction were used as templates for a second PCR. In the secondary reaction, a nested primer, directed against the 5-prime untranslated region (UTR) of NG2, was used to confirm which isolates are derived from the regions upstream of NG2. Positive isolates are cloned and confirmed by DNA sequencing. Each sequence is BLAST searched (NCBI Blast) and subsequent primers designed to target and isolate 1584 base-pairs up stream of the NG2 translational start-site (5?-GGAGGGGAAAGTCAAAGGTTCACAGAAGACCCTC-3?; Operon Technologies). Following sequence confirmation and analysis, a series of NG2-promoter truncations (9 total; 3-prime and 5-prime mutants) evaluated promoter activity and isolated the regions required to regulate transcription stringently. Each truncation created by PCR mutagenesis was subcloned into pGL3-basic (promoterless mammalian expression-vector; Promega, Madison, WI) to regulate luciferase expression. Thus, pGL3 vectors report promoter activity according to luciferase activity. Consequently, COS and PC12 cells (ATCC, Bethesda, MD.) transfected with the recombinant promoter plasmid quantified transcriptional activation as a function of the luminescence produced by luciferase activity, in cell lysates. Using bright-lite (PerkinElmer Life Sciences) as the substrate, luminescence was measured (in a 96-well plate; NUNC) using a Packard Fusion plate analyzer (PerkinElmer) and normalized against control (promoterless) to evaluate NG2 promoter activity.  NG2-reporter maloney virus construct and production A mouse maloney retrovirus, constructed to express green fluorescent protein, tracked the proliferation and differentiation of NG2-expressing progenitors. Within the confirmed NG2 promoter sequence in a TOPO-PCR2.1 plasmid (Invitrogen), PCR mutagenesis inserted and NcoI endoneclease site at the NG2 ATG-start site, and the product was cloned into pBR322 (New England Biolabs). The mutant NcoI site permitted EGFP to be inserted into the translational start-site regulated by the NG2 promoter. DNA sequencing confirmed the reading-frame and placement of the chimeric EGFP reporter (NG2pEGFP), with respect to the NG2 promoter. After confirmation, a standard T4 Ligase (New England Biolabs) reaction inserted the excised NG2pEGFP expression-cassette (EcoRI and EcoRV digest from pBR322; the full-length 1580 base-pairs NG2 promoter with EGFP) into the pLAPSN retroviral vector (EcoRI and HpaI sites, Invitrogen). Positive colonies that harbor the recombinant plasmid were selected from ampicillin (Sigma) agar plates (50 ?g/ml), and the plasmid was amplified and isolated according to standard recombinant DNA techniques. Within pLAPSN, NG2pEGFP was inserted 3-prime of the LTR and in reverse orientation of the alkaline phosphatase (AP) gene. Therefore, the recombinant vector is designated pLrNpEAPSN. Similar methods were used to produce a cre-recombinase expression vector: pLNpCRESN. Phoenix-GP packaging cells (ATCC, Bathesda, Maryland) were used to package and produced recombinant viral particles. Briefly, pLrNpEAPSN was co-transfected with the VSVG envelope vector into Phoenix-GP cells. In DMEM (Gibco), Fugene 6 (Roche) was mixed at a 3:1 ration with the vector constructs (1 ?g each). The transfection cocktail was added to cells (60% confluent) with gentle shaking in 4.5 mls of serum free media (10 cm dish) supplemented with 1 ?g/ml Polybrene (Sigma). After 18-24 hours, cell media was supplemented with serum (10%), hygromycin (0.3 mg/ml, Invitrogen,) and G418 (30 ?g/ml, Omega Scientific, Irvine, CA.). Infectious virus particles harvested from the media are concentrated to 1×109 infectious particles per microliter (high-titer) via ultra-centrifugation (Beckman Ultracentrifuge, 24,000× g, 70.1 Ti rotor at 4°C for 2 hours, Palo Alto, CA) In vivo experiments required high-titer virus for injection (1 ?l), 1 mm rostral to the lesion, into the dorsal columns of adult mice, at 24 hours post-injury (PI) or 7 days PI. Seven and three days after each injection, spinal cord tissue was harvested from perfusion fixed mice for subsequent analysis (above). To evaluate the stringency of EGFP expression from the viral genome, and other molecular phenotypes confocal microscopy quantified and characterized the coincidence of EGFP with phenotypic markers and NG2 proteoglycan in immunologically stained tissue (detailed below). Spinal cord tissue was embedded in OTC media and frozen to be cyrosectioned. Coronal Spinal cord sections were mounted on permafrost slides (Fisher Scientific) and stored at -80°C for future use. In vitro infection of isolate cells used high-titer virus diluted into culture in growth media (approx 10,000 cells per 106 particles) with greater than 80% efficiency. Viral was insured by antibiotic selection with G418 (50?g/ml, a dose known to kill untransfected NPCs). Infection and recombination was monitored fluorescently and via RT-PCR. Cells were purified by EGFP expression, driven by CRE infection, by FACS (described below).  Immunofluorescence Molecular markers expression was evaluated by immunofluorescence to determine the cellular phenotype of virally labeled (EGFP) cells in SCI tissue. Primary antibodies previously shown to identify reactive astrocytes (glial fibrillary acidic protein, GFAP), immature and mature astrocytes (s100® polypeptide), immature oligodendrocytes (adenomatosis polyposis coli tumor suppresser gene, APC, CC1 clone), and EGFP are combined to elucidate cell phenotype. It is important to note the CC1 clone antibody is directed against the amino terminus of APC and is specific for glial cells (CalBiochem, La Jolla, CA), but CC1 does not cross react with neurons, as reported with antibodies directed against the c-terminus of APC. Combined in blocking buffer (TBS + 0.3%Triton +5% donkey serum), three compatible primary antibodies were applied to tissue and incubated overnight at 4°C. The optimum antibody concentration had been determined by a dilution series: guinea pig ?-GFAP (1:2500, Advanced Immunochemical, Long Beach, CA), rabbit ?-s100? (1:5,000, Swant, Switzerland) or mouse ?-s100? (1:1000, clone SB6, Abcam), mouse ?-CathD (1:200, Chemicon), rabbit ?-Caspase 3 (cleaved Caspase 3, Cell Signaling Technologies) mouse ?-APC (1:500, CalBiochem, La Jolla, CA), rabbit ?-NG2 (1:500, Chemicon, Inc.), and chicken or rabbit ?-EGFP (1:2500 or 1:500, respectively, Chemicon, Inc.). CSPG was detected by a monoclonal Anti-CSPG (Clone CS-56, Sigma Inc.) and mouse IgG was added to the primary block to reduce non-specific binding. Following the primary incubation, sections were rinsed twice in 0.1 M TBS pH 7.5 and once in blocking buffer. Secondary antibodies were applied in blocking buffer for 2 hours at room temperature, or overnight at 4°C: donkey ?-mouse IgG conjugated to CY3 (1:250; Jackson Labs West Grove, PA), ?-rabbit IgG conjugated to CY2 (1:250, Jackson Labs), donkey ?-guinea pig conjugated to CY5 (1:250, Jackson Labs), and donkey ?-chicken Alexa-488 (Invitrogen). Unbound antibody was removed by extensive washes with blocking buffer. All immunostains were verified by a “no primary” secondary antibody stain.  Cell and Molecular Phenotype Quantification Images of multiple-label immunofluorescence are collected and quantified using confocal microscopy (Bio-Rad Radiance, Carl Zeiss Inc., Thornwood, NY). Confocal z-stack images permit optically sectioned stains to be examined to determine which phenotypic markers (outlined above) co-localize with EGFP. The dorsal half of SCI tissue was sampled randomly to quantify the phenotypes of virally labeled cells. Antigen co-localization with EGFP was quantified in serial tissue sections, 1-in-6 series (2 mm rostral of the dorsal hemi-section), from 4 or 5 animals per time-point. Phenotypes were designated in accordance with antigen (detailed above) co-localization with the well-defined cytoplasm of an EGFP labeled-cell, followed through the z-axis. A minimum of 100 EGFP-cells was examined from 12 to 16 sections.  Quantitative real-time PCR Tissue sections (1-2 mm) rostral to a hemi-section lesion were dissected and snapped froze in liquid nitrogen. Trizol was used to isolate RNA from harvested tissues and cDNA was synthesized with Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) from 500 ng total RNA. Using random hexamer primers, reverse-transcription reactions incubated at 50°C for 90 minutes. Each sample was RNase H treated (30 min. at 37°C) followed by 30 min incubation at 65°C. Each template was used in subsequent real-time PCR reactions. Real-time PCR was performed with an ABI 7000 cycler. Sybr-Green PCR master mix (ABI) was used to monitor each amplicon and ROX served as the passive dye to control for pipette errors. Each primer set was validated and showed a single peak in the dissociation curves, and amplicon size was confirmed electrophoretically ( X. Wang and B. Seed, 2003 ). Relative changes in expression levels for each amplicon was normalized against GAPDH expression and each experimental group was compared against sham controls (5-7 animals each), and all reactions performed in triplicate and repeated 2 times. Stated changes were quantified as changes in threshold cycle (?Ct) compared to controls (??Ct) and reported as fold changes (2-??Ct).  Flow Cytometry After infection of 26Sor-cells (isolated from the spinal cords of ROSA:GFP mice), FACS was performed on a MoFlow cell cytometer (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) to separate GFP-positive from GFP negative cells. Dissociated cells were suspended in HBSS supplemented with EDTA (5 ?M) and Penn-strep (1X). Cell sorts were gated according to forward-scatter (FSC) versus fluorescent intensity (488 nm excitation). After isolation, 26Sor* cells were grown in growth media supplemented with pen-strep.  Data Analysis Differences among experimental groups were evaluated by a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). A non-paired students t-test evaluated differences in cell phenotypes between the 24-hours and 7-day group and real-time PCR data. For all statistical analyses, significance was accepted at a p value of 0.05 and lower for a one-tailed t-test.  Results Cycling NG2<sup>+</sup>-cells produce progeny that differentiate into multiple cell types Ectopic gene expression by promoter-specific retroviruses has been used for decades to trace cell lineages ( A. H. Brand and N. Perrimon, 1993 ; J. A. Golden et al., 1995 ; C. L. Cepko et al., 1998 ). Since cells that express NG2 proteoglycan divide after CNS insult, the regulatory sequence upstream of the NG2 protein-coding sequence was cloned (Genebank accession DQ241507; Supplemental data ) and used to construct a bi-cistronic retrovirus. The NG2-reporter virus was engineered such that the NG2-promoter sequence regulated the expression of green fluorescent protein (EGFP) while the generic viral (LTR) promoter regulated Alkaline Phosphatase (AP) expression. Therefore, EGFP expression marks cells that actively express NG2 proteoglycan and AP marks dividing cells generically, and cycling-NG2+ cells are analyzed (an EGFP+) and compared against other progenitors (EGFP-AP+) that respond to traumatic injury ( Figure 1A ). In vitro analysis showed 91% of NG2+-cells co-express GFP after infection ( Table 2 ). An intraspinal injection of high-titer NG2-reporter virus (?1×109 infection particles per milliliter) was injected rostral to a mid thoracic hemi-section of the spinal cord at 24 hours post-injury (PI) and the spinal cord tissue was harvested 3 days PI ( Figure 1B ). The specificity of the reporter virus was verified by co-localization of NG2-proteoglycan on EGFP+ cells and quantified as a percentage of EGFP labeled cells ( Figure 1C ). NG2 proteoglycan was co-localized on greater than 95% of EGFP labeled cells (>100 cells per animal, Figure 1E , n=4). Therefore, co-localization of NG2 immunofluorescence, with EGFP, demonstrated stringent regulation of EGFP expression by the cloned NG2-promoter. Since the NG2 reporter virus showed stringent regulation of EGFP expression, the NG2 promoter virus was used to investigate the fates adopted (molecular phenotype) by cycling NG2+-cells after SCI, in vivo. As shown previously, NG2-expression marked a large majority of dividing cells that respond to injury ( J. M. Levine and R. Reynolds, 1999 ). EGFP was expressed by 32.6% of virally labeled cells ( Figure 1D ). The proportion of EGFP+AP- versus AP+ co-localization with GFAP (glial lineage), Iba1 (microglial fate), and von Willebrand Factor (vWF; vascular fate; Figure 1F ) was quantified to determine the phenotype of NG2+- versus NG2- progenitors. Surprisingly, GFAP+/EGFP+ cells comprised 15.1 +/-2.4% of the cells transfected ( Figure 1G , 5 animals) by the reporter virus ( Figure 1G , green bars). Historically, NG2 proteoglycan is believed to mark a single population of cycling progenitors, and NG2+ progenitors are postulated to be uni-potent oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) that remyelinate axons after injury ( H. S. Keirstead et al., 1998 ). Previous studies have also correlated evidence of NG2 co-expression with GFAP+/BrdU+ cells ( J. M. Levine and A. Nishiyama, 1996 ; G. Alonso, 2005 ) to suggest NG2-progenitors produce GFAP+ cells. However, direct evidence that cycling NG2+-cells participate in remyelination or astroglial production (or both) has yet to be published ( A. Polito and R. Reynolds, 2005 ). Therefore, by labeling dividing cells 24 hours after SCI, our experiments demonstrate immunofluorescent co-localization of phenotypic markers for astrocytes (GFAP), microglia (Iba1) and pericytes (vWF) on separate EGFP+ cytoplasms. Since, the stringency of the virus demonstrated greater-than 95% co-incident EGFP-NG2 co-localization, and provides direct evidence that cycling cells with an active NG2 promoter express molecular marks of multiple cell types. Therefore, newborn cells with an active NG2 promoter are not fate-restricted OPCs, and thus, raise two possible conclusions: cycling NG2+-cells are multi-potent neural progenitors or NG2-proteoglycan labels several different uni-potent progenitors whereby NG2 proteoglycan would not mark a single lineage. Regardless, these results demonstrate that in the setting of injury NG2-expression is not limited to a population of fate-restricted OPCs. Vacuolated NG2 progeny contain myelin debris within endosomes Since EGFP expression labels the cell soma, the NG2-reporter virus was used to discern the morphologies of dividing cells that actively express NG2 and differentiate within the lesion epicenter. Unlike studies that used BrdU to label a mitotic nucleus and correlate NG2 immuno-reactivity, confocal microscopy was used to visualize EGFP+ somas to resolve individual cycling-cells that express NG2, which revealed a sub-population of progeny derived from cycling-NG2+ cells within the lesion epicenter. The progeny did not possess the branched multi-process morphology previously described for NG2-progeny in the spinal cord ( P. J. Horner et al., 2002 ). Further examination of the morpho-type showed NG2-progenitor derived progeny had large cell bodies and bore a single bifurcated process. The EGFP-expressing phenotype did not co-localize with traditional glial marker GFAP or APC ( Figure 2A ). The morphotype was abundant within the lesion epicenter and these s100?+EGFP+ progeny possessed large (5-7 ?m diameter, whole-cell examples of the morphology are highlighted by arrows, as seen via confocal z-plane series) vacuoles within the cell body ( Figure 2B ); the vacuolated morpho-type was localized within 1 mm of the hemi-section lesion and was not detected outside the lesion epicenter. However, these vacuolated cells did not express ED1 ( Figure 2C ) and could not be labeled by isolectin immunofluorescence. Instead, this novel population of NG2-progeny expressed s100? ( Figure 2C ), which has been shown to label alternate populations of committed astrocytes that do not express GFAP (GFAP-; ( B. E. Boyes et al., 1986 ; V. Vives et al., 2003 ; J. D. Jordan et al., 2007 ). Since these vacuolated NG2-progeny resided within the lesion, the tissue was examined to determine if the cells could be microglia. Within CNS, microglia ( W. J. Streit, 2000 ) are the only cells documented to contain large vacuoles, which are often filled with phagocytized debris ( M. A. Kahn et al., 1997 ; S. U. Kim and J. de Vellis, 2005 ). Regardless, s100? did not co-localize with ED1 (macrophage marker; Figure 2C ) or isolectins (data not shown) in these newly discovered NG2-progeny, and a secondary stain to label Iba1 confirmed that the s100?+EGFP+ cells comprise a population separate from the Iba1+/NG2+ cells ( Figure 2D and E , arrows). Therefore, we concluded that these vacuolated NG2+s100?+ cells are not mature microglia. Confounded by the presence of a vacuolated non-microglial cell, we examined the lesion epicenter with antibodies against denatured myelin (MBP 81-92) ( B. W. Gibson et al., 1984 ; R. E. Martenson, 1984 ), which labeled a sea of debris throughout the epicenter. Interestingly, myelin debris was observed within the vacuoles of the EGFP+S100?+ cells ( Figure 2F and G , arrows). Confocal optical-fractionation showed intensely labeled bundles of myelin debris contained within vacuoles circumscribed by EGFP+ cell bodies ( Figure 2G , arrows). Whereas non-vacuolated EGFP+s100?+ cells did not co-localize with MBP 81-92 rostral to the lesion site nor did the cells possess large intracellular vacuoles ( Figure 2H ). Recently, a published astrocyte-transcriptome showed components of the endocytosis pathway (draper/Megf10 and Mertk) to be up regulated in astrocyte populations ( J. D. Cahoy et al., 2008 ). Based on these findings, Cahoy and colleagues hypothesized that astrocytes are professional phagocytes. To determine if the vacuolated NG2-progeny possessed characters of phagocytes, tissue was stained with antibodies against the endosome/lysosome protein capthepsin-D (CathD) ( B. Westley and H. Rochefort, 1980 ) and denatured myelin basic protein (dMBP). As revealed by confocal microscopy, EGFP+ NG2-progeny do possess vacuoles decorated with CathD ( Figure 2I , cyan arrows). The CathD+ structures are present on distinct cytoplasmic vacuoles that contain dMBP, and CathD is seen on processes surrounding a large dMBP structure ( Figure 2J , *). Therefore, EGFP+ NG2-progeny differentiate into a class of phagocyte that is an NG2+s100?+ astrocytes. Interestingly, alternate birth dating-studies (by virus injection at 3 and 7-days PI) did not label a population of cells with the phagocytic morphotype. In contrast, the population of phagocytic-cells was prominent around the lesion epicenter when labeled 24-hours PI. CNS insults are known to induce reactive astrocytes, which provide trophic support to surrounding cells and facilitate recovery from traumatic injury ( L. F. Eng and R. S. Ghirnikar, 1994 ; M. Aschner, 1998 ). Since the phagocytic astrocytes were not seen within the SCI lesion 14-days PI, the life span of the EGFP+s100?+ population was examined to determine whether these NG2-progeny are transient. Furthermore, the s100?+-phagocyte was not a phenotype adopted by NG2+-progeny born 3- and 7-days PI (unpublished observations). Therefore, SCI mice injected with the NG2-reporter virus (24-hrs PI) was killed at 3 and 7-days PI to quantify the relative number of apoptotic s100?+-phagocytes. SCI tissue was stained immunofluorescently to co-localize activated (cleaved) Caspase-3 (Casp3, apoptotic marker) with s100?+ NG2+-progeny. EGFP+s100?+Casp3+ co-localization was quantified and used to determine the percentage of apoptotic-cells at 3-days versus 7-days PI ( Figure 3A and B ). In general, s100?+ NG2+-progeny born 24 hours PI show a significant increase (p=0.027) in activated Casp3 between 3 and 7-days PI. The percentage of apoptotic EGFP+s100?+-cells increased from 3.6% +/-0.46 to 9.2% +/-1.87 ( Figure 3C ; N=3 and 4, respectively), in conjunction with an overall increase in apoptotic cells in the same time-course, from 16.77% +/-3.6 to 36.97% +/-4.4 Casp3+ ( Figure 3C ; p=0.012, N=4). The progressive increase (from 3- to 7-days) in cells marked by Casp3+ indicates that the s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours PI is a transient population and short-lived in the post-injury environment. However, the interpretation that s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours are transient is confounded by the lack of change observed in the EGFP+s100?+-cells between 3 and 7-days PI. Despite the increased number of cells with an activated Caspase 3, the EGFP+s100?+-population is sustained. Therefore, a single population of population of labeled cells could proliferate and persist within the lesion. NG2-progenitor differentiation profiles shift temporally as SCI repair progresses SCI tissue is known to undergo temporal-spatial changes in cell replacement as recovery progresses after injury ( D. Wu et al., 2005 ; L. J. Zai and J. R. Wrathall, 2005 ; J. M. Lytle and J. R. Wrathall, 2007 ). As such, the micro-environmental changes that evolve post-injury define a progressive stem cell niche. Since the NG2 reporter-virus showed cycling NG2-cells produce multiple cell types, we wanted to determine whether progeny fates, as a population, shift as the post-injury niche recovers/regenerates. Therefore, the differentiation profile of progeny derived from NG2-progenitors born at 24-hours and 7-days PI was quantified at 3 and 14-day PI, respectively. Dividing cells were birth-dated with the NG2-reporter virus and the molecular phenotype was determined to discern whether the differentiation profiles shift with birth date and correlate with temporal changes in a post-traumatic niche. Therefore, temporal-spatial changes in the stem cell niche would manifest changes in progenitor differentiation profiles as the niche recovers/regenerates PI, and thus define a progressive niche. The temporal shift in NG2-progenitor differentiation was examined as a function of phenotype among cycling-cells labeled by the NG2-virus, for cells born 24-hours PI (analyzed 3-days PI) and cells born 7-days PI (analyzed 14-days PI, Figure 4A ). Confocal microscopy was used to evaluate GFAP and APC expression in EGFP+-cells born 24 hrs versus 7-days PI. Relative-quantification of the molecular phenotypes show the majority of cycling NG2+-cells born 24 hours PI adopt an astroglial fate 3 days PI (EGFP+GFAP+ expression, 53.3%, Figure 4B ). Confocal micrographs of the lesion epicenter show distinct co-localization of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG, reactive profile) on the surface of GFAP+ EGFP+-cells derived from cycling NG2+-cells ( Figure 4C ). Therefore, these newborn NG2-cells may participate in gliotic scarring within the lesion. The reactive-profiles are seen within the lesion epi-center among intense GFAP immunofluorescence ( Figure 4D ), which is the hallmark of gliosis and scarring ( G. M. Smith et al., 1986 ). Therefore, the majority of NG2-progenitors born acutely (24 hours) after injury adopt a reactive fate and participate in the formation of the gliosis thought to prevent continued tissue damage after traumatic injury ( P. J. Reier and J. D. Houle, 1988 ; J. Silver and J. H. Miller, 2004 ). By contrast, a significant shift in phenotype is seen in NG2+-progenitors cycling 7-days PI. While acutely born cells adopt a reactive phenotype, NG2-progeny with a 7-day PI birth-date do not display a reactive profile upon differentiation. Instead, the population dynamic of the progeny fates (derived from progenitor) undergoes a shift. Among NG2-progeny born 7-days PI, the progeny possess characters of early immature oligodendrocytes and express molecular markers of cells destined for an oligodendrocyte lineage (52.6%, APC+) versus the astroglial lineage (33%, GFAP+, Figure 4B ). When examined at 14-days PI, confocal micrographs of progeny derived from NG2+-progenitors born 7-days PI show these cells co-express MBP ( Figure 4E ). When counterstained with antibodies against neurofilaments (NF), EGFP+MBP+ profiles are shown to encircle NF+ structures in the dorsal columns of hemi-sected spinal cords ( Figure 4E and F , arrows). The presence of MBP on EGFP+ processes demonstrates that progeny of NG2-progenitors are able to produce oligodendrocytes, which have the potential to participate in remyelination; however, further studies that examine myelin profiles are needed to provide unequivocal evidence that NG2-progeny remyelinate axons after injury. Regardless, the temporal shift in adopted fates demonstrates that NG2+-progenitors produce multiple cell types after injury. Furthermore, the fates adopted by endogenous cycling NG2+-cells are influenced by temporal and spatial cues within the progressive niche, and thus, the product of the progeny is contingent upon the nurturing derived from the post-injury niche. Instructive cues with the post-injury niche evolve to direct progenitor differentiation Behavioral recovery is known to be minimal within the first 7 days after SCI. However, in the second and third weeks (7 days to 21 days PI) animals show the greatest changes in behavioral recovery ( M. Ma et al., 2001 ). Since we observed a temporal shift in the differentiation profiles of cycling endogenous NG2+-progenitors that parallels the progression in behavioral recovery seen in SCI animals, we hypothesized that instructive cues within the niche must evolve temporally to promote astrocyte and oligodendrocyte differentiation post-injury. Therefore, we examined the transcriptional profile of molecules that direct BMP signaling and oligogenesis in the SCI niche. After exsanguinations, mRNA was isolated from a 1mm block of tissue (rostral edge of the lesion and T9 from controls). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to examine the transcriptional profile of each gene-set at 24-hours PI and 7-days PI (relative to GAPDH expression) to determine if changes in the molecular cues precede concomitant temporal shifts in progeny-fates after SCI. The antagonistic action of BMP and noggin control glial differentiation (astrocytic versus oligodendrocytic fate, respectively) throughout development and noggin maintains stemness within neurogenic regions of the adult brain ( L. Lillien and H. Raphael, 2000 ; D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ). Interestingly, noggin expression is only slightly diminished at 24 hours PI and increased at 7-days PI, but noggin expression does not differ significantly from levels seen within the intact spinal cord. By contrast, BMP4 expression is increased 2.57 fold ( Figure 5A , p<0.05) at 24-hours PI and 8.9 fold 7-days PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). BMPs are thought to regulate stemness by regulating the expression of inhibitors of differentiation and factors that promote progenitor self-renewal ( A. Alvarez-Buylla and D. A. Lim, 2004 ). Since the up-regulation of BMP4 persisted between 24-hours and 7-days PI ( Figure 5A ; †††, p<0.0001), we quantified the secondary effects on the expression profile of Inhibitors of DNA binding/differentiation (Id transcription factors) and sonic hedgehog (Shh, which promotes self-renewal). Significant genomic shifts are observed for both Id1 and Id3. Id1 is elevated 4.1 fold (p<0.05) 24-hrs PI and returns to control levels by 7d PI, whereas Id3 does not become elevated until 7d PI (3.6 fold, p<0.05). Changes in Id2 expression are modest (1.6 fold at 24 hours PI) and do not vary significantly from controls, and Shh expression is reduced to 0.23 fold at 7d PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). Since Ids are known to affect stem cell fate ( Q. L. Ying et al., 2003 ), the expression profile suggests a possible mechanism for antagonism between Id1, Id3, and Shh expression. The orchestrated actions of Ids and Shh highlight a temporal shift for instructive-cues within the niche that promote self-renewal toward cues that promote terminal-differentiation of progenitors into astrocytes and oligodendrocytes to facilitate recovery ( S. F. Tzeng et al., 1999 ). The progression of the instructive niche from a pro-proliferation to pro-differentiation between 24 hrs and 7-days PI, respectively, indicate a potential niche progression to explain the observed shift in the fate of NG2+-progeny toward oligodendrocyte production. Previous studies have demonstrated how NG2-progenitors that express PDGF? receptor produce oligodendrocytes and that NG2-cells must divide and differentiate to facilitate recovery after demyelination lesions ( H. S. Keirstead and W. F. Blakemore, 1999 ; D. W. Hampton et al., 2004 ). In addition, the expression and sub-cellular localization of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (Olig1 and Olig2) are known to regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation to meet repair demands ( H. A. Arnett et al., 2004 ). Therefore, the expression profile of Nkx2.2, Olig1, Olig2 and PDGF? was evaluated to determine whether an increase in pro-oligodendrocyte cues accompanied the observed changes in differentiation cues (Id and Shh) within the instructive niche. Real-time PCR experiments revealed reduced Olig1 (0.39 fold, p<0.01) and PDGF? (0.66 fold, p<0.05) expression in the acute PI niche (24 hours PI, Figure 5B ). Expression levels recovered and by 7-days PI, Olig1 and PDGF? expression mirrored expression levels with the intact niche (control). However, Nkx2.2 and Olig2 expression did not change significantly within the post-injury niche at 24-hours or 7-days PI. Combined, the observed changes in cues that affect proliferation and/or differentiation highlight changes that evolve within the progressive niche to orchestrate oligodendrocyte differentiation PI, in accord with the state of repair. BMP signals modulate gliogenesis in the post-injury niche Since BMP4 transcription showed persistent up-regulation after injury, and since other studies have shown that BMP signaling maintains the SVZ stem cell niche ( D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ), experiments were designed to examine how BMP signals affect the post-injury niche. In order to augment signaling, BMP4 (50 ?g/ml) was injected into the 24-hours PI lesion to supplement BMP4 concentrations and mimic the 7-days PI BMP4 transcriptional-state. In the 7-days PI lesion, BMP signaling was antagonized by a single injection of noggin (50 ?g/ml). Therefore, BMP4 protein would be up regulated early and suppressed 7-days PI, to oppose the post-injury dynamics (for BMP4) shown by quantitative-PCR. To measure how BMP signals remodel the post-injury niche, the total number of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes was quantified in SCI tissue at 24-hours PI versus 7-days PI with BMP4 and noggin supplementation. BMP4 injection into the SCI lesion 24-hours PI significantly reduced the number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche (lesion epicenter, 2 mm rostral, and 2mm caudal). Compared to controls, BMP4 injected animals had a 10% reduction in astrogliogenesis ( Figure 5C : 2.189 cells vs. 2.435 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.021, N=4), and BMP4 reduced GFAP+ cells at 24-hours PI below 7-days PI controls ( Figure 5C : p=0.037; N=4). Noggin, however, increased the total number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche at 7-days PI ( Figure 5C : 2.516 cells vs. 2.337 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.032, N=4). An examination of the oligodendrocyte population showed BMP4 had similar effects on the number of APC+ cells within the post-injury niche. In control animals, the pool of oligodendroctyes was diminished 21% between 24-hours and 7-days PI (1.171 cells to 0.929 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.02, N=4), which corroborates previously reported data ( D. M. McTigue et al., 2001 ). Similarly, APC+ populations are reduced 17% in animals intra-spinally injected with BMP4 at 24-hours PI ( Figure 5C : 0.970 cells vs. 1.171 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.046, N=4), which is equivalent to the APC+ population-numbers at 7-days PI. In contrast to its effect on GFAP+ cells, Noggin reduced the number of APC+ cells present in post-injury tissue at 7-days ( Figure 5C : p=0.0088, N=4). Since glial numbers showed a consistent reduction in BMP injected animals, cell proliferation was quantified to ensure that the observed reduction in gliogenesis was not a secondary side effect of reduced cell replacement (via proliferation). All animals received intra-peritoneal injections of BrdU (50 ?g/kg) in conjunction with the intra-spinal injections of BMP4 or Noggin. BrdU-immunoreactivity was quantified within the lesion epicenter, and 2mm rostral and caudal (as with GFAP and APC stereology). In each experimental group, proliferation was consistent and did not vary from controls at 24-hours or 7-days PI ( Figure 5E ). Therefore, the changes in gliogenesis were due to BMP4's ability to affect differentiation and create shifts in cell populations rather than reduce cell numbers, overall, by reducing cell proliferation. BMP signals modulate NG2-progenitor differentiation in the post-injury niche The observed changes in glial populations, within the progressive niche, suggest that BMPs could serve to direct progenitor differentiation to facilitate lesion-repair. Therefore, we performed transplantation experiments to determine if BMP4 supplements induce NG2-progenitors to adopt a differentiation profile similar to naïve cells transplanted 7-days PI. A CRE-recombinase expression retroviral vector, constructed with the NG2-promoter, was used to infect CNS progenitors isolated from adult 129-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm2Sho/J mice (ROSA:GFP: 26Sor-cells) spinal cords. According to the paradigm, progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan will express CRE and induce GFP to be expressed in cells with an active NG2-promoter ( Figure 6A ), and thus, produce a lineage of CNS derived NG2-progenitors labeled by EGFP for transplantation ( Table 2 .). After viral infection with the NG2-CRE virus, the proportion of CNS progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan was determined by activated fluorescence and subsequently used to separate GFP-positive and negative 26Sor-progenitors. After 2 weeks of G418-selection and amplification, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis showed approximately 28.5% GFP-positive cells (26Sor*-cells, Figure 6B ), and mRNA analysis by RT-PCR showed CRE and NG2 expression in GFP+-cells ( Figure 6C ). After expansion in culture, 26Sor* cultures maintained GFP expression ( Figure 6D ). 26Sor*-cells displayed the morphology and expressed phenotypic markers of glia (GFAP), neurons (TuJ1, Map2), and oligodendroglia (CNPase) when exposed to differentiation media ( Figure 6E ). Therefore, as seen with the NG2-reporter virus in SCI, NG2-proteoglycan was expressed by progenitors with the potential to produce multiple cell types and morphologies and corroborate multiple cell-types observed in vivo with the NG2-reporter virus (above). Given the potential to produce a diverse array of progeny, akin to endogenous cycling NG2+-cells, we quantified the phenotypic profile adopted by 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours versus 7-days PI. Whereas experiments discussed above ( Figure 1 ) quantified virus-labeled cycling NG2+-cells of a non-specific origin, direct transplantation of 26Sor*-cells into the lesion epicenter enables niche-effects on an NG2-progenitor, of a known differentiation potential and origin to be examined directly. Cells transplanted at 24-hours PI had no fate bias, and an equal percentage of transplanted cells expressed GFAP (16.1% +/-4.8) versus APC (13.3% +/-3.9: Figure 6G . N=4 and 3, n=508). However, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI displayed a surprising differentiation profile. Contrary to virally labeled cycling NG2+-cells, which showed a shift toward an APC+ phenotype in cells born 7-days PI, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI had a higher percentage of GFAP+-cells (25.6% +/-0.66) compared to APC+-cells (18.5% +/-0.27) 14-days after transplantation ( Figure 6G . p=0.0003; N=3, n=532). Since BMP ligands induced changes in the cellular composition of the post-injury niche ( Figure 5c ), in addition to the increase in BMP4 transcription (seen in Figure 4B ) and coincident shift in the differentiation profile of progenitors born after SCI ( Figure 5A ), we hypothesized that BMP ligands (administered at the time of transplantation) would shift the differentiation profiles of transplanted 26Sor*-cells. Specifically, we hypothesized that BMP4 at 24-hours PI would induce a profile similar to naïve 7-day transplants. Indeed, despite the split in phenotype, BMP4 induced 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours PI ( Figure 6H and I ) to adopt a differentiation profile that mimicked naïve 7-days PI transplants, instead of 24-hours PI naïve transplants ( Figure 6J and K ). Compared to the unbiased phenotype split among 24-hours PI transplants, BMP4 significantly increased the percentage of GFAP+-cells (31.3% +/-3.4) versus APC+-cells (19.3% +/-0.61; Figure 6G : p=0.13, N=3, n=692). Together, these data demonstrate that BMP4 has an appreciable ability to remodel the post-injury stem cell niche, and, in the process, BMP4 is able to modulate the fate choice of NG2-expressing progenitors.  Results Cycling NG2<sup>+</sup>-cells produce progeny that differentiate into multiple cell types Ectopic gene expression by promoter-specific retroviruses has been used for decades to trace cell lineages ( A. H. Brand and N. Perrimon, 1993 ; J. A. Golden et al., 1995 ; C. L. Cepko et al., 1998 ). Since cells that express NG2 proteoglycan divide after CNS insult, the regulatory sequence upstream of the NG2 protein-coding sequence was cloned (Genebank accession DQ241507; Supplemental data ) and used to construct a bi-cistronic retrovirus. The NG2-reporter virus was engineered such that the NG2-promoter sequence regulated the expression of green fluorescent protein (EGFP) while the generic viral (LTR) promoter regulated Alkaline Phosphatase (AP) expression. Therefore, EGFP expression marks cells that actively express NG2 proteoglycan and AP marks dividing cells generically, and cycling-NG2+ cells are analyzed (an EGFP+) and compared against other progenitors (EGFP-AP+) that respond to traumatic injury ( Figure 1A ). In vitro analysis showed 91% of NG2+-cells co-express GFP after infection ( Table 2 ). An intraspinal injection of high-titer NG2-reporter virus (?1×109 infection particles per milliliter) was injected rostral to a mid thoracic hemi-section of the spinal cord at 24 hours post-injury (PI) and the spinal cord tissue was harvested 3 days PI ( Figure 1B ). The specificity of the reporter virus was verified by co-localization of NG2-proteoglycan on EGFP+ cells and quantified as a percentage of EGFP labeled cells ( Figure 1C ). NG2 proteoglycan was co-localized on greater than 95% of EGFP labeled cells (>100 cells per animal, Figure 1E , n=4). Therefore, co-localization of NG2 immunofluorescence, with EGFP, demonstrated stringent regulation of EGFP expression by the cloned NG2-promoter. Since the NG2 reporter virus showed stringent regulation of EGFP expression, the NG2 promoter virus was used to investigate the fates adopted (molecular phenotype) by cycling NG2+-cells after SCI, in vivo. As shown previously, NG2-expression marked a large majority of dividing cells that respond to injury ( J. M. Levine and R. Reynolds, 1999 ). EGFP was expressed by 32.6% of virally labeled cells ( Figure 1D ). The proportion of EGFP+AP- versus AP+ co-localization with GFAP (glial lineage), Iba1 (microglial fate), and von Willebrand Factor (vWF; vascular fate; Figure 1F ) was quantified to determine the phenotype of NG2+- versus NG2- progenitors. Surprisingly, GFAP+/EGFP+ cells comprised 15.1 +/-2.4% of the cells transfected ( Figure 1G , 5 animals) by the reporter virus ( Figure 1G , green bars). Historically, NG2 proteoglycan is believed to mark a single population of cycling progenitors, and NG2+ progenitors are postulated to be uni-potent oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) that remyelinate axons after injury ( H. S. Keirstead et al., 1998 ). Previous studies have also correlated evidence of NG2 co-expression with GFAP+/BrdU+ cells ( J. M. Levine and A. Nishiyama, 1996 ; G. Alonso, 2005 ) to suggest NG2-progenitors produce GFAP+ cells. However, direct evidence that cycling NG2+-cells participate in remyelination or astroglial production (or both) has yet to be published ( A. Polito and R. Reynolds, 2005 ). Therefore, by labeling dividing cells 24 hours after SCI, our experiments demonstrate immunofluorescent co-localization of phenotypic markers for astrocytes (GFAP), microglia (Iba1) and pericytes (vWF) on separate EGFP+ cytoplasms. Since, the stringency of the virus demonstrated greater-than 95% co-incident EGFP-NG2 co-localization, and provides direct evidence that cycling cells with an active NG2 promoter express molecular marks of multiple cell types. Therefore, newborn cells with an active NG2 promoter are not fate-restricted OPCs, and thus, raise two possible conclusions: cycling NG2+-cells are multi-potent neural progenitors or NG2-proteoglycan labels several different uni-potent progenitors whereby NG2 proteoglycan would not mark a single lineage. Regardless, these results demonstrate that in the setting of injury NG2-expression is not limited to a population of fate-restricted OPCs. Vacuolated NG2 progeny contain myelin debris within endosomes Since EGFP expression labels the cell soma, the NG2-reporter virus was used to discern the morphologies of dividing cells that actively express NG2 and differentiate within the lesion epicenter. Unlike studies that used BrdU to label a mitotic nucleus and correlate NG2 immuno-reactivity, confocal microscopy was used to visualize EGFP+ somas to resolve individual cycling-cells that express NG2, which revealed a sub-population of progeny derived from cycling-NG2+ cells within the lesion epicenter. The progeny did not possess the branched multi-process morphology previously described for NG2-progeny in the spinal cord ( P. J. Horner et al., 2002 ). Further examination of the morpho-type showed NG2-progenitor derived progeny had large cell bodies and bore a single bifurcated process. The EGFP-expressing phenotype did not co-localize with traditional glial marker GFAP or APC ( Figure 2A ). The morphotype was abundant within the lesion epicenter and these s100?+EGFP+ progeny possessed large (5-7 ?m diameter, whole-cell examples of the morphology are highlighted by arrows, as seen via confocal z-plane series) vacuoles within the cell body ( Figure 2B ); the vacuolated morpho-type was localized within 1 mm of the hemi-section lesion and was not detected outside the lesion epicenter. However, these vacuolated cells did not express ED1 ( Figure 2C ) and could not be labeled by isolectin immunofluorescence. Instead, this novel population of NG2-progeny expressed s100? ( Figure 2C ), which has been shown to label alternate populations of committed astrocytes that do not express GFAP (GFAP-; ( B. E. Boyes et al., 1986 ; V. Vives et al., 2003 ; J. D. Jordan et al., 2007 ). Since these vacuolated NG2-progeny resided within the lesion, the tissue was examined to determine if the cells could be microglia. Within CNS, microglia ( W. J. Streit, 2000 ) are the only cells documented to contain large vacuoles, which are often filled with phagocytized debris ( M. A. Kahn et al., 1997 ; S. U. Kim and J. de Vellis, 2005 ). Regardless, s100? did not co-localize with ED1 (macrophage marker; Figure 2C ) or isolectins (data not shown) in these newly discovered NG2-progeny, and a secondary stain to label Iba1 confirmed that the s100?+EGFP+ cells comprise a population separate from the Iba1+/NG2+ cells ( Figure 2D and E , arrows). Therefore, we concluded that these vacuolated NG2+s100?+ cells are not mature microglia. Confounded by the presence of a vacuolated non-microglial cell, we examined the lesion epicenter with antibodies against denatured myelin (MBP 81-92) ( B. W. Gibson et al., 1984 ; R. E. Martenson, 1984 ), which labeled a sea of debris throughout the epicenter. Interestingly, myelin debris was observed within the vacuoles of the EGFP+S100?+ cells ( Figure 2F and G , arrows). Confocal optical-fractionation showed intensely labeled bundles of myelin debris contained within vacuoles circumscribed by EGFP+ cell bodies ( Figure 2G , arrows). Whereas non-vacuolated EGFP+s100?+ cells did not co-localize with MBP 81-92 rostral to the lesion site nor did the cells possess large intracellular vacuoles ( Figure 2H ). Recently, a published astrocyte-transcriptome showed components of the endocytosis pathway (draper/Megf10 and Mertk) to be up regulated in astrocyte populations ( J. D. Cahoy et al., 2008 ). Based on these findings, Cahoy and colleagues hypothesized that astrocytes are professional phagocytes. To determine if the vacuolated NG2-progeny possessed characters of phagocytes, tissue was stained with antibodies against the endosome/lysosome protein capthepsin-D (CathD) ( B. Westley and H. Rochefort, 1980 ) and denatured myelin basic protein (dMBP). As revealed by confocal microscopy, EGFP+ NG2-progeny do possess vacuoles decorated with CathD ( Figure 2I , cyan arrows). The CathD+ structures are present on distinct cytoplasmic vacuoles that contain dMBP, and CathD is seen on processes surrounding a large dMBP structure ( Figure 2J , *). Therefore, EGFP+ NG2-progeny differentiate into a class of phagocyte that is an NG2+s100?+ astrocytes. Interestingly, alternate birth dating-studies (by virus injection at 3 and 7-days PI) did not label a population of cells with the phagocytic morphotype. In contrast, the population of phagocytic-cells was prominent around the lesion epicenter when labeled 24-hours PI. CNS insults are known to induce reactive astrocytes, which provide trophic support to surrounding cells and facilitate recovery from traumatic injury ( L. F. Eng and R. S. Ghirnikar, 1994 ; M. Aschner, 1998 ). Since the phagocytic astrocytes were not seen within the SCI lesion 14-days PI, the life span of the EGFP+s100?+ population was examined to determine whether these NG2-progeny are transient. Furthermore, the s100?+-phagocyte was not a phenotype adopted by NG2+-progeny born 3- and 7-days PI (unpublished observations). Therefore, SCI mice injected with the NG2-reporter virus (24-hrs PI) was killed at 3 and 7-days PI to quantify the relative number of apoptotic s100?+-phagocytes. SCI tissue was stained immunofluorescently to co-localize activated (cleaved) Caspase-3 (Casp3, apoptotic marker) with s100?+ NG2+-progeny. EGFP+s100?+Casp3+ co-localization was quantified and used to determine the percentage of apoptotic-cells at 3-days versus 7-days PI ( Figure 3A and B ). In general, s100?+ NG2+-progeny born 24 hours PI show a significant increase (p=0.027) in activated Casp3 between 3 and 7-days PI. The percentage of apoptotic EGFP+s100?+-cells increased from 3.6% +/-0.46 to 9.2% +/-1.87 ( Figure 3C ; N=3 and 4, respectively), in conjunction with an overall increase in apoptotic cells in the same time-course, from 16.77% +/-3.6 to 36.97% +/-4.4 Casp3+ ( Figure 3C ; p=0.012, N=4). The progressive increase (from 3- to 7-days) in cells marked by Casp3+ indicates that the s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours PI is a transient population and short-lived in the post-injury environment. However, the interpretation that s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours are transient is confounded by the lack of change observed in the EGFP+s100?+-cells between 3 and 7-days PI. Despite the increased number of cells with an activated Caspase 3, the EGFP+s100?+-population is sustained. Therefore, a single population of population of labeled cells could proliferate and persist within the lesion. NG2-progenitor differentiation profiles shift temporally as SCI repair progresses SCI tissue is known to undergo temporal-spatial changes in cell replacement as recovery progresses after injury ( D. Wu et al., 2005 ; L. J. Zai and J. R. Wrathall, 2005 ; J. M. Lytle and J. R. Wrathall, 2007 ). As such, the micro-environmental changes that evolve post-injury define a progressive stem cell niche. Since the NG2 reporter-virus showed cycling NG2-cells produce multiple cell types, we wanted to determine whether progeny fates, as a population, shift as the post-injury niche recovers/regenerates. Therefore, the differentiation profile of progeny derived from NG2-progenitors born at 24-hours and 7-days PI was quantified at 3 and 14-day PI, respectively. Dividing cells were birth-dated with the NG2-reporter virus and the molecular phenotype was determined to discern whether the differentiation profiles shift with birth date and correlate with temporal changes in a post-traumatic niche. Therefore, temporal-spatial changes in the stem cell niche would manifest changes in progenitor differentiation profiles as the niche recovers/regenerates PI, and thus define a progressive niche. The temporal shift in NG2-progenitor differentiation was examined as a function of phenotype among cycling-cells labeled by the NG2-virus, for cells born 24-hours PI (analyzed 3-days PI) and cells born 7-days PI (analyzed 14-days PI, Figure 4A ). Confocal microscopy was used to evaluate GFAP and APC expression in EGFP+-cells born 24 hrs versus 7-days PI. Relative-quantification of the molecular phenotypes show the majority of cycling NG2+-cells born 24 hours PI adopt an astroglial fate 3 days PI (EGFP+GFAP+ expression, 53.3%, Figure 4B ). Confocal micrographs of the lesion epicenter show distinct co-localization of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG, reactive profile) on the surface of GFAP+ EGFP+-cells derived from cycling NG2+-cells ( Figure 4C ). Therefore, these newborn NG2-cells may participate in gliotic scarring within the lesion. The reactive-profiles are seen within the lesion epi-center among intense GFAP immunofluorescence ( Figure 4D ), which is the hallmark of gliosis and scarring ( G. M. Smith et al., 1986 ). Therefore, the majority of NG2-progenitors born acutely (24 hours) after injury adopt a reactive fate and participate in the formation of the gliosis thought to prevent continued tissue damage after traumatic injury ( P. J. Reier and J. D. Houle, 1988 ; J. Silver and J. H. Miller, 2004 ). By contrast, a significant shift in phenotype is seen in NG2+-progenitors cycling 7-days PI. While acutely born cells adopt a reactive phenotype, NG2-progeny with a 7-day PI birth-date do not display a reactive profile upon differentiation. Instead, the population dynamic of the progeny fates (derived from progenitor) undergoes a shift. Among NG2-progeny born 7-days PI, the progeny possess characters of early immature oligodendrocytes and express molecular markers of cells destined for an oligodendrocyte lineage (52.6%, APC+) versus the astroglial lineage (33%, GFAP+, Figure 4B ). When examined at 14-days PI, confocal micrographs of progeny derived from NG2+-progenitors born 7-days PI show these cells co-express MBP ( Figure 4E ). When counterstained with antibodies against neurofilaments (NF), EGFP+MBP+ profiles are shown to encircle NF+ structures in the dorsal columns of hemi-sected spinal cords ( Figure 4E and F , arrows). The presence of MBP on EGFP+ processes demonstrates that progeny of NG2-progenitors are able to produce oligodendrocytes, which have the potential to participate in remyelination; however, further studies that examine myelin profiles are needed to provide unequivocal evidence that NG2-progeny remyelinate axons after injury. Regardless, the temporal shift in adopted fates demonstrates that NG2+-progenitors produce multiple cell types after injury. Furthermore, the fates adopted by endogenous cycling NG2+-cells are influenced by temporal and spatial cues within the progressive niche, and thus, the product of the progeny is contingent upon the nurturing derived from the post-injury niche. Instructive cues with the post-injury niche evolve to direct progenitor differentiation Behavioral recovery is known to be minimal within the first 7 days after SCI. However, in the second and third weeks (7 days to 21 days PI) animals show the greatest changes in behavioral recovery ( M. Ma et al., 2001 ). Since we observed a temporal shift in the differentiation profiles of cycling endogenous NG2+-progenitors that parallels the progression in behavioral recovery seen in SCI animals, we hypothesized that instructive cues within the niche must evolve temporally to promote astrocyte and oligodendrocyte differentiation post-injury. Therefore, we examined the transcriptional profile of molecules that direct BMP signaling and oligogenesis in the SCI niche. After exsanguinations, mRNA was isolated from a 1mm block of tissue (rostral edge of the lesion and T9 from controls). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to examine the transcriptional profile of each gene-set at 24-hours PI and 7-days PI (relative to GAPDH expression) to determine if changes in the molecular cues precede concomitant temporal shifts in progeny-fates after SCI. The antagonistic action of BMP and noggin control glial differentiation (astrocytic versus oligodendrocytic fate, respectively) throughout development and noggin maintains stemness within neurogenic regions of the adult brain ( L. Lillien and H. Raphael, 2000 ; D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ). Interestingly, noggin expression is only slightly diminished at 24 hours PI and increased at 7-days PI, but noggin expression does not differ significantly from levels seen within the intact spinal cord. By contrast, BMP4 expression is increased 2.57 fold ( Figure 5A , p<0.05) at 24-hours PI and 8.9 fold 7-days PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). BMPs are thought to regulate stemness by regulating the expression of inhibitors of differentiation and factors that promote progenitor self-renewal ( A. Alvarez-Buylla and D. A. Lim, 2004 ). Since the up-regulation of BMP4 persisted between 24-hours and 7-days PI ( Figure 5A ; †††, p<0.0001), we quantified the secondary effects on the expression profile of Inhibitors of DNA binding/differentiation (Id transcription factors) and sonic hedgehog (Shh, which promotes self-renewal). Significant genomic shifts are observed for both Id1 and Id3. Id1 is elevated 4.1 fold (p<0.05) 24-hrs PI and returns to control levels by 7d PI, whereas Id3 does not become elevated until 7d PI (3.6 fold, p<0.05). Changes in Id2 expression are modest (1.6 fold at 24 hours PI) and do not vary significantly from controls, and Shh expression is reduced to 0.23 fold at 7d PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). Since Ids are known to affect stem cell fate ( Q. L. Ying et al., 2003 ), the expression profile suggests a possible mechanism for antagonism between Id1, Id3, and Shh expression. The orchestrated actions of Ids and Shh highlight a temporal shift for instructive-cues within the niche that promote self-renewal toward cues that promote terminal-differentiation of progenitors into astrocytes and oligodendrocytes to facilitate recovery ( S. F. Tzeng et al., 1999 ). The progression of the instructive niche from a pro-proliferation to pro-differentiation between 24 hrs and 7-days PI, respectively, indicate a potential niche progression to explain the observed shift in the fate of NG2+-progeny toward oligodendrocyte production. Previous studies have demonstrated how NG2-progenitors that express PDGF? receptor produce oligodendrocytes and that NG2-cells must divide and differentiate to facilitate recovery after demyelination lesions ( H. S. Keirstead and W. F. Blakemore, 1999 ; D. W. Hampton et al., 2004 ). In addition, the expression and sub-cellular localization of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (Olig1 and Olig2) are known to regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation to meet repair demands ( H. A. Arnett et al., 2004 ). Therefore, the expression profile of Nkx2.2, Olig1, Olig2 and PDGF? was evaluated to determine whether an increase in pro-oligodendrocyte cues accompanied the observed changes in differentiation cues (Id and Shh) within the instructive niche. Real-time PCR experiments revealed reduced Olig1 (0.39 fold, p<0.01) and PDGF? (0.66 fold, p<0.05) expression in the acute PI niche (24 hours PI, Figure 5B ). Expression levels recovered and by 7-days PI, Olig1 and PDGF? expression mirrored expression levels with the intact niche (control). However, Nkx2.2 and Olig2 expression did not change significantly within the post-injury niche at 24-hours or 7-days PI. Combined, the observed changes in cues that affect proliferation and/or differentiation highlight changes that evolve within the progressive niche to orchestrate oligodendrocyte differentiation PI, in accord with the state of repair. BMP signals modulate gliogenesis in the post-injury niche Since BMP4 transcription showed persistent up-regulation after injury, and since other studies have shown that BMP signaling maintains the SVZ stem cell niche ( D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ), experiments were designed to examine how BMP signals affect the post-injury niche. In order to augment signaling, BMP4 (50 ?g/ml) was injected into the 24-hours PI lesion to supplement BMP4 concentrations and mimic the 7-days PI BMP4 transcriptional-state. In the 7-days PI lesion, BMP signaling was antagonized by a single injection of noggin (50 ?g/ml). Therefore, BMP4 protein would be up regulated early and suppressed 7-days PI, to oppose the post-injury dynamics (for BMP4) shown by quantitative-PCR. To measure how BMP signals remodel the post-injury niche, the total number of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes was quantified in SCI tissue at 24-hours PI versus 7-days PI with BMP4 and noggin supplementation. BMP4 injection into the SCI lesion 24-hours PI significantly reduced the number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche (lesion epicenter, 2 mm rostral, and 2mm caudal). Compared to controls, BMP4 injected animals had a 10% reduction in astrogliogenesis ( Figure 5C : 2.189 cells vs. 2.435 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.021, N=4), and BMP4 reduced GFAP+ cells at 24-hours PI below 7-days PI controls ( Figure 5C : p=0.037; N=4). Noggin, however, increased the total number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche at 7-days PI ( Figure 5C : 2.516 cells vs. 2.337 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.032, N=4). An examination of the oligodendrocyte population showed BMP4 had similar effects on the number of APC+ cells within the post-injury niche. In control animals, the pool of oligodendroctyes was diminished 21% between 24-hours and 7-days PI (1.171 cells to 0.929 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.02, N=4), which corroborates previously reported data ( D. M. McTigue et al., 2001 ). Similarly, APC+ populations are reduced 17% in animals intra-spinally injected with BMP4 at 24-hours PI ( Figure 5C : 0.970 cells vs. 1.171 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.046, N=4), which is equivalent to the APC+ population-numbers at 7-days PI. In contrast to its effect on GFAP+ cells, Noggin reduced the number of APC+ cells present in post-injury tissue at 7-days ( Figure 5C : p=0.0088, N=4). Since glial numbers showed a consistent reduction in BMP injected animals, cell proliferation was quantified to ensure that the observed reduction in gliogenesis was not a secondary side effect of reduced cell replacement (via proliferation). All animals received intra-peritoneal injections of BrdU (50 ?g/kg) in conjunction with the intra-spinal injections of BMP4 or Noggin. BrdU-immunoreactivity was quantified within the lesion epicenter, and 2mm rostral and caudal (as with GFAP and APC stereology). In each experimental group, proliferation was consistent and did not vary from controls at 24-hours or 7-days PI ( Figure 5E ). Therefore, the changes in gliogenesis were due to BMP4's ability to affect differentiation and create shifts in cell populations rather than reduce cell numbers, overall, by reducing cell proliferation. BMP signals modulate NG2-progenitor differentiation in the post-injury niche The observed changes in glial populations, within the progressive niche, suggest that BMPs could serve to direct progenitor differentiation to facilitate lesion-repair. Therefore, we performed transplantation experiments to determine if BMP4 supplements induce NG2-progenitors to adopt a differentiation profile similar to naïve cells transplanted 7-days PI. A CRE-recombinase expression retroviral vector, constructed with the NG2-promoter, was used to infect CNS progenitors isolated from adult 129-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm2Sho/J mice (ROSA:GFP: 26Sor-cells) spinal cords. According to the paradigm, progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan will express CRE and induce GFP to be expressed in cells with an active NG2-promoter ( Figure 6A ), and thus, produce a lineage of CNS derived NG2-progenitors labeled by EGFP for transplantation ( Table 2 .). After viral infection with the NG2-CRE virus, the proportion of CNS progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan was determined by activated fluorescence and subsequently used to separate GFP-positive and negative 26Sor-progenitors. After 2 weeks of G418-selection and amplification, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis showed approximately 28.5% GFP-positive cells (26Sor*-cells, Figure 6B ), and mRNA analysis by RT-PCR showed CRE and NG2 expression in GFP+-cells ( Figure 6C ). After expansion in culture, 26Sor* cultures maintained GFP expression ( Figure 6D ). 26Sor*-cells displayed the morphology and expressed phenotypic markers of glia (GFAP), neurons (TuJ1, Map2), and oligodendroglia (CNPase) when exposed to differentiation media ( Figure 6E ). Therefore, as seen with the NG2-reporter virus in SCI, NG2-proteoglycan was expressed by progenitors with the potential to produce multiple cell types and morphologies and corroborate multiple cell-types observed in vivo with the NG2-reporter virus (above). Given the potential to produce a diverse array of progeny, akin to endogenous cycling NG2+-cells, we quantified the phenotypic profile adopted by 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours versus 7-days PI. Whereas experiments discussed above ( Figure 1 ) quantified virus-labeled cycling NG2+-cells of a non-specific origin, direct transplantation of 26Sor*-cells into the lesion epicenter enables niche-effects on an NG2-progenitor, of a known differentiation potential and origin to be examined directly. Cells transplanted at 24-hours PI had no fate bias, and an equal percentage of transplanted cells expressed GFAP (16.1% +/-4.8) versus APC (13.3% +/-3.9: Figure 6G . N=4 and 3, n=508). However, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI displayed a surprising differentiation profile. Contrary to virally labeled cycling NG2+-cells, which showed a shift toward an APC+ phenotype in cells born 7-days PI, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI had a higher percentage of GFAP+-cells (25.6% +/-0.66) compared to APC+-cells (18.5% +/-0.27) 14-days after transplantation ( Figure 6G . p=0.0003; N=3, n=532). Since BMP ligands induced changes in the cellular composition of the post-injury niche ( Figure 5c ), in addition to the increase in BMP4 transcription (seen in Figure 4B ) and coincident shift in the differentiation profile of progenitors born after SCI ( Figure 5A ), we hypothesized that BMP ligands (administered at the time of transplantation) would shift the differentiation profiles of transplanted 26Sor*-cells. Specifically, we hypothesized that BMP4 at 24-hours PI would induce a profile similar to naïve 7-day transplants. Indeed, despite the split in phenotype, BMP4 induced 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours PI ( Figure 6H and I ) to adopt a differentiation profile that mimicked naïve 7-days PI transplants, instead of 24-hours PI naïve transplants ( Figure 6J and K ). Compared to the unbiased phenotype split among 24-hours PI transplants, BMP4 significantly increased the percentage of GFAP+-cells (31.3% +/-3.4) versus APC+-cells (19.3% +/-0.61; Figure 6G : p=0.13, N=3, n=692). Together, these data demonstrate that BMP4 has an appreciable ability to remodel the post-injury stem cell niche, and, in the process, BMP4 is able to modulate the fate choice of NG2-expressing progenitors.  Cycling NG2<sup>+</sup>-cells produce progeny that differentiate into multiple cell types Ectopic gene expression by promoter-specific retroviruses has been used for decades to trace cell lineages ( A. H. Brand and N. Perrimon, 1993 ; J. A. Golden et al., 1995 ; C. L. Cepko et al., 1998 ). Since cells that express NG2 proteoglycan divide after CNS insult, the regulatory sequence upstream of the NG2 protein-coding sequence was cloned (Genebank accession DQ241507; Supplemental data ) and used to construct a bi-cistronic retrovirus. The NG2-reporter virus was engineered such that the NG2-promoter sequence regulated the expression of green fluorescent protein (EGFP) while the generic viral (LTR) promoter regulated Alkaline Phosphatase (AP) expression. Therefore, EGFP expression marks cells that actively express NG2 proteoglycan and AP marks dividing cells generically, and cycling-NG2+ cells are analyzed (an EGFP+) and compared against other progenitors (EGFP-AP+) that respond to traumatic injury ( Figure 1A ). In vitro analysis showed 91% of NG2+-cells co-express GFP after infection ( Table 2 ). An intraspinal injection of high-titer NG2-reporter virus (?1×109 infection particles per milliliter) was injected rostral to a mid thoracic hemi-section of the spinal cord at 24 hours post-injury (PI) and the spinal cord tissue was harvested 3 days PI ( Figure 1B ). The specificity of the reporter virus was verified by co-localization of NG2-proteoglycan on EGFP+ cells and quantified as a percentage of EGFP labeled cells ( Figure 1C ). NG2 proteoglycan was co-localized on greater than 95% of EGFP labeled cells (>100 cells per animal, Figure 1E , n=4). Therefore, co-localization of NG2 immunofluorescence, with EGFP, demonstrated stringent regulation of EGFP expression by the cloned NG2-promoter. Since the NG2 reporter virus showed stringent regulation of EGFP expression, the NG2 promoter virus was used to investigate the fates adopted (molecular phenotype) by cycling NG2+-cells after SCI, in vivo. As shown previously, NG2-expression marked a large majority of dividing cells that respond to injury ( J. M. Levine and R. Reynolds, 1999 ). EGFP was expressed by 32.6% of virally labeled cells ( Figure 1D ). The proportion of EGFP+AP- versus AP+ co-localization with GFAP (glial lineage), Iba1 (microglial fate), and von Willebrand Factor (vWF; vascular fate; Figure 1F ) was quantified to determine the phenotype of NG2+- versus NG2- progenitors. Surprisingly, GFAP+/EGFP+ cells comprised 15.1 +/-2.4% of the cells transfected ( Figure 1G , 5 animals) by the reporter virus ( Figure 1G , green bars). Historically, NG2 proteoglycan is believed to mark a single population of cycling progenitors, and NG2+ progenitors are postulated to be uni-potent oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) that remyelinate axons after injury ( H. S. Keirstead et al., 1998 ). Previous studies have also correlated evidence of NG2 co-expression with GFAP+/BrdU+ cells ( J. M. Levine and A. Nishiyama, 1996 ; G. Alonso, 2005 ) to suggest NG2-progenitors produce GFAP+ cells. However, direct evidence that cycling NG2+-cells participate in remyelination or astroglial production (or both) has yet to be published ( A. Polito and R. Reynolds, 2005 ). Therefore, by labeling dividing cells 24 hours after SCI, our experiments demonstrate immunofluorescent co-localization of phenotypic markers for astrocytes (GFAP), microglia (Iba1) and pericytes (vWF) on separate EGFP+ cytoplasms. Since, the stringency of the virus demonstrated greater-than 95% co-incident EGFP-NG2 co-localization, and provides direct evidence that cycling cells with an active NG2 promoter express molecular marks of multiple cell types. Therefore, newborn cells with an active NG2 promoter are not fate-restricted OPCs, and thus, raise two possible conclusions: cycling NG2+-cells are multi-potent neural progenitors or NG2-proteoglycan labels several different uni-potent progenitors whereby NG2 proteoglycan would not mark a single lineage. Regardless, these results demonstrate that in the setting of injury NG2-expression is not limited to a population of fate-restricted OPCs.  Cycling NG2<sup>+</sup>-cells produce progeny that differentiate into multiple cell types Ectopic gene expression by promoter-specific retroviruses has been used for decades to trace cell lineages ( A. H. Brand and N. Perrimon, 1993 ; J. A. Golden et al., 1995 ; C. L. Cepko et al., 1998 ). Since cells that express NG2 proteoglycan divide after CNS insult, the regulatory sequence upstream of the NG2 protein-coding sequence was cloned (Genebank accession DQ241507; Supplemental data ) and used to construct a bi-cistronic retrovirus. The NG2-reporter virus was engineered such that the NG2-promoter sequence regulated the expression of green fluorescent protein (EGFP) while the generic viral (LTR) promoter regulated Alkaline Phosphatase (AP) expression. Therefore, EGFP expression marks cells that actively express NG2 proteoglycan and AP marks dividing cells generically, and cycling-NG2+ cells are analyzed (an EGFP+) and compared against other progenitors (EGFP-AP+) that respond to traumatic injury ( Figure 1A ). In vitro analysis showed 91% of NG2+-cells co-express GFP after infection ( Table 2 ). An intraspinal injection of high-titer NG2-reporter virus (?1×109 infection particles per milliliter) was injected rostral to a mid thoracic hemi-section of the spinal cord at 24 hours post-injury (PI) and the spinal cord tissue was harvested 3 days PI ( Figure 1B ). The specificity of the reporter virus was verified by co-localization of NG2-proteoglycan on EGFP+ cells and quantified as a percentage of EGFP labeled cells ( Figure 1C ). NG2 proteoglycan was co-localized on greater than 95% of EGFP labeled cells (>100 cells per animal, Figure 1E , n=4). Therefore, co-localization of NG2 immunofluorescence, with EGFP, demonstrated stringent regulation of EGFP expression by the cloned NG2-promoter. Since the NG2 reporter virus showed stringent regulation of EGFP expression, the NG2 promoter virus was used to investigate the fates adopted (molecular phenotype) by cycling NG2+-cells after SCI, in vivo. As shown previously, NG2-expression marked a large majority of dividing cells that respond to injury ( J. M. Levine and R. Reynolds, 1999 ). EGFP was expressed by 32.6% of virally labeled cells ( Figure 1D ). The proportion of EGFP+AP- versus AP+ co-localization with GFAP (glial lineage), Iba1 (microglial fate), and von Willebrand Factor (vWF; vascular fate; Figure 1F ) was quantified to determine the phenotype of NG2+- versus NG2- progenitors. Surprisingly, GFAP+/EGFP+ cells comprised 15.1 +/-2.4% of the cells transfected ( Figure 1G , 5 animals) by the reporter virus ( Figure 1G , green bars). Historically, NG2 proteoglycan is believed to mark a single population of cycling progenitors, and NG2+ progenitors are postulated to be uni-potent oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) that remyelinate axons after injury ( H. S. Keirstead et al., 1998 ). Previous studies have also correlated evidence of NG2 co-expression with GFAP+/BrdU+ cells ( J. M. Levine and A. Nishiyama, 1996 ; G. Alonso, 2005 ) to suggest NG2-progenitors produce GFAP+ cells. However, direct evidence that cycling NG2+-cells participate in remyelination or astroglial production (or both) has yet to be published ( A. Polito and R. Reynolds, 2005 ). Therefore, by labeling dividing cells 24 hours after SCI, our experiments demonstrate immunofluorescent co-localization of phenotypic markers for astrocytes (GFAP), microglia (Iba1) and pericytes (vWF) on separate EGFP+ cytoplasms. Since, the stringency of the virus demonstrated greater-than 95% co-incident EGFP-NG2 co-localization, and provides direct evidence that cycling cells with an active NG2 promoter express molecular marks of multiple cell types. Therefore, newborn cells with an active NG2 promoter are not fate-restricted OPCs, and thus, raise two possible conclusions: cycling NG2+-cells are multi-potent neural progenitors or NG2-proteoglycan labels several different uni-potent progenitors whereby NG2 proteoglycan would not mark a single lineage. Regardless, these results demonstrate that in the setting of injury NG2-expression is not limited to a population of fate-restricted OPCs.  Vacuolated NG2 progeny contain myelin debris within endosomes Since EGFP expression labels the cell soma, the NG2-reporter virus was used to discern the morphologies of dividing cells that actively express NG2 and differentiate within the lesion epicenter. Unlike studies that used BrdU to label a mitotic nucleus and correlate NG2 immuno-reactivity, confocal microscopy was used to visualize EGFP+ somas to resolve individual cycling-cells that express NG2, which revealed a sub-population of progeny derived from cycling-NG2+ cells within the lesion epicenter. The progeny did not possess the branched multi-process morphology previously described for NG2-progeny in the spinal cord ( P. J. Horner et al., 2002 ). Further examination of the morpho-type showed NG2-progenitor derived progeny had large cell bodies and bore a single bifurcated process. The EGFP-expressing phenotype did not co-localize with traditional glial marker GFAP or APC ( Figure 2A ). The morphotype was abundant within the lesion epicenter and these s100?+EGFP+ progeny possessed large (5-7 ?m diameter, whole-cell examples of the morphology are highlighted by arrows, as seen via confocal z-plane series) vacuoles within the cell body ( Figure 2B ); the vacuolated morpho-type was localized within 1 mm of the hemi-section lesion and was not detected outside the lesion epicenter. However, these vacuolated cells did not express ED1 ( Figure 2C ) and could not be labeled by isolectin immunofluorescence. Instead, this novel population of NG2-progeny expressed s100? ( Figure 2C ), which has been shown to label alternate populations of committed astrocytes that do not express GFAP (GFAP-; ( B. E. Boyes et al., 1986 ; V. Vives et al., 2003 ; J. D. Jordan et al., 2007 ). Since these vacuolated NG2-progeny resided within the lesion, the tissue was examined to determine if the cells could be microglia. Within CNS, microglia ( W. J. Streit, 2000 ) are the only cells documented to contain large vacuoles, which are often filled with phagocytized debris ( M. A. Kahn et al., 1997 ; S. U. Kim and J. de Vellis, 2005 ). Regardless, s100? did not co-localize with ED1 (macrophage marker; Figure 2C ) or isolectins (data not shown) in these newly discovered NG2-progeny, and a secondary stain to label Iba1 confirmed that the s100?+EGFP+ cells comprise a population separate from the Iba1+/NG2+ cells ( Figure 2D and E , arrows). Therefore, we concluded that these vacuolated NG2+s100?+ cells are not mature microglia. Confounded by the presence of a vacuolated non-microglial cell, we examined the lesion epicenter with antibodies against denatured myelin (MBP 81-92) ( B. W. Gibson et al., 1984 ; R. E. Martenson, 1984 ), which labeled a sea of debris throughout the epicenter. Interestingly, myelin debris was observed within the vacuoles of the EGFP+S100?+ cells ( Figure 2F and G , arrows). Confocal optical-fractionation showed intensely labeled bundles of myelin debris contained within vacuoles circumscribed by EGFP+ cell bodies ( Figure 2G , arrows). Whereas non-vacuolated EGFP+s100?+ cells did not co-localize with MBP 81-92 rostral to the lesion site nor did the cells possess large intracellular vacuoles ( Figure 2H ). Recently, a published astrocyte-transcriptome showed components of the endocytosis pathway (draper/Megf10 and Mertk) to be up regulated in astrocyte populations ( J. D. Cahoy et al., 2008 ). Based on these findings, Cahoy and colleagues hypothesized that astrocytes are professional phagocytes. To determine if the vacuolated NG2-progeny possessed characters of phagocytes, tissue was stained with antibodies against the endosome/lysosome protein capthepsin-D (CathD) ( B. Westley and H. Rochefort, 1980 ) and denatured myelin basic protein (dMBP). As revealed by confocal microscopy, EGFP+ NG2-progeny do possess vacuoles decorated with CathD ( Figure 2I , cyan arrows). The CathD+ structures are present on distinct cytoplasmic vacuoles that contain dMBP, and CathD is seen on processes surrounding a large dMBP structure ( Figure 2J , *). Therefore, EGFP+ NG2-progeny differentiate into a class of phagocyte that is an NG2+s100?+ astrocytes. Interestingly, alternate birth dating-studies (by virus injection at 3 and 7-days PI) did not label a population of cells with the phagocytic morphotype. In contrast, the population of phagocytic-cells was prominent around the lesion epicenter when labeled 24-hours PI. CNS insults are known to induce reactive astrocytes, which provide trophic support to surrounding cells and facilitate recovery from traumatic injury ( L. F. Eng and R. S. Ghirnikar, 1994 ; M. Aschner, 1998 ). Since the phagocytic astrocytes were not seen within the SCI lesion 14-days PI, the life span of the EGFP+s100?+ population was examined to determine whether these NG2-progeny are transient. Furthermore, the s100?+-phagocyte was not a phenotype adopted by NG2+-progeny born 3- and 7-days PI (unpublished observations). Therefore, SCI mice injected with the NG2-reporter virus (24-hrs PI) was killed at 3 and 7-days PI to quantify the relative number of apoptotic s100?+-phagocytes. SCI tissue was stained immunofluorescently to co-localize activated (cleaved) Caspase-3 (Casp3, apoptotic marker) with s100?+ NG2+-progeny. EGFP+s100?+Casp3+ co-localization was quantified and used to determine the percentage of apoptotic-cells at 3-days versus 7-days PI ( Figure 3A and B ). In general, s100?+ NG2+-progeny born 24 hours PI show a significant increase (p=0.027) in activated Casp3 between 3 and 7-days PI. The percentage of apoptotic EGFP+s100?+-cells increased from 3.6% +/-0.46 to 9.2% +/-1.87 ( Figure 3C ; N=3 and 4, respectively), in conjunction with an overall increase in apoptotic cells in the same time-course, from 16.77% +/-3.6 to 36.97% +/-4.4 Casp3+ ( Figure 3C ; p=0.012, N=4). The progressive increase (from 3- to 7-days) in cells marked by Casp3+ indicates that the s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours PI is a transient population and short-lived in the post-injury environment. However, the interpretation that s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours are transient is confounded by the lack of change observed in the EGFP+s100?+-cells between 3 and 7-days PI. Despite the increased number of cells with an activated Caspase 3, the EGFP+s100?+-population is sustained. Therefore, a single population of population of labeled cells could proliferate and persist within the lesion.  Vacuolated NG2 progeny contain myelin debris within endosomes Since EGFP expression labels the cell soma, the NG2-reporter virus was used to discern the morphologies of dividing cells that actively express NG2 and differentiate within the lesion epicenter. Unlike studies that used BrdU to label a mitotic nucleus and correlate NG2 immuno-reactivity, confocal microscopy was used to visualize EGFP+ somas to resolve individual cycling-cells that express NG2, which revealed a sub-population of progeny derived from cycling-NG2+ cells within the lesion epicenter. The progeny did not possess the branched multi-process morphology previously described for NG2-progeny in the spinal cord ( P. J. Horner et al., 2002 ). Further examination of the morpho-type showed NG2-progenitor derived progeny had large cell bodies and bore a single bifurcated process. The EGFP-expressing phenotype did not co-localize with traditional glial marker GFAP or APC ( Figure 2A ). The morphotype was abundant within the lesion epicenter and these s100?+EGFP+ progeny possessed large (5-7 ?m diameter, whole-cell examples of the morphology are highlighted by arrows, as seen via confocal z-plane series) vacuoles within the cell body ( Figure 2B ); the vacuolated morpho-type was localized within 1 mm of the hemi-section lesion and was not detected outside the lesion epicenter. However, these vacuolated cells did not express ED1 ( Figure 2C ) and could not be labeled by isolectin immunofluorescence. Instead, this novel population of NG2-progeny expressed s100? ( Figure 2C ), which has been shown to label alternate populations of committed astrocytes that do not express GFAP (GFAP-; ( B. E. Boyes et al., 1986 ; V. Vives et al., 2003 ; J. D. Jordan et al., 2007 ). Since these vacuolated NG2-progeny resided within the lesion, the tissue was examined to determine if the cells could be microglia. Within CNS, microglia ( W. J. Streit, 2000 ) are the only cells documented to contain large vacuoles, which are often filled with phagocytized debris ( M. A. Kahn et al., 1997 ; S. U. Kim and J. de Vellis, 2005 ). Regardless, s100? did not co-localize with ED1 (macrophage marker; Figure 2C ) or isolectins (data not shown) in these newly discovered NG2-progeny, and a secondary stain to label Iba1 confirmed that the s100?+EGFP+ cells comprise a population separate from the Iba1+/NG2+ cells ( Figure 2D and E , arrows). Therefore, we concluded that these vacuolated NG2+s100?+ cells are not mature microglia. Confounded by the presence of a vacuolated non-microglial cell, we examined the lesion epicenter with antibodies against denatured myelin (MBP 81-92) ( B. W. Gibson et al., 1984 ; R. E. Martenson, 1984 ), which labeled a sea of debris throughout the epicenter. Interestingly, myelin debris was observed within the vacuoles of the EGFP+S100?+ cells ( Figure 2F and G , arrows). Confocal optical-fractionation showed intensely labeled bundles of myelin debris contained within vacuoles circumscribed by EGFP+ cell bodies ( Figure 2G , arrows). Whereas non-vacuolated EGFP+s100?+ cells did not co-localize with MBP 81-92 rostral to the lesion site nor did the cells possess large intracellular vacuoles ( Figure 2H ). Recently, a published astrocyte-transcriptome showed components of the endocytosis pathway (draper/Megf10 and Mertk) to be up regulated in astrocyte populations ( J. D. Cahoy et al., 2008 ). Based on these findings, Cahoy and colleagues hypothesized that astrocytes are professional phagocytes. To determine if the vacuolated NG2-progeny possessed characters of phagocytes, tissue was stained with antibodies against the endosome/lysosome protein capthepsin-D (CathD) ( B. Westley and H. Rochefort, 1980 ) and denatured myelin basic protein (dMBP). As revealed by confocal microscopy, EGFP+ NG2-progeny do possess vacuoles decorated with CathD ( Figure 2I , cyan arrows). The CathD+ structures are present on distinct cytoplasmic vacuoles that contain dMBP, and CathD is seen on processes surrounding a large dMBP structure ( Figure 2J , *). Therefore, EGFP+ NG2-progeny differentiate into a class of phagocyte that is an NG2+s100?+ astrocytes. Interestingly, alternate birth dating-studies (by virus injection at 3 and 7-days PI) did not label a population of cells with the phagocytic morphotype. In contrast, the population of phagocytic-cells was prominent around the lesion epicenter when labeled 24-hours PI. CNS insults are known to induce reactive astrocytes, which provide trophic support to surrounding cells and facilitate recovery from traumatic injury ( L. F. Eng and R. S. Ghirnikar, 1994 ; M. Aschner, 1998 ). Since the phagocytic astrocytes were not seen within the SCI lesion 14-days PI, the life span of the EGFP+s100?+ population was examined to determine whether these NG2-progeny are transient. Furthermore, the s100?+-phagocyte was not a phenotype adopted by NG2+-progeny born 3- and 7-days PI (unpublished observations). Therefore, SCI mice injected with the NG2-reporter virus (24-hrs PI) was killed at 3 and 7-days PI to quantify the relative number of apoptotic s100?+-phagocytes. SCI tissue was stained immunofluorescently to co-localize activated (cleaved) Caspase-3 (Casp3, apoptotic marker) with s100?+ NG2+-progeny. EGFP+s100?+Casp3+ co-localization was quantified and used to determine the percentage of apoptotic-cells at 3-days versus 7-days PI ( Figure 3A and B ). In general, s100?+ NG2+-progeny born 24 hours PI show a significant increase (p=0.027) in activated Casp3 between 3 and 7-days PI. The percentage of apoptotic EGFP+s100?+-cells increased from 3.6% +/-0.46 to 9.2% +/-1.87 ( Figure 3C ; N=3 and 4, respectively), in conjunction with an overall increase in apoptotic cells in the same time-course, from 16.77% +/-3.6 to 36.97% +/-4.4 Casp3+ ( Figure 3C ; p=0.012, N=4). The progressive increase (from 3- to 7-days) in cells marked by Casp3+ indicates that the s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours PI is a transient population and short-lived in the post-injury environment. However, the interpretation that s100?+ NG2+-progeny born at 24 hours are transient is confounded by the lack of change observed in the EGFP+s100?+-cells between 3 and 7-days PI. Despite the increased number of cells with an activated Caspase 3, the EGFP+s100?+-population is sustained. Therefore, a single population of population of labeled cells could proliferate and persist within the lesion.  NG2-progenitor differentiation profiles shift temporally as SCI repair progresses SCI tissue is known to undergo temporal-spatial changes in cell replacement as recovery progresses after injury ( D. Wu et al., 2005 ; L. J. Zai and J. R. Wrathall, 2005 ; J. M. Lytle and J. R. Wrathall, 2007 ). As such, the micro-environmental changes that evolve post-injury define a progressive stem cell niche. Since the NG2 reporter-virus showed cycling NG2-cells produce multiple cell types, we wanted to determine whether progeny fates, as a population, shift as the post-injury niche recovers/regenerates. Therefore, the differentiation profile of progeny derived from NG2-progenitors born at 24-hours and 7-days PI was quantified at 3 and 14-day PI, respectively. Dividing cells were birth-dated with the NG2-reporter virus and the molecular phenotype was determined to discern whether the differentiation profiles shift with birth date and correlate with temporal changes in a post-traumatic niche. Therefore, temporal-spatial changes in the stem cell niche would manifest changes in progenitor differentiation profiles as the niche recovers/regenerates PI, and thus define a progressive niche. The temporal shift in NG2-progenitor differentiation was examined as a function of phenotype among cycling-cells labeled by the NG2-virus, for cells born 24-hours PI (analyzed 3-days PI) and cells born 7-days PI (analyzed 14-days PI, Figure 4A ). Confocal microscopy was used to evaluate GFAP and APC expression in EGFP+-cells born 24 hrs versus 7-days PI. Relative-quantification of the molecular phenotypes show the majority of cycling NG2+-cells born 24 hours PI adopt an astroglial fate 3 days PI (EGFP+GFAP+ expression, 53.3%, Figure 4B ). Confocal micrographs of the lesion epicenter show distinct co-localization of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG, reactive profile) on the surface of GFAP+ EGFP+-cells derived from cycling NG2+-cells ( Figure 4C ). Therefore, these newborn NG2-cells may participate in gliotic scarring within the lesion. The reactive-profiles are seen within the lesion epi-center among intense GFAP immunofluorescence ( Figure 4D ), which is the hallmark of gliosis and scarring ( G. M. Smith et al., 1986 ). Therefore, the majority of NG2-progenitors born acutely (24 hours) after injury adopt a reactive fate and participate in the formation of the gliosis thought to prevent continued tissue damage after traumatic injury ( P. J. Reier and J. D. Houle, 1988 ; J. Silver and J. H. Miller, 2004 ). By contrast, a significant shift in phenotype is seen in NG2+-progenitors cycling 7-days PI. While acutely born cells adopt a reactive phenotype, NG2-progeny with a 7-day PI birth-date do not display a reactive profile upon differentiation. Instead, the population dynamic of the progeny fates (derived from progenitor) undergoes a shift. Among NG2-progeny born 7-days PI, the progeny possess characters of early immature oligodendrocytes and express molecular markers of cells destined for an oligodendrocyte lineage (52.6%, APC+) versus the astroglial lineage (33%, GFAP+, Figure 4B ). When examined at 14-days PI, confocal micrographs of progeny derived from NG2+-progenitors born 7-days PI show these cells co-express MBP ( Figure 4E ). When counterstained with antibodies against neurofilaments (NF), EGFP+MBP+ profiles are shown to encircle NF+ structures in the dorsal columns of hemi-sected spinal cords ( Figure 4E and F , arrows). The presence of MBP on EGFP+ processes demonstrates that progeny of NG2-progenitors are able to produce oligodendrocytes, which have the potential to participate in remyelination; however, further studies that examine myelin profiles are needed to provide unequivocal evidence that NG2-progeny remyelinate axons after injury. Regardless, the temporal shift in adopted fates demonstrates that NG2+-progenitors produce multiple cell types after injury. Furthermore, the fates adopted by endogenous cycling NG2+-cells are influenced by temporal and spatial cues within the progressive niche, and thus, the product of the progeny is contingent upon the nurturing derived from the post-injury niche.  NG2-progenitor differentiation profiles shift temporally as SCI repair progresses SCI tissue is known to undergo temporal-spatial changes in cell replacement as recovery progresses after injury ( D. Wu et al., 2005 ; L. J. Zai and J. R. Wrathall, 2005 ; J. M. Lytle and J. R. Wrathall, 2007 ). As such, the micro-environmental changes that evolve post-injury define a progressive stem cell niche. Since the NG2 reporter-virus showed cycling NG2-cells produce multiple cell types, we wanted to determine whether progeny fates, as a population, shift as the post-injury niche recovers/regenerates. Therefore, the differentiation profile of progeny derived from NG2-progenitors born at 24-hours and 7-days PI was quantified at 3 and 14-day PI, respectively. Dividing cells were birth-dated with the NG2-reporter virus and the molecular phenotype was determined to discern whether the differentiation profiles shift with birth date and correlate with temporal changes in a post-traumatic niche. Therefore, temporal-spatial changes in the stem cell niche would manifest changes in progenitor differentiation profiles as the niche recovers/regenerates PI, and thus define a progressive niche. The temporal shift in NG2-progenitor differentiation was examined as a function of phenotype among cycling-cells labeled by the NG2-virus, for cells born 24-hours PI (analyzed 3-days PI) and cells born 7-days PI (analyzed 14-days PI, Figure 4A ). Confocal microscopy was used to evaluate GFAP and APC expression in EGFP+-cells born 24 hrs versus 7-days PI. Relative-quantification of the molecular phenotypes show the majority of cycling NG2+-cells born 24 hours PI adopt an astroglial fate 3 days PI (EGFP+GFAP+ expression, 53.3%, Figure 4B ). Confocal micrographs of the lesion epicenter show distinct co-localization of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (CSPG, reactive profile) on the surface of GFAP+ EGFP+-cells derived from cycling NG2+-cells ( Figure 4C ). Therefore, these newborn NG2-cells may participate in gliotic scarring within the lesion. The reactive-profiles are seen within the lesion epi-center among intense GFAP immunofluorescence ( Figure 4D ), which is the hallmark of gliosis and scarring ( G. M. Smith et al., 1986 ). Therefore, the majority of NG2-progenitors born acutely (24 hours) after injury adopt a reactive fate and participate in the formation of the gliosis thought to prevent continued tissue damage after traumatic injury ( P. J. Reier and J. D. Houle, 1988 ; J. Silver and J. H. Miller, 2004 ). By contrast, a significant shift in phenotype is seen in NG2+-progenitors cycling 7-days PI. While acutely born cells adopt a reactive phenotype, NG2-progeny with a 7-day PI birth-date do not display a reactive profile upon differentiation. Instead, the population dynamic of the progeny fates (derived from progenitor) undergoes a shift. Among NG2-progeny born 7-days PI, the progeny possess characters of early immature oligodendrocytes and express molecular markers of cells destined for an oligodendrocyte lineage (52.6%, APC+) versus the astroglial lineage (33%, GFAP+, Figure 4B ). When examined at 14-days PI, confocal micrographs of progeny derived from NG2+-progenitors born 7-days PI show these cells co-express MBP ( Figure 4E ). When counterstained with antibodies against neurofilaments (NF), EGFP+MBP+ profiles are shown to encircle NF+ structures in the dorsal columns of hemi-sected spinal cords ( Figure 4E and F , arrows). The presence of MBP on EGFP+ processes demonstrates that progeny of NG2-progenitors are able to produce oligodendrocytes, which have the potential to participate in remyelination; however, further studies that examine myelin profiles are needed to provide unequivocal evidence that NG2-progeny remyelinate axons after injury. Regardless, the temporal shift in adopted fates demonstrates that NG2+-progenitors produce multiple cell types after injury. Furthermore, the fates adopted by endogenous cycling NG2+-cells are influenced by temporal and spatial cues within the progressive niche, and thus, the product of the progeny is contingent upon the nurturing derived from the post-injury niche.  Instructive cues with the post-injury niche evolve to direct progenitor differentiation Behavioral recovery is known to be minimal within the first 7 days after SCI. However, in the second and third weeks (7 days to 21 days PI) animals show the greatest changes in behavioral recovery ( M. Ma et al., 2001 ). Since we observed a temporal shift in the differentiation profiles of cycling endogenous NG2+-progenitors that parallels the progression in behavioral recovery seen in SCI animals, we hypothesized that instructive cues within the niche must evolve temporally to promote astrocyte and oligodendrocyte differentiation post-injury. Therefore, we examined the transcriptional profile of molecules that direct BMP signaling and oligogenesis in the SCI niche. After exsanguinations, mRNA was isolated from a 1mm block of tissue (rostral edge of the lesion and T9 from controls). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to examine the transcriptional profile of each gene-set at 24-hours PI and 7-days PI (relative to GAPDH expression) to determine if changes in the molecular cues precede concomitant temporal shifts in progeny-fates after SCI. The antagonistic action of BMP and noggin control glial differentiation (astrocytic versus oligodendrocytic fate, respectively) throughout development and noggin maintains stemness within neurogenic regions of the adult brain ( L. Lillien and H. Raphael, 2000 ; D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ). Interestingly, noggin expression is only slightly diminished at 24 hours PI and increased at 7-days PI, but noggin expression does not differ significantly from levels seen within the intact spinal cord. By contrast, BMP4 expression is increased 2.57 fold ( Figure 5A , p<0.05) at 24-hours PI and 8.9 fold 7-days PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). BMPs are thought to regulate stemness by regulating the expression of inhibitors of differentiation and factors that promote progenitor self-renewal ( A. Alvarez-Buylla and D. A. Lim, 2004 ). Since the up-regulation of BMP4 persisted between 24-hours and 7-days PI ( Figure 5A ; †††, p<0.0001), we quantified the secondary effects on the expression profile of Inhibitors of DNA binding/differentiation (Id transcription factors) and sonic hedgehog (Shh, which promotes self-renewal). Significant genomic shifts are observed for both Id1 and Id3. Id1 is elevated 4.1 fold (p<0.05) 24-hrs PI and returns to control levels by 7d PI, whereas Id3 does not become elevated until 7d PI (3.6 fold, p<0.05). Changes in Id2 expression are modest (1.6 fold at 24 hours PI) and do not vary significantly from controls, and Shh expression is reduced to 0.23 fold at 7d PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). Since Ids are known to affect stem cell fate ( Q. L. Ying et al., 2003 ), the expression profile suggests a possible mechanism for antagonism between Id1, Id3, and Shh expression. The orchestrated actions of Ids and Shh highlight a temporal shift for instructive-cues within the niche that promote self-renewal toward cues that promote terminal-differentiation of progenitors into astrocytes and oligodendrocytes to facilitate recovery ( S. F. Tzeng et al., 1999 ). The progression of the instructive niche from a pro-proliferation to pro-differentiation between 24 hrs and 7-days PI, respectively, indicate a potential niche progression to explain the observed shift in the fate of NG2+-progeny toward oligodendrocyte production. Previous studies have demonstrated how NG2-progenitors that express PDGF? receptor produce oligodendrocytes and that NG2-cells must divide and differentiate to facilitate recovery after demyelination lesions ( H. S. Keirstead and W. F. Blakemore, 1999 ; D. W. Hampton et al., 2004 ). In addition, the expression and sub-cellular localization of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (Olig1 and Olig2) are known to regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation to meet repair demands ( H. A. Arnett et al., 2004 ). Therefore, the expression profile of Nkx2.2, Olig1, Olig2 and PDGF? was evaluated to determine whether an increase in pro-oligodendrocyte cues accompanied the observed changes in differentiation cues (Id and Shh) within the instructive niche. Real-time PCR experiments revealed reduced Olig1 (0.39 fold, p<0.01) and PDGF? (0.66 fold, p<0.05) expression in the acute PI niche (24 hours PI, Figure 5B ). Expression levels recovered and by 7-days PI, Olig1 and PDGF? expression mirrored expression levels with the intact niche (control). However, Nkx2.2 and Olig2 expression did not change significantly within the post-injury niche at 24-hours or 7-days PI. Combined, the observed changes in cues that affect proliferation and/or differentiation highlight changes that evolve within the progressive niche to orchestrate oligodendrocyte differentiation PI, in accord with the state of repair.  Instructive cues with the post-injury niche evolve to direct progenitor differentiation Behavioral recovery is known to be minimal within the first 7 days after SCI. However, in the second and third weeks (7 days to 21 days PI) animals show the greatest changes in behavioral recovery ( M. Ma et al., 2001 ). Since we observed a temporal shift in the differentiation profiles of cycling endogenous NG2+-progenitors that parallels the progression in behavioral recovery seen in SCI animals, we hypothesized that instructive cues within the niche must evolve temporally to promote astrocyte and oligodendrocyte differentiation post-injury. Therefore, we examined the transcriptional profile of molecules that direct BMP signaling and oligogenesis in the SCI niche. After exsanguinations, mRNA was isolated from a 1mm block of tissue (rostral edge of the lesion and T9 from controls). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to examine the transcriptional profile of each gene-set at 24-hours PI and 7-days PI (relative to GAPDH expression) to determine if changes in the molecular cues precede concomitant temporal shifts in progeny-fates after SCI. The antagonistic action of BMP and noggin control glial differentiation (astrocytic versus oligodendrocytic fate, respectively) throughout development and noggin maintains stemness within neurogenic regions of the adult brain ( L. Lillien and H. Raphael, 2000 ; D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ). Interestingly, noggin expression is only slightly diminished at 24 hours PI and increased at 7-days PI, but noggin expression does not differ significantly from levels seen within the intact spinal cord. By contrast, BMP4 expression is increased 2.57 fold ( Figure 5A , p<0.05) at 24-hours PI and 8.9 fold 7-days PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). BMPs are thought to regulate stemness by regulating the expression of inhibitors of differentiation and factors that promote progenitor self-renewal ( A. Alvarez-Buylla and D. A. Lim, 2004 ). Since the up-regulation of BMP4 persisted between 24-hours and 7-days PI ( Figure 5A ; †††, p<0.0001), we quantified the secondary effects on the expression profile of Inhibitors of DNA binding/differentiation (Id transcription factors) and sonic hedgehog (Shh, which promotes self-renewal). Significant genomic shifts are observed for both Id1 and Id3. Id1 is elevated 4.1 fold (p<0.05) 24-hrs PI and returns to control levels by 7d PI, whereas Id3 does not become elevated until 7d PI (3.6 fold, p<0.05). Changes in Id2 expression are modest (1.6 fold at 24 hours PI) and do not vary significantly from controls, and Shh expression is reduced to 0.23 fold at 7d PI ( Figure 5A , p<0.01). Since Ids are known to affect stem cell fate ( Q. L. Ying et al., 2003 ), the expression profile suggests a possible mechanism for antagonism between Id1, Id3, and Shh expression. The orchestrated actions of Ids and Shh highlight a temporal shift for instructive-cues within the niche that promote self-renewal toward cues that promote terminal-differentiation of progenitors into astrocytes and oligodendrocytes to facilitate recovery ( S. F. Tzeng et al., 1999 ). The progression of the instructive niche from a pro-proliferation to pro-differentiation between 24 hrs and 7-days PI, respectively, indicate a potential niche progression to explain the observed shift in the fate of NG2+-progeny toward oligodendrocyte production. Previous studies have demonstrated how NG2-progenitors that express PDGF? receptor produce oligodendrocytes and that NG2-cells must divide and differentiate to facilitate recovery after demyelination lesions ( H. S. Keirstead and W. F. Blakemore, 1999 ; D. W. Hampton et al., 2004 ). In addition, the expression and sub-cellular localization of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors (Olig1 and Olig2) are known to regulate oligodendrocyte differentiation to meet repair demands ( H. A. Arnett et al., 2004 ). Therefore, the expression profile of Nkx2.2, Olig1, Olig2 and PDGF? was evaluated to determine whether an increase in pro-oligodendrocyte cues accompanied the observed changes in differentiation cues (Id and Shh) within the instructive niche. Real-time PCR experiments revealed reduced Olig1 (0.39 fold, p<0.01) and PDGF? (0.66 fold, p<0.05) expression in the acute PI niche (24 hours PI, Figure 5B ). Expression levels recovered and by 7-days PI, Olig1 and PDGF? expression mirrored expression levels with the intact niche (control). However, Nkx2.2 and Olig2 expression did not change significantly within the post-injury niche at 24-hours or 7-days PI. Combined, the observed changes in cues that affect proliferation and/or differentiation highlight changes that evolve within the progressive niche to orchestrate oligodendrocyte differentiation PI, in accord with the state of repair.  BMP signals modulate gliogenesis in the post-injury niche Since BMP4 transcription showed persistent up-regulation after injury, and since other studies have shown that BMP signaling maintains the SVZ stem cell niche ( D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ), experiments were designed to examine how BMP signals affect the post-injury niche. In order to augment signaling, BMP4 (50 ?g/ml) was injected into the 24-hours PI lesion to supplement BMP4 concentrations and mimic the 7-days PI BMP4 transcriptional-state. In the 7-days PI lesion, BMP signaling was antagonized by a single injection of noggin (50 ?g/ml). Therefore, BMP4 protein would be up regulated early and suppressed 7-days PI, to oppose the post-injury dynamics (for BMP4) shown by quantitative-PCR. To measure how BMP signals remodel the post-injury niche, the total number of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes was quantified in SCI tissue at 24-hours PI versus 7-days PI with BMP4 and noggin supplementation. BMP4 injection into the SCI lesion 24-hours PI significantly reduced the number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche (lesion epicenter, 2 mm rostral, and 2mm caudal). Compared to controls, BMP4 injected animals had a 10% reduction in astrogliogenesis ( Figure 5C : 2.189 cells vs. 2.435 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.021, N=4), and BMP4 reduced GFAP+ cells at 24-hours PI below 7-days PI controls ( Figure 5C : p=0.037; N=4). Noggin, however, increased the total number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche at 7-days PI ( Figure 5C : 2.516 cells vs. 2.337 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.032, N=4). An examination of the oligodendrocyte population showed BMP4 had similar effects on the number of APC+ cells within the post-injury niche. In control animals, the pool of oligodendroctyes was diminished 21% between 24-hours and 7-days PI (1.171 cells to 0.929 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.02, N=4), which corroborates previously reported data ( D. M. McTigue et al., 2001 ). Similarly, APC+ populations are reduced 17% in animals intra-spinally injected with BMP4 at 24-hours PI ( Figure 5C : 0.970 cells vs. 1.171 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.046, N=4), which is equivalent to the APC+ population-numbers at 7-days PI. In contrast to its effect on GFAP+ cells, Noggin reduced the number of APC+ cells present in post-injury tissue at 7-days ( Figure 5C : p=0.0088, N=4). Since glial numbers showed a consistent reduction in BMP injected animals, cell proliferation was quantified to ensure that the observed reduction in gliogenesis was not a secondary side effect of reduced cell replacement (via proliferation). All animals received intra-peritoneal injections of BrdU (50 ?g/kg) in conjunction with the intra-spinal injections of BMP4 or Noggin. BrdU-immunoreactivity was quantified within the lesion epicenter, and 2mm rostral and caudal (as with GFAP and APC stereology). In each experimental group, proliferation was consistent and did not vary from controls at 24-hours or 7-days PI ( Figure 5E ). Therefore, the changes in gliogenesis were due to BMP4's ability to affect differentiation and create shifts in cell populations rather than reduce cell numbers, overall, by reducing cell proliferation.  BMP signals modulate gliogenesis in the post-injury niche Since BMP4 transcription showed persistent up-regulation after injury, and since other studies have shown that BMP signaling maintains the SVZ stem cell niche ( D. A. Lim et al., 2000 ), experiments were designed to examine how BMP signals affect the post-injury niche. In order to augment signaling, BMP4 (50 ?g/ml) was injected into the 24-hours PI lesion to supplement BMP4 concentrations and mimic the 7-days PI BMP4 transcriptional-state. In the 7-days PI lesion, BMP signaling was antagonized by a single injection of noggin (50 ?g/ml). Therefore, BMP4 protein would be up regulated early and suppressed 7-days PI, to oppose the post-injury dynamics (for BMP4) shown by quantitative-PCR. To measure how BMP signals remodel the post-injury niche, the total number of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes was quantified in SCI tissue at 24-hours PI versus 7-days PI with BMP4 and noggin supplementation. BMP4 injection into the SCI lesion 24-hours PI significantly reduced the number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche (lesion epicenter, 2 mm rostral, and 2mm caudal). Compared to controls, BMP4 injected animals had a 10% reduction in astrogliogenesis ( Figure 5C : 2.189 cells vs. 2.435 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.021, N=4), and BMP4 reduced GFAP+ cells at 24-hours PI below 7-days PI controls ( Figure 5C : p=0.037; N=4). Noggin, however, increased the total number of GFAP+ cells in the post-injury niche at 7-days PI ( Figure 5C : 2.516 cells vs. 2.337 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.032, N=4). An examination of the oligodendrocyte population showed BMP4 had similar effects on the number of APC+ cells within the post-injury niche. In control animals, the pool of oligodendroctyes was diminished 21% between 24-hours and 7-days PI (1.171 cells to 0.929 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.02, N=4), which corroborates previously reported data ( D. M. McTigue et al., 2001 ). Similarly, APC+ populations are reduced 17% in animals intra-spinally injected with BMP4 at 24-hours PI ( Figure 5C : 0.970 cells vs. 1.171 cells/100 ?m3; p=0.046, N=4), which is equivalent to the APC+ population-numbers at 7-days PI. In contrast to its effect on GFAP+ cells, Noggin reduced the number of APC+ cells present in post-injury tissue at 7-days ( Figure 5C : p=0.0088, N=4). Since glial numbers showed a consistent reduction in BMP injected animals, cell proliferation was quantified to ensure that the observed reduction in gliogenesis was not a secondary side effect of reduced cell replacement (via proliferation). All animals received intra-peritoneal injections of BrdU (50 ?g/kg) in conjunction with the intra-spinal injections of BMP4 or Noggin. BrdU-immunoreactivity was quantified within the lesion epicenter, and 2mm rostral and caudal (as with GFAP and APC stereology). In each experimental group, proliferation was consistent and did not vary from controls at 24-hours or 7-days PI ( Figure 5E ). Therefore, the changes in gliogenesis were due to BMP4's ability to affect differentiation and create shifts in cell populations rather than reduce cell numbers, overall, by reducing cell proliferation.  BMP signals modulate NG2-progenitor differentiation in the post-injury niche The observed changes in glial populations, within the progressive niche, suggest that BMPs could serve to direct progenitor differentiation to facilitate lesion-repair. Therefore, we performed transplantation experiments to determine if BMP4 supplements induce NG2-progenitors to adopt a differentiation profile similar to naïve cells transplanted 7-days PI. A CRE-recombinase expression retroviral vector, constructed with the NG2-promoter, was used to infect CNS progenitors isolated from adult 129-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm2Sho/J mice (ROSA:GFP: 26Sor-cells) spinal cords. According to the paradigm, progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan will express CRE and induce GFP to be expressed in cells with an active NG2-promoter ( Figure 6A ), and thus, produce a lineage of CNS derived NG2-progenitors labeled by EGFP for transplantation ( Table 2 .). After viral infection with the NG2-CRE virus, the proportion of CNS progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan was determined by activated fluorescence and subsequently used to separate GFP-positive and negative 26Sor-progenitors. After 2 weeks of G418-selection and amplification, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis showed approximately 28.5% GFP-positive cells (26Sor*-cells, Figure 6B ), and mRNA analysis by RT-PCR showed CRE and NG2 expression in GFP+-cells ( Figure 6C ). After expansion in culture, 26Sor* cultures maintained GFP expression ( Figure 6D ). 26Sor*-cells displayed the morphology and expressed phenotypic markers of glia (GFAP), neurons (TuJ1, Map2), and oligodendroglia (CNPase) when exposed to differentiation media ( Figure 6E ). Therefore, as seen with the NG2-reporter virus in SCI, NG2-proteoglycan was expressed by progenitors with the potential to produce multiple cell types and morphologies and corroborate multiple cell-types observed in vivo with the NG2-reporter virus (above). Given the potential to produce a diverse array of progeny, akin to endogenous cycling NG2+-cells, we quantified the phenotypic profile adopted by 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours versus 7-days PI. Whereas experiments discussed above ( Figure 1 ) quantified virus-labeled cycling NG2+-cells of a non-specific origin, direct transplantation of 26Sor*-cells into the lesion epicenter enables niche-effects on an NG2-progenitor, of a known differentiation potential and origin to be examined directly. Cells transplanted at 24-hours PI had no fate bias, and an equal percentage of transplanted cells expressed GFAP (16.1% +/-4.8) versus APC (13.3% +/-3.9: Figure 6G . N=4 and 3, n=508). However, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI displayed a surprising differentiation profile. Contrary to virally labeled cycling NG2+-cells, which showed a shift toward an APC+ phenotype in cells born 7-days PI, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI had a higher percentage of GFAP+-cells (25.6% +/-0.66) compared to APC+-cells (18.5% +/-0.27) 14-days after transplantation ( Figure 6G . p=0.0003; N=3, n=532). Since BMP ligands induced changes in the cellular composition of the post-injury niche ( Figure 5c ), in addition to the increase in BMP4 transcription (seen in Figure 4B ) and coincident shift in the differentiation profile of progenitors born after SCI ( Figure 5A ), we hypothesized that BMP ligands (administered at the time of transplantation) would shift the differentiation profiles of transplanted 26Sor*-cells. Specifically, we hypothesized that BMP4 at 24-hours PI would induce a profile similar to naïve 7-day transplants. Indeed, despite the split in phenotype, BMP4 induced 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours PI ( Figure 6H and I ) to adopt a differentiation profile that mimicked naïve 7-days PI transplants, instead of 24-hours PI naïve transplants ( Figure 6J and K ). Compared to the unbiased phenotype split among 24-hours PI transplants, BMP4 significantly increased the percentage of GFAP+-cells (31.3% +/-3.4) versus APC+-cells (19.3% +/-0.61; Figure 6G : p=0.13, N=3, n=692). Together, these data demonstrate that BMP4 has an appreciable ability to remodel the post-injury stem cell niche, and, in the process, BMP4 is able to modulate the fate choice of NG2-expressing progenitors.  BMP signals modulate NG2-progenitor differentiation in the post-injury niche The observed changes in glial populations, within the progressive niche, suggest that BMPs could serve to direct progenitor differentiation to facilitate lesion-repair. Therefore, we performed transplantation experiments to determine if BMP4 supplements induce NG2-progenitors to adopt a differentiation profile similar to naïve cells transplanted 7-days PI. A CRE-recombinase expression retroviral vector, constructed with the NG2-promoter, was used to infect CNS progenitors isolated from adult 129-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm2Sho/J mice (ROSA:GFP: 26Sor-cells) spinal cords. According to the paradigm, progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan will express CRE and induce GFP to be expressed in cells with an active NG2-promoter ( Figure 6A ), and thus, produce a lineage of CNS derived NG2-progenitors labeled by EGFP for transplantation ( Table 2 .). After viral infection with the NG2-CRE virus, the proportion of CNS progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan was determined by activated fluorescence and subsequently used to separate GFP-positive and negative 26Sor-progenitors. After 2 weeks of G418-selection and amplification, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis showed approximately 28.5% GFP-positive cells (26Sor*-cells, Figure 6B ), and mRNA analysis by RT-PCR showed CRE and NG2 expression in GFP+-cells ( Figure 6C ). After expansion in culture, 26Sor* cultures maintained GFP expression ( Figure 6D ). 26Sor*-cells displayed the morphology and expressed phenotypic markers of glia (GFAP), neurons (TuJ1, Map2), and oligodendroglia (CNPase) when exposed to differentiation media ( Figure 6E ). Therefore, as seen with the NG2-reporter virus in SCI, NG2-proteoglycan was expressed by progenitors with the potential to produce multiple cell types and morphologies and corroborate multiple cell-types observed in vivo with the NG2-reporter virus (above). Given the potential to produce a diverse array of progeny, akin to endogenous cycling NG2+-cells, we quantified the phenotypic profile adopted by 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours versus 7-days PI. Whereas experiments discussed above ( Figure 1 ) quantified virus-labeled cycling NG2+-cells of a non-specific origin, direct transplantation of 26Sor*-cells into the lesion epicenter enables niche-effects on an NG2-progenitor, of a known differentiation potential and origin to be examined directly. Cells transplanted at 24-hours PI had no fate bias, and an equal percentage of transplanted cells expressed GFAP (16.1% +/-4.8) versus APC (13.3% +/-3.9: Figure 6G . N=4 and 3, n=508). However, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI displayed a surprising differentiation profile. Contrary to virally labeled cycling NG2+-cells, which showed a shift toward an APC+ phenotype in cells born 7-days PI, 26Sor*-cells transplanted 7-days PI had a higher percentage of GFAP+-cells (25.6% +/-0.66) compared to APC+-cells (18.5% +/-0.27) 14-days after transplantation ( Figure 6G . p=0.0003; N=3, n=532). Since BMP ligands induced changes in the cellular composition of the post-injury niche ( Figure 5c ), in addition to the increase in BMP4 transcription (seen in Figure 4B ) and coincident shift in the differentiation profile of progenitors born after SCI ( Figure 5A ), we hypothesized that BMP ligands (administered at the time of transplantation) would shift the differentiation profiles of transplanted 26Sor*-cells. Specifically, we hypothesized that BMP4 at 24-hours PI would induce a profile similar to naïve 7-day transplants. Indeed, despite the split in phenotype, BMP4 induced 26Sor*-cells transplanted at 24-hours PI ( Figure 6H and I ) to adopt a differentiation profile that mimicked naïve 7-days PI transplants, instead of 24-hours PI naïve transplants ( Figure 6J and K ). Compared to the unbiased phenotype split among 24-hours PI transplants, BMP4 significantly increased the percentage of GFAP+-cells (31.3% +/-3.4) versus APC+-cells (19.3% +/-0.61; Figure 6G : p=0.13, N=3, n=692). Together, these data demonstrate that BMP4 has an appreciable ability to remodel the post-injury stem cell niche, and, in the process, BMP4 is able to modulate the fate choice of NG2-expressing progenitors.  Discussion Cell genesis following spinal cord injuries is well documented ( J. W. Fawcett and R. A. Asher, 1999 ; D. M. McTigue et al., 2001 ; L. J. Zai and J. R. Wrathall, 2005 ; L. L. Horky et al., 2006 ), however, surprisingly little data describe how progenitor cell fate is instructed and what signals drive the post-injury niche as it evolves. This has been in part due to the ambiguous nature of assaying progenitor cell lineage by histochemical methods alone. In an injury environment dying cells, proteases and immunoglobins create aberrant protein distributions and non-specific signals that confound the identification of normally detectable epitopes. This challenge has driven the development of viral and genetic methods to isolate and follow glial progenitor cell lineages based on expression of lineage specific pathways ( S. Belachew et al., 2003 ; A. Aguirre et al., 2007 ; K. Meletis et al., 2008 ; X. Zhu et al., 2008 ). The studies herein are the first to use a unique NG2-reporter virus to demonstrate a coordinated temporal shift in phenotypes adopted by progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan. This novel tool revealed a unique sub-population of cells derived from NG2-expressing cells that produce phagocytic s100?+ cells shown to contain denatured myelin within endosomes. The transcriptome of the post-injury niche was characterized and showed temporal fluctuations in regulatory genes, such as BMP, that coincide with shifts in the differentiation profiles observed for NG2-progenitors after SCI. The fates adopted by cycling NG2+-cells indicate a temporal shift occurs within the post-injury niche to direct a transition in progenitor differentiation between 24-hours and 7-days PI. By using a reporter virus to label cells actively expressing NG2-proteoglycan, these studies are the first to be able to address the fates adopted by NG2+-progenitors. Since, the cytoplasm of cells with an active NG2-promoter are labeled by EGFP, cycling NG2+-cells could be identified as GFAP+ and APC+ expression by direct association with a particular cytoplasm rather than co-incident localization with NG2-proteoglycan in the extracellular milieu. As a result, the studies revealed progenitors born 24-hours PI are gliotic, co-express CSPGs, and participate in scar formation. Whereas, NG2+-cells born 7-days PI produce a greater proportion of cells that co-express APC, which we hypothesize could participate in the functional recovery that coincides with the transition in behavioral recovery in SCI animals observed by Ma and colleagues ( M. Ma et al., 2001 ). Furthermore, the reporter virus has been the first study to provide evidence of direct co-localization of MBP on a cell with an active NG2-promoter. As a tissue recovers from injury, we show that molecular cues, known to instruct progenitors, undergo a temporal shift between 24-hours and 7-days PI. Experiments in culture have demonstrated BMPs induce Id expression to affect astrogliogenesis versus oligodendrocyte lineage commitment ( M. Yanagisawa et al., 2001 ; J. Samanta and J. A. Kessler, 2004 ). Our results demonstrate that Id1 and Id3 transcription undergoes a temporal shift that correlates with the shift in lineage commitment after SCI. The delayed increase in Olig1 and PDGF? may reflect the trend toward an oligogenic niche, which correlates with the observed shifts in fates adopted by cycling NG2+-progenitors from the acute astrocytic fate to produce oligodendrocytes. Combined, the data suggest a model for succession in a progressive progenitor niche: acute signals generated within 24 hours aid the rescue response whereby endogenous neural progenitors respond to produce astroglia to facilitate BBB repair and preserve tissue integrity. Subsequent differentiation cues progress temporally to facilitate niche-repair by directing latent progenitors (i.e. 7 days PI birth-date) to produce a greater proportion of oligodendrocytes to repair myelin. Thus, as the post-injury niche recovers, the progressive niche directs cycling NG2-cells to produce astrocytes or oligodendroglia in a regimented process. In addition, these experiments are the first to show reactive astrocytes (derived from cycling NG2+-cells) as phagocytes within with acute post-injury niche. Recent analysis of the astrocyte-transcriptome showed increased expression of phagocyte genes ( J. D. Cahoy et al., 2008 ) but for the first time, our studies show images of a class of reactive astrocyte (s100?-expressing) with myelin debris contained within endosomes (CathD+). Astrocytes have a demonstrated role in tissue homeostasis ( M. Aschner, 1998 ) and immature astrocytes have been shown to phagocytize boutons in development ( L. O. Ronnevi, 1978 ), but, how an astrocyte participates to restore homestasis in a post-injury environment is not known. More recently, quiescent multipotent s100?-astrocytes have been shown to exist after a stab wound in the brain ( A. Buffo et al., 2008 ). While the cells identified by Buffo and colleagues did not express NG2, the quiescent astrocytes proliferated and participated in reactive gliosis after injury. Our studies have revealed another class of s100?-expressing cell that does not express phenotypic marker of peripheral cells and provides the custodial function of phagoctytosis before the arrival of peripheral monocytes ( P. G. Popovich and W. F. Hickey, 2001 ). Future work on this unique astrocyte progenitor will be needed to better understand its role in removal of debris after injury. Subsequently, after intraspinal injection of BMP4, transplanted NG2-progenitors produce fewer APC+ cells compared to control transplants, and, a larger proportion of transplanted NG2-progenitors express GFAP 14-days post-transplantation. The data presented here suggests that BMP4 is a gliogenic cue in the post-injury stem cell niche that can be manipulated to direct progenitor differentiation. In conjunction, previous studies have also demonstrated that glial populations can be augmented by inhibiting noggin within the CNS, which indirectly up-regulates BMP signaling without an effect on cell proliferation ( D. W. Hampton et al., 2007 ). Alternately, the action of BMP4 could be to delay differentiation after transplantation since BMP signals have been demonstrated to regulate the “stemness” of adult progenitors and function to preserve an astrocyte stem cell ( A. Alvarez-Buylla and D. A. Lim, 2004 ) and GFAP+-progenitors are proposed to be more stem-like ( D. K. Ma et al., 2005 ). Whether sustained increases in BMP4 expression act to preserve the “stemness” of latent progenitors, or whether BMP4 promotes stemness (as indicated by increased GFAP+-cells) BMP ligands could be administered to remodel the post-injury niche to direct recovery. Together, the coordinated instruction of proliferation and differentiation would act to promote the maintenance of stem cell populations and differentiation to re-establish a stem cell niche. Using the combination of a viral NG2-reporter and transplanted NG2-expressing progenitor cells, we have shown that instructions within the post-injury niche change temporally to produce both expected and unique cell lineages from neural progenitors after a hemisection spinal cord injury. We focused this study on the hemisection because it does not have the wave of inflammation and demyelination that follows a contusion injury. Hence it is easier to demarcate the border zones of the injury site. The effect on the niche or the mediators of the niche (e.g., blood, cell death, inflammation etc) would likely be similar at the lesion epicenter of hemi-section or a contusion. However, the secondary complications are more prolific after a contusion injury despite the the cut meninges that coincide the laceration of a hemisection. ( P. G. Popovich and W. F. Hickey, 2001 ; D. J. Donnelly and P. G. Popovich, 2008 ) Therefore, a contusion injury is larger and has a widespread inflammatory response, which is a result of the mechanical trauma to the vascular system and shearing of axons over larger distances. Understanding the process and the mechanism by which progenitor fates are directed by post-injury niches will be important to develop therapeutic tools that are 1) at the mercy of the inherent cues within progressive niche, 2) designed to augment recovery from a post-traumatic injury through transplantation of exongenous stem cells, and 3) do not introduce acute injuries upon intervention. Additionally, understanding how niche succession is coordinated will elucidate how endogenous and transplanted progenitors respond to injury and how best to therapeutically manage their participation in tissue regeneration.  Discussion Cell genesis following spinal cord injuries is well documented ( J. W. Fawcett and R. A. Asher, 1999 ; D. M. McTigue et al., 2001 ; L. J. Zai and J. R. Wrathall, 2005 ; L. L. Horky et al., 2006 ), however, surprisingly little data describe how progenitor cell fate is instructed and what signals drive the post-injury niche as it evolves. This has been in part due to the ambiguous nature of assaying progenitor cell lineage by histochemical methods alone. In an injury environment dying cells, proteases and immunoglobins create aberrant protein distributions and non-specific signals that confound the identification of normally detectable epitopes. This challenge has driven the development of viral and genetic methods to isolate and follow glial progenitor cell lineages based on expression of lineage specific pathways ( S. Belachew et al., 2003 ; A. Aguirre et al., 2007 ; K. Meletis et al., 2008 ; X. Zhu et al., 2008 ). The studies herein are the first to use a unique NG2-reporter virus to demonstrate a coordinated temporal shift in phenotypes adopted by progenitors that express NG2-proteoglycan. This novel tool revealed a unique sub-population of cells derived from NG2-expressing cells that produce phagocytic s100?+ cells shown to contain denatured myelin within endosomes. The transcriptome of the post-injury niche was characterized and showed temporal fluctuations in regulatory genes, such as BMP, that coincide with shifts in the differentiation profiles observed for NG2-progenitors after SCI. The fates adopted by cycling NG2+-cells indicate a temporal shift occurs within the post-injury niche to direct a transition in progenitor differentiation between 24-hours and 7-days PI. By using a reporter virus to label cells actively expressing NG2-proteoglycan, these studies are the first to be able to address the fates adopted by NG2+-progenitors. Since, the cytoplasm of cells with an active NG2-promoter are labeled by EGFP, cycling NG2+-cells could be identified as GFAP+ and APC+ expression by direct association with a particular cytoplasm rather than co-incident localization with NG2-proteoglycan in the extracellular milieu. As a result, the studies revealed progenitors born 24-hours PI are gliotic, co-express CSPGs, and participate in scar formation. Whereas, NG2+-cells born 7-days PI produce a greater proportion of cells that co-express APC, which we hypothesize could participate in the functional recovery that coincides with the transition in behavioral recovery in SCI animals observed by Ma and colleagues ( M. Ma et al., 2001 ). Furthermore, the reporter virus has been the first study to provide evidence of direct co-localization of MBP on a cell with an active NG2-promoter. As a tissue recovers from injury, we show that molecular cues, known to instruct progenitors, undergo a temporal shift between 24-hours and 7-days PI. Experiments in culture have demonstrated BMPs induce Id expression to affect astrogliogenesis versus oligodendrocyte lineage commitment ( M. Yanagisawa et al., 2001 ; J. Samanta and J. A. Kessler, 2004 ). Our results demonstrate that Id1 and Id3 transcription undergoes a temporal shift that correlates with the shift in lineage commitment after SCI. The delayed increase in Olig1 and PDGF? may reflect the trend toward an oligogenic niche, which correlates with the observed shifts in fates adopted by cycling NG2+-progenitors from the acute astrocytic fate to produce oligodendrocytes. Combined, the data suggest a model for succession in a progressive progenitor niche: acute signals generated within 24 hours aid the rescue response whereby endogenous neural progenitors respond to produce astroglia to facilitate BBB repair and preserve tissue integrity. Subsequent differentiation cues progress temporally to facilitate niche-repair by directing latent progenitors (i.e. 7 days PI birth-date) to produce a greater proportion of oligodendrocytes to repair myelin. Thus, as the post-injury niche recovers, the progressive niche directs cycling NG2-cells to produce astrocytes or oligodendroglia in a regimented process. In addition, these experiments are the first to show reactive astrocytes (derived from cycling NG2+-cells) as phagocytes within with acute post-injury niche. Recent analysis of the astrocyte-transcriptome showed increased expression of phagocyte genes ( J. D. Cahoy et al., 2008 ) but for the first time, our studies show images of a class of reactive astrocyte (s100?-expressing) with myelin debris contained within endosomes (CathD+). Astrocytes have a demonstrated role in tissue homeostasis ( M. Aschner, 1998 ) and immature astrocytes have been shown to phagocytize boutons in development ( L. O. Ronnevi, 1978 ), but, how an astrocyte participates to restore homestasis in a post-injury environment is not known. More recently, quiescent multipotent s100?-astrocytes have been shown to exist after a stab wound in the brain ( A. Buffo et al., 2008 ). While the cells identified by Buffo and colleagues did not express NG2, the quiescent astrocytes proliferated and participated in reactive gliosis after injury. Our studies have revealed another class of s100?-expressing cell that does not express phenotypic marker of peripheral cells and provides the custodial function of phagoctytosis before the arrival of peripheral monocytes ( P. G. Popovich and W. F. Hickey, 2001 ). Future work on this unique astrocyte progenitor will be needed to better understand its role in removal of debris after injury. Subsequently, after intraspinal injection of BMP4, transplanted NG2-progenitors produce fewer APC+ cells compared to control transplants, and, a larger proportion of transplanted NG2-progenitors express GFAP 14-days post-transplantation. The data presented here suggests that BMP4 is a gliogenic cue in the post-injury stem cell niche that can be manipulated to direct progenitor differentiation. In conjunction, previous studies have also demonstrated that glial populations can be augmented by inhibiting noggin within the CNS, which indirectly up-regulates BMP signaling without an effect on cell proliferation ( D. W. Hampton et al., 2007 ). Alternately, the action of BMP4 could be to delay differentiation after transplantation since BMP signals have been demonstrated to regulate the “stemness” of adult progenitors and function to preserve an astrocyte stem cell ( A. Alvarez-Buylla and D. A. Lim, 2004 ) and GFAP+-progenitors are proposed to be more stem-like ( D. K. Ma et al., 2005 ). Whether sustained increases in BMP4 expression act to preserve the “stemness” of latent progenitors, or whether BMP4 promotes stemness (as indicated by increased GFAP+-cells) BMP ligands could be administered to remodel the post-injury niche to direct recovery. Together, the coordinated instruction of proliferation and differentiation would act to promote the maintenance of stem cell populations and differentiation to re-establish a stem cell niche. Using the combination of a viral NG2-reporter and transplanted NG2-expressing progenitor cells, we have shown that instructions within the post-injury niche change temporally to produce both expected and unique cell lineages from neural progenitors after a hemisection spinal cord injury. We focused this study on the hemisection because it does not have the wave of inflammation and demyelination that follows a contusion injury. Hence it is easier to demarcate the border zones of the injury site. The effect on the niche or the mediators of the niche (e.g., blood, cell death, inflammation etc) would likely be similar at the lesion epicenter of hemi-section or a contusion. However, the secondary complications are more prolific after a contusion injury despite the the cut meninges that coincide the laceration of a hemisection. ( P. G. Popovich and W. F. Hickey, 2001 ; D. J. Donnelly and P. G. Popovich, 2008 ) Therefore, a contusion injury is larger and has a widespread inflammatory response, which is a result of the mechanical trauma to the vascular system and shearing of axons over larger distances. Understanding the process and the mechanism by which progenitor fates are directed by post-injury niches will be important to develop therapeutic tools that are 1) at the mercy of the inherent cues within progressive niche, 2) designed to augment recovery from a post-traumatic injury through transplantation of exongenous stem cells, and 3) do not introduce acute injuries upon intervention. Additionally, understanding how niche succession is coordinated will elucidate how endogenous and transplanted progenitors respond to injury and how best to therapeutically manage their participation in tissue regeneration.  Supplementary Material Supp1  Supplementary Material Supp1  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Cycling NG2<sup>+</sup>-cells produce multiple cell types after SCI The NG2 promoter was used in a bi-cistronic retrovirus to drive the expression of EGFP ( A ), and alkaline phosphatase expression was control by the internal LTR. B . The NG2 reporter virus was used to track NG2 progenitors after injury via GFP expression ( c ) and labeled approximately 33% of infected progenitors ( D ) with >95% of EGFP expressing cells co-expressing NG2 proteoglycan ( E ). EGFP expression evaluated the phenotypes of cycling-NG2+ progeny. F. Confocal microscopy was used to determine the molecular phenotypes of progeny derived from NG2 progenitors via co-localization of EGFP with Iba1 (microglia marker), vWF (blood-vasculature pericytes) and GFAP (glial marker). G. The Virally labeled cell-phenotypes were quantified as a function of AP or GFP expression (3024 cells) in adjacent serial sections stained with vWF, Iba1 and GFAP. 24 hrs PI, the majority of cycling NG2+-cells displays a reactive phenotype (GFAP+ or Iba1+), and NG2 progenitors comprise almost 50% (combined) of reactive phenotypes (AP+Iba1+ and NG2+Iba1+ versus or AP+- and NG2+GFAP+; microglia and astroctyes, respectively). Bar, ?10 ?m. Figure 2 Progeny derived from NG2 progenitors participate in wound clearing Confocal microscopy revealed a subset of cycling NG2+ cells that did not express GFAP ( A. , arrows), and possessed large vacuoles (?5 ?m) within the cell body ( B. , arrows, inset from A. ). Vacuolated EGFP+-cells co-localized with s100? immunofluorescence but did not express ED1 ( C , ). D. Adjacent serial sections show the vacuolated s100?+ EGFP+-cells (cyan arrow) are a morphologically distinct population of phagocytic cell within the lesion, which are not Iba1+. E. An orthogonal view of a confocal z-stack shows that vacuolated s100?+ EGFP+-cells (cyan arrow) do not label with other markers for phagocytic microglia (Iba1, magenta arrow). F. Immunofluorescence with antibodies against denatured myelin basic protein (MBP 81-92) revealed the s100?+ progeny (EGFP+), within the lesion epicenter, are a phagocytic phenotype and contained denature MBP within their cytoplasm. G. An orthogonal view, rotated about the z-axis (inset from F. ), clearly shows the MBP contained within numerous EGFP+ cell processes (arrows). H. The vacuolated s100? phenotypes do not persist outside the lesion epicenter where less denatured myelin is present (2 mm rostral; arrows), and are distinct from activated Iba+-microglia. I. Immunofluorescence of cathepsin D (CathD) shows co-localization (cyan arrow) of the endosome protein in cells that contain denatured MBP (dMBP, yellow arrow). J. The rotated view of a confocal z-stack (inset from I. ) shows CathD localization on vacuoles and EGFP+ processes (cyan arrow) that flank dMBP. Monochrome breakouts show distinct localization of dMBP within an EGFP process decorated with CathD (inset from J. ; , arrows). Bar, ?10 ?m. Figure 3 NG2<sup>+</sup>-phagocytes transition to become apoptotic 7-days after SCI Immunofluorescence of virally labeled NG2+-cells, born 24-hours PI, was quantified to determine whether s100?+ EGFP+-cells (cyan arrow) become apoptotic, since the phenotype is not seen in cells born 7-days PI. A. Confocal images of Tissue harvested from animals at 3- and 7-days ( B. ) PI was imuunofluorescently stained with antibodies against Caspase 3 (Casp3) and s100?. Rotational views generated from each designated insets ( A. and B. ) of serial sections show the morphology and colocization of Casp3+ cells, and showed a significant (p=0.027) increase in Casp3+ s100?+ EGFP+-cells (arrows) between 3- and 7-days PI ( C. , 3.65% +/-0.46 to 9.23 +/-1.49, respectively). Overall, apoptotic cells (yellow arrow, Casp3+) increased significantly (p=0.012) from 3- and 7-days PI (16.77% +/-3.6 to 36.97 +/-4.4, respectively). Bar, 10 ?m. Figure 4 Progeny from cycling NG2<sup>+</sup> cells show temporal shifts in differentiation profile after SCI The NG2 reporter virus was used to label cycling NG2 progenitors at 24 hours PI or 7 day PI ( A ). The phenotypes of the labeled cells were examined at 3 and 14 days PI. B. 53% of the progeny derived from NG2 cells, born 24 hrs PI, astrocytes (GFAP+) compared to 24% APC+ immature oligodendrocytes. The direction of phenotype undergoes a significant temporal shift (p<0.001) to produce more oligodendrocytes (53%) and fewer (35%) when the progenitors are born 7 days after SCI and evaluated 14 days PI. The astrocyte progeny (born 24 hrs PI) are seen within the lesion epicenter expressing a gloitic phenotype ( C. GFAP+ and chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan, CSPG+). D. A high-resolution z-stack (tilted orthogonal view from C. inset) shows distinct co-localization of GFAP with EGFP+ processes in cells born 24 hrs PI (arrows). Color channel-breakouts highlight the morphology and localization of CSPG on GFAP+ cells. (inset from D. ) E. Progeny derived from progenitors cycling at 7 days PI express myelin basic protein (MBP) by 14 days PI. F. A high-resolution z-stack (tilted orthogonal view from E. inset) shows distinct co-localization of MBP with EGFP+ processes (arrows) in cells born 7 days PI that encircle neurofilament (NF+) profiles. Color channel-breakouts from F. show an NF+ profile circumscribed by an EGFP+MBP+-process. Bar, 10 ?m. Figure 5 Temporal shifts in the expression of molecular cues and BMP ligand injection modulate gliogenesis in the post-injury niche Real-time PCR on cDNA derived from injurious tissue (24 hr PI or 7 day PI, orange and blue symbols respectively) quantified the difference in expression of 17 genes. The fold change in gene expression is expressed as the difference in threshold cycle compared to GAPDH expression of experimental versus control values (24hr PI or 7d PI, circles and squares, respectively). A. BMP4 expression is elevated 2.5 fold at 24 hrs PI and continues to increase by 7 days PI (8.9 fold), which could influence the increase early Id1 expression 24 hrs PI (up 2 fold). Whereas, Id3 becomes elevated 3.6 fold by 7d PI and Shh expression is suppressed 80% (.24 of controls). Id2 did not change significantly. B. Factors know to be necessary for oligodendrocyte differentiation have reduced expression levels 24 hrs PI (Olig1, PDGF?) but return to control levels by 7 days PI to facilitate remyelination. *, p=0.05; **, p<0.01; ***, ††† p<0.001 by t-test. C. BMP signaling was modulated in SCI by direct injection of BMP4 (24-hours PI) and Noggin (7-days PI). Gliogenesis (GFAP+-cells, and APC+-cells) was reduced significantly (p=0.021) in BMP4 injected animals. Whereas, Noggin increased astrogliogenesis (GFAP+), but decrease overall numbers of oligodendrocytes (APC+) in animals injected 7 days-PI. Cell proliferation was not affected by BMP4 or Noggin (statistics determined by one-tailed t-test). Figure 6 NG2-progenitors respond to BMP4 when transplanted into a progressive niche The NG2 promoter was used to drive the expression of CRE recombinase (A.), and infect spinal cord progenitors isolate from ROSA?GFP mice (26Sor cells). B. After infection, induced GFP expression was analyzed by activated flourescence and cells (26Sor*-cells) were purified via FACS (EGFP-high). C. mRNA isolated from 26Sor*-cells confirmed CRE expression in cells that express NG2 and EGFP. Sor26*-cells were amplified in cell culture and analyzed, via FACS (D.), prior to tranplantation into SCI. E. The stemness of 26Sor*-cells was examine under differentiation conditions to produce s100?+ astrocyte, CNPase+ oligodendrocyte and Map2+ neuronal phenotypes. F. Hemisection-SCI animals received transplants of 26Sor*-cells at 24-hours and 7-days PI (+/-BMP4). The differentiation profile of transplanted 26Sor* was examined 14-days post-transplantation. G. BMP4 increased the percentage GFAP+ 26Sor*-cells (31.3%, H. and I., cyan arrow), compared to naïve controls (16.1%; J. and K.), to exceed the percent of GFAP+ cells in animals that received tranplants at 7-days PI (25.6%; p=0.032). BMP4 did not alter the percent of APC+ 26Sor*-cells (yellow arrow) significantly (statistics determined by one-tailed t-test). Rotated views of Confocal z-plane stacks (I. and K. from H. and J., respectively) showed increases in the proportions of GFAP co-localization (I.) versus APC (K.) on 26Sor*-cells transplanted with BMP4 24-hours PI. Monochrome breakouts (from insets) show distinct localization of GFAP and APC with EGFP+ processes (cyan and yellow arrows, respectively). Bar, ?10 ?m. Table 1 Real-time PCR primer sets and amplicon size Gene 5? primer sequence 3? primer sequence bp Noggin cagccggcggccagcactat ctctgggggcgaagtggcca 185 BMP4 gcttgagtacccggagcgt tgctgctgaggttgaagagga 131 Olig1 gaacgcggctcccgcgacca gagcggagcttcggccttct 178 Olig2 cagagctgagctccgagcta cgggctcagtcatctgcttctt 168 PDGF? ggctgcggatacctcgccca gcatcctcagcccctacgga 143 Nkx2.2 gaagacggctcggtggccga gaggccctcggtgctggcca 180 BMP2 ccggccttcggaagacgtcct gcggctggctgccctctcca 187 GAPDH cgggaagcccatcaccatct gggcggagatgatgacccgt 161 Id1 cctagctgttcgctgaaggc gtagagcaggacgttcacct 141 Id2 gtccggtgaggtccgttag tgtagagcagactcatcgggt 99 Id3 cgaccgaggagcctcttag gcaggatttccacctggcta 114 Shh tcacaagaaactccgaacgattt gatgtccactgctcgaccc 248 Table 2 The specificity of transgene expression by the NG2 promoter was examined by retroviral infection of aSCPs in vitro Transgene Efficiency (% Infected) Specificity (% of NG2+) GFP 82.5 +/- 10.63 91.8 +/- 3.73 CRE 45.1 +/- 9.67 91.2 +/- 5.12 aSCPs were infected with an NG2-reporter virus (105 cfu/ml). Three days after infection, transgene expression was interrogated by immunofluorescence. The specificity of the NG2-promoter viruses was quantified by co-localization of GFP or CRE recombinase on NG2+-cells.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Cycling NG2<sup>+</sup>-cells produce multiple cell types after SCI The NG2 promoter was used in a bi-cistronic retrovirus to drive the expression of EGFP ( A ), and alkaline phosphatase expression was control by the internal LTR. B . The NG2 reporter virus was used to track NG2 progenitors after injury via GFP expression ( c ) and labeled approximately 33% of infected progenitors ( D ) with >95% of EGFP expressing cells co-expressing NG2 proteoglycan ( E ). EGFP expression evaluated the phenotypes of cycling-NG2+ progeny. F. Confocal microscopy was used to determine the molecular phenotypes of progeny derived from NG2 progenitors via co-localization of EGFP with Iba1 (microglia marker), vWF (blood-vasculature pericytes) and GFAP (glial marker). G. The Virally labeled cell-phenotypes were quantified as a function of AP or GFP expression (3024 cells) in adjacent serial sections stained with vWF, Iba1 and GFAP. 24 hrs PI, the majority of cycling NG2+-cells displays a reactive phenotype (GFAP+ or Iba1+), and NG2 progenitors comprise almost 50% (combined) of reactive phenotypes (AP+Iba1+ and NG2+Iba1+ versus or AP+- and NG2+GFAP+; microglia and astroctyes, respectively). Bar, ?10 ?m. Figure 2 Progeny derived from NG2 progenitors participate in wound clearing Confocal microscopy revealed a subset of cycling NG2+ cells that did not express GFAP ( A. , arrows), and possessed large vacuoles (?5 ?m) within the cell body ( B. , arrows, inset from A. ). Vacuolated EGFP+-cells co-localized with s100? immunofluorescence but did not express ED1 ( C , ). D. Adjacent serial sections show the vacuolated s100?+ EGFP+-cells (cyan arrow) are a morphologically distinct population of phagocytic cell within the lesion, which are not Iba1+. E. An orthogonal view of a confocal z-stack shows that vacuolated s100?+ EGFP+-cells (cyan arrow) do not label with other markers for phagocytic microglia (Iba1, magenta arrow). F. Immunofluorescence with antibodies against denatured myelin basic protein (MBP 81-92) revealed the s100?+ progeny (EGFP+), within the lesion epicenter, are a phagocytic phenotype and contained denature MBP within their cytoplasm. G. An orthogonal view, rotated about the z-axis (inset from F. ), clearly shows the MBP contained within numerous EGFP+ cell processes (arrows). H. The vacuolated s100? phenotypes do not persist outside the lesion epicenter where less denatured myelin is present (2 mm rostral; arrows), and are distinct from activated Iba+-microglia. I. Immunofluorescence of cathepsin D (CathD) shows co-localization (cyan arrow) of the endosome protein in cells that contain denatured MBP (dMBP, yellow arrow). J. The rotated view of a confocal z-stack (inset from I. ) shows CathD localization on vacuoles and EGFP+ processes (cyan arrow) that flank dMBP. Monochrome breakouts show distinct localization of dMBP within an EGFP process decorated with CathD (inset from J. ; , arrows). Bar, ?10 ?m. Figure 3 NG2<sup>+</sup>-phagocytes transition to become apoptotic 7-days after SCI Immunofluorescence of virally labeled NG2+-cells, born 24-hours PI, was quantified to determine whether s100?+ EGFP+-cells (cyan arrow) become apoptotic, since the phenotype is not seen in cells born 7-days PI. A. Confocal images of Tissue harvested from animals at 3- and 7-days ( B. ) PI was imuunofluorescently stained with antibodies against Caspase 3 (Casp3) and s100?. Rotational views generated from each designated insets ( A. and B. ) of serial sections show the morphology and colocization of Casp3+ cells, and showed a significant (p=0.027) increase in Casp3+ s100?+ EGFP+-cells (arrows) between 3- and 7-days PI ( C. , 3.65% +/-0.46 to 9.23 +/-1.49, respectively). Overall, apoptotic cells (yellow arrow, Casp3+) increased significantly (p=0.012) from 3- and 7-days PI (16.77% +/-3.6 to 36.97 +/-4.4, respectively). Bar, 10 ?m. Figure 4 Progeny from cycling NG2<sup>+</sup> cells show temporal shifts in differentiation profile after SCI The NG2 reporter virus was used to label cycling NG2 progenitors at 24 hours PI or 7 day PI ( A ). The phenotypes of the labeled cells were examined at 3 and 14 days PI. B. 53% of the progeny derived from NG2 cells, born 24 hrs PI, astrocytes (GFAP+) compared to 24% APC+ immature oligodendrocytes. The direction of phenotype undergoes a significant temporal shift (p<0.001) to produce more oligodendrocytes (53%) and fewer (35%) when the progenitors are born 7 days after SCI and evaluated 14 days PI. The astrocyte progeny (born 24 hrs PI) are seen within the lesion epicenter expressing a gloitic phenotype ( C. GFAP+ and chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan, CSPG+). D. A high-resolution z-stack (tilted orthogonal view from C. inset) shows distinct co-localization of GFAP with EGFP+ processes in cells born 24 hrs PI (arrows). Color channel-breakouts highlight the morphology and localization of CSPG on GFAP+ cells. (inset from D. ) E. Progeny derived from progenitors cycling at 7 days PI express myelin basic protein (MBP) by 14 days PI. F. A high-resolution z-stack (tilted orthogonal view from E. inset) shows distinct co-localization of MBP with EGFP+ processes (arrows) in cells born 7 days PI that encircle neurofilament (NF+) profiles. Color channel-breakouts from F. show an NF+ profile circumscribed by an EGFP+MBP+-process. Bar, 10 ?m. Figure 5 Temporal shifts in the expression of molecular cues and BMP ligand injection modulate gliogenesis in the post-injury niche Real-time PCR on cDNA derived from injurious tissue (24 hr PI or 7 day PI, orange and blue symbols respectively) quantified the difference in expression of 17 genes. The fold change in gene expression is expressed as the difference in threshold cycle compared to GAPDH expression of experimental versus control values (24hr PI or 7d PI, circles and squares, respectively). A. BMP4 expression is elevated 2.5 fold at 24 hrs PI and continues to increase by 7 days PI (8.9 fold), which could influence the increase early Id1 expression 24 hrs PI (up 2 fold). Whereas, Id3 becomes elevated 3.6 fold by 7d PI and Shh expression is suppressed 80% (.24 of controls). Id2 did not change significantly. B. Factors know to be necessary for oligodendrocyte differentiation have reduced expression levels 24 hrs PI (Olig1, PDGF?) but return to control levels by 7 days PI to facilitate remyelination. *, p=0.05; **, p<0.01; ***, ††† p<0.001 by t-test. C. BMP signaling was modulated in SCI by direct injection of BMP4 (24-hours PI) and Noggin (7-days PI). Gliogenesis (GFAP+-cells, and APC+-cells) was reduced significantly (p=0.021) in BMP4 injected animals. Whereas, Noggin increased astrogliogenesis (GFAP+), but decrease overall numbers of oligodendrocytes (APC+) in animals injected 7 days-PI. Cell proliferation was not affected by BMP4 or Noggin (statistics determined by one-tailed t-test). Figure 6 NG2-progenitors respond to BMP4 when transplanted into a progressive niche The NG2 promoter was used to drive the expression of CRE recombinase (A.), and infect spinal cord progenitors isolate from ROSA?GFP mice (26Sor cells). B. After infection, induced GFP expression was analyzed by activated flourescence and cells (26Sor*-cells) were purified via FACS (EGFP-high). C. mRNA isolated from 26Sor*-cells confirmed CRE expression in cells that express NG2 and EGFP. Sor26*-cells were amplified in cell culture and analyzed, via FACS (D.), prior to tranplantation into SCI. E. The stemness of 26Sor*-cells was examine under differentiation conditions to produce s100?+ astrocyte, CNPase+ oligodendrocyte and Map2+ neuronal phenotypes. F. Hemisection-SCI animals received transplants of 26Sor*-cells at 24-hours and 7-days PI (+/-BMP4). The differentiation profile of transplanted 26Sor* was examined 14-days post-transplantation. G. BMP4 increased the percentage GFAP+ 26Sor*-cells (31.3%, H. and I., cyan arrow), compared to naïve controls (16.1%; J. and K.), to exceed the percent of GFAP+ cells in animals that received tranplants at 7-days PI (25.6%; p=0.032). BMP4 did not alter the percent of APC+ 26Sor*-cells (yellow arrow) significantly (statistics determined by one-tailed t-test). Rotated views of Confocal z-plane stacks (I. and K. from H. and J., respectively) showed increases in the proportions of GFAP co-localization (I.) versus APC (K.) on 26Sor*-cells transplanted with BMP4 24-hours PI. Monochrome breakouts (from insets) show distinct localization of GFAP and APC with EGFP+ processes (cyan and yellow arrows, respectively). Bar, ?10 ?m. Table 1 Real-time PCR primer sets and amplicon size Gene 5? primer sequence 3? primer sequence bp Noggin cagccggcggccagcactat ctctgggggcgaagtggcca 185 BMP4 gcttgagtacccggagcgt tgctgctgaggttgaagagga 131 Olig1 gaacgcggctcccgcgacca gagcggagcttcggccttct 178 Olig2 cagagctgagctccgagcta cgggctcagtcatctgcttctt 168 PDGF? ggctgcggatacctcgccca gcatcctcagcccctacgga 143 Nkx2.2 gaagacggctcggtggccga gaggccctcggtgctggcca 180 BMP2 ccggccttcggaagacgtcct gcggctggctgccctctcca 187 GAPDH cgggaagcccatcaccatct gggcggagatgatgacccgt 161 Id1 cctagctgttcgctgaaggc gtagagcaggacgttcacct 141 Id2 gtccggtgaggtccgttag tgtagagcagactcatcgggt 99 Id3 cgaccgaggagcctcttag gcaggatttccacctggcta 114 Shh tcacaagaaactccgaacgattt gatgtccactgctcgaccc 248 Table 2 The specificity of transgene expression by the NG2 promoter was examined by retroviral infection of aSCPs in vitro Transgene Efficiency (% Infected) Specificity (% of NG2+) GFP 82.5 +/- 10.63 91.8 +/- 3.73 CRE 45.1 +/- 9.67 91.2 +/- 5.12 aSCPs were infected with an NG2-reporter virus (105 cfu/ml). Three days after infection, transgene expression was interrogated by immunofluorescence. The specificity of the NG2-promoter viruses was quantified by co-localization of GFP or CRE recombinase on NG2+-cells. 