Down syndrome suppression of tumor growth and the role of the calcineurin inhibitor DSCR1 The incidence of many cancer types is significantly reduced in individuals with Down syndrome 1 – 4 and it is proposed that this broad cancer protection is conferred by the elevated expression of one or more of the 231 supernumerary genes on the extra copy of chromosome 21. One such gene is the Down syndrome candidate region-1 ( Dscr1, RCAN1 ), which encodes a protein that suppresses vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mediated angiogenic signalling via the calcineurin pathway 5 – 10 . Here we show that DSCR1 is elevated in Down syndrome individuals and a mouse model of Down syndrome. Further, we show that the modest elevation in expression afforded by a single extra transgenic copy of Dscr1 is sufficient to confer significant suppression of tumor growth in mice and that such resistance is a consequence of a deficit in tumor angiogenesis arising from suppression of the calcineurin pathway. We also provide evidence that attenuation of calcineurin activity by DSCR1 together with another chromosome 21 gene DYRK1A, may be sufficient to dramatically diminish angiogenesis. These data provide a mechanism for the reduced cancer incidence in Down syndrome and identifies the calcineurin signalling pathway and its regulators DSCR1 and DYRK1A as potential therapeutic targets in cancers arising in all individuals.  Methods Generation of Ts65Dn mice and Ts65Dn-<italic>Dscr1</italic> heterozygous mice Two-month old diploid and Ts65Dn mice age 2–4 months old were obtained by breeding Ts65Dn females with C57BL/6C3H F1 males or acquired from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). Mice were karyotyped with chromosomal spreads from the blood 26 , and metaphase chromosomal spreads were prepared and karyotypes evaluated. All protocols were approved by the Children’s Hospital or USUHS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Experiments were performed without prior knowledge of genotypes. The Ts65Dn/ Dscr1 +/? mice that were diploid for the Dscr1 gene and trisomic for the rest of the Ts65Dn segment of Chr.16 was generated as follows: Males heterozygous for the Dscr1 gene on a C57Bl/6 background were bred with Ts65Dn females. Litters were genotyped by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and PCR screening using tail DNA as previously described 6 , 27 . In brief, nuclei of blood leukocytes stained by DAPI show red spots that reveal presence of chromosomes 16 and Ts65Dn segment detected by FISH with a probe produced by labeling of BAC 480C6 (Research Genetics), containing a fragment of Ts65Dn segment) with biotin-dUTP or digoxigenin-dUTP (Boehringer Mannheim) in a nick-translation reaction. <italic>Dscr</italic>1 transgenic mice A 593 bp cDNA fragment encoding the inducible murine Dscr1 isoform ( Dscr1.Ex4 ) was subcloned with a 5’ 6- myc epitope into a a hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase ( Hprt ) targeting vector with the Dscr1.Ex4 native 2 Kb promoter 28 . Allowing generation of single-copy, site-specific recombination at the Hprt locus reducing the risk of non-specific phenotypes due to site of insertion 29 . This construct was targeted into the Hprt locus by electroporation into Hprt -deficient embryonic stem cells (BK4 cells). Two independent recombinant embryonic stem cell clones screened by PCR and Southern blot were injected into blastocysts with both lines demonstrating germline transmission. Dscr1 transgenic mice were backcrossed onto a C57Bl/6 background for 6 generations. Western blot analysis Fourteen week-old human fetal kidney and liver tissue were isolated from control and DS tissue obtained from therapeutic miscarriages according to an approved IRB protocol at UCLA. Tissues were lysed in RIPA buffer and protein quantified by the Bio Rad DC Protein Assay. Five µg of tissues were, separated by SDS-PAGE, probed with anti-DSCR1 (clone 14B4) mAb 18 and detected via chemiluminescence (ECL, Amersham). Blots were stripped and re-probed with beta actin. Levels of DSCR1 were quantified by densitometric analysis in the linear range and compared to beta actin. Ts65Dn mice, diploid littermates and Dscr1 -null mice were sacrificed between 8–12 weeks of age, their brains dissected and probed as described above. Human microvascular endothelial cells (Cambrex) were cultured as previously described 6 , lysed, separated by SDS-PAGE and probed with anti-DYRK1A pAb (Abcam). Primary mouse endothelial cells from the indicated genotypes were lysed, separated by SDS-PAGE and probed with anti-Myc (9E10) mAb or anti-COX2 mAb (Alexis). Immunohistochemistry and microvessel density Mice were euthanized and tumors harvested and fixed in neutral-buffered formalin for paraffin embedding. Paraffin embedded sections were deparaffinized and epitopes unmasked as previously described 6 . Sections were immunostained with rat anti-CD31 mAb (1:50; Pharmingen) overnight at room temperature followed by incubation for 2 hours with goat anti-rat Alexa 594 conjugated secondary antibody (1:1000; Molecular Probes), and analyzed using Axio Vision 4.0 software. Microvessel density was quantified after CD31 immunostaining of 5 sections per tumor, 5 mice per cohort and quantified as previously described 6 . Quantification of microvessel density in tumors by flow cytometry Tumor-bearing mice were anesthetized with avertin and the vasculature perfused for 3 minutes at 120 mm Hg pressure with saline from a 18-gauge cannula inserted into the aorta via an incision in the left ventricle. Tumors were dissected, minced with scissors, and then digested in PBS supplemented with 2 mg/ml of collagenase/dispase (Roche) for 45 minutes at 37°C. Dissociated cells were resuspended with PBS containing 10% FBS and 106 cells were stained with anti-mouse CD31-FITC conjugated antibody plus anti-mouse CD45-PerCP conjugated antibody (BD Pharmingen) for 15 minutes on ice. Cells were washed in PBS, examined in a FACScan flow cytometer, and analyzed using CellQuest software (BD Biosciences). FITC-lectin perfusion Mice were anesthetized with isofluorane. FITC-labeled Lycopersicon esculentum lectin (100 µg in 100 µl of 0.9% NaCl; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) was injected into the femoral vein and allowed to circulate for 3 minutes before perfusion of fixative. The chest was opened and the vasculature perfused for 3 minutes at a pressure of 120 mm Hg with fixative (4% paraformaldehyde in PBS) from a 18-gauge cannula inserted into the aorta via an incision in the left ventricle. The right atrium was incised to create a route for the fixative to escape. After removal, tissues were processed for immunohistochemistry. Immunofluorescence 10×105 endothelial cells/ml were plated onto gelatin-coated glass coverslips overnight. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min followed by blocking in 3% milk in TBS-T for 45 min. Anti-VEGF-R2 mAb (1:500; Cell Signaling) or anti-mouse NF-ATc1 (1:200) or isotype matched control antibodies was added for 1 hr. Cells were washed with PBS-T before the addition of rabbit anti-mouse-Alexa594 (1:500; Molecular Probes) for 30 min protected from light. Nuclei were stained with 1% Hoechst dye for 1 minute. Cells were washed with PBS-T, mounted and imaged on a fluorescence microscope. Quantification of <italic>Dscr1</italic> and <italic>Cox-2</italic> mRNA in endothelial cells Total RNA was isolated from 5×105 endothelial cells using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). cDNA was generated from 5 ug total RNA using SuperScript III First –Strand Synthesis system (Invitrogen) and subjected to real-time PCR with PerfeCTa™ SYBR Green SuperMix (Quanta Biosciences) using the RNA Engine Opticon Monitor 2 System (MJ Research Inc). Dscr1 was amplified with forward primer: 5’-AGCTCCCTGATTGCTTGTGT-3’and reverse primer: 5’-AGGAACTCGGTCTTGTGCAG-3’. COX-2 was amplified with forward primer: 5’-CCCCCACAGTCAAAGACACT-3’and reverse primer: 5’-AGTTGCTCATCACCCCACTC-3’. GAPDH was amplified with forward primer: 5’-TGAAGGTCGGTGTGAACGGATTTGG-3’ and reverse primer: 5’-CATGTAGGCCATGAGGTCCACCAC-3’. Retroviral expression of DYRK1A Dyrk1A cDNA was obtained from Open Biosystems, excised with EcoR1 and cloned into pBABE. DYRK1A retrovirus was generated by transfecting GPG293 cells as previously described 30 . Virus was used to infect 2×105 human microvascular endothelial cells or primary mouse endothelial cells by serial incubations with DYRK1A virus.  Generation of Ts65Dn mice and Ts65Dn-<italic>Dscr1</italic> heterozygous mice Two-month old diploid and Ts65Dn mice age 2–4 months old were obtained by breeding Ts65Dn females with C57BL/6C3H F1 males or acquired from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). Mice were karyotyped with chromosomal spreads from the blood 26 , and metaphase chromosomal spreads were prepared and karyotypes evaluated. All protocols were approved by the Children’s Hospital or USUHS Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Experiments were performed without prior knowledge of genotypes. The Ts65Dn/ Dscr1 +/? mice that were diploid for the Dscr1 gene and trisomic for the rest of the Ts65Dn segment of Chr.16 was generated as follows: Males heterozygous for the Dscr1 gene on a C57Bl/6 background were bred with Ts65Dn females. Litters were genotyped by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and PCR screening using tail DNA as previously described 6 , 27 . In brief, nuclei of blood leukocytes stained by DAPI show red spots that reveal presence of chromosomes 16 and Ts65Dn segment detected by FISH with a probe produced by labeling of BAC 480C6 (Research Genetics), containing a fragment of Ts65Dn segment) with biotin-dUTP or digoxigenin-dUTP (Boehringer Mannheim) in a nick-translation reaction.  <italic>Dscr</italic>1 transgenic mice A 593 bp cDNA fragment encoding the inducible murine Dscr1 isoform ( Dscr1.Ex4 ) was subcloned with a 5’ 6- myc epitope into a a hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase ( Hprt ) targeting vector with the Dscr1.Ex4 native 2 Kb promoter 28 . Allowing generation of single-copy, site-specific recombination at the Hprt locus reducing the risk of non-specific phenotypes due to site of insertion 29 . This construct was targeted into the Hprt locus by electroporation into Hprt -deficient embryonic stem cells (BK4 cells). Two independent recombinant embryonic stem cell clones screened by PCR and Southern blot were injected into blastocysts with both lines demonstrating germline transmission. Dscr1 transgenic mice were backcrossed onto a C57Bl/6 background for 6 generations.  Western blot analysis Fourteen week-old human fetal kidney and liver tissue were isolated from control and DS tissue obtained from therapeutic miscarriages according to an approved IRB protocol at UCLA. Tissues were lysed in RIPA buffer and protein quantified by the Bio Rad DC Protein Assay. Five µg of tissues were, separated by SDS-PAGE, probed with anti-DSCR1 (clone 14B4) mAb 18 and detected via chemiluminescence (ECL, Amersham). Blots were stripped and re-probed with beta actin. Levels of DSCR1 were quantified by densitometric analysis in the linear range and compared to beta actin. Ts65Dn mice, diploid littermates and Dscr1 -null mice were sacrificed between 8–12 weeks of age, their brains dissected and probed as described above. Human microvascular endothelial cells (Cambrex) were cultured as previously described 6 , lysed, separated by SDS-PAGE and probed with anti-DYRK1A pAb (Abcam). Primary mouse endothelial cells from the indicated genotypes were lysed, separated by SDS-PAGE and probed with anti-Myc (9E10) mAb or anti-COX2 mAb (Alexis).  Immunohistochemistry and microvessel density Mice were euthanized and tumors harvested and fixed in neutral-buffered formalin for paraffin embedding. Paraffin embedded sections were deparaffinized and epitopes unmasked as previously described 6 . Sections were immunostained with rat anti-CD31 mAb (1:50; Pharmingen) overnight at room temperature followed by incubation for 2 hours with goat anti-rat Alexa 594 conjugated secondary antibody (1:1000; Molecular Probes), and analyzed using Axio Vision 4.0 software. Microvessel density was quantified after CD31 immunostaining of 5 sections per tumor, 5 mice per cohort and quantified as previously described 6 .  Quantification of microvessel density in tumors by flow cytometry Tumor-bearing mice were anesthetized with avertin and the vasculature perfused for 3 minutes at 120 mm Hg pressure with saline from a 18-gauge cannula inserted into the aorta via an incision in the left ventricle. Tumors were dissected, minced with scissors, and then digested in PBS supplemented with 2 mg/ml of collagenase/dispase (Roche) for 45 minutes at 37°C. Dissociated cells were resuspended with PBS containing 10% FBS and 106 cells were stained with anti-mouse CD31-FITC conjugated antibody plus anti-mouse CD45-PerCP conjugated antibody (BD Pharmingen) for 15 minutes on ice. Cells were washed in PBS, examined in a FACScan flow cytometer, and analyzed using CellQuest software (BD Biosciences).  FITC-lectin perfusion Mice were anesthetized with isofluorane. FITC-labeled Lycopersicon esculentum lectin (100 µg in 100 µl of 0.9% NaCl; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) was injected into the femoral vein and allowed to circulate for 3 minutes before perfusion of fixative. The chest was opened and the vasculature perfused for 3 minutes at a pressure of 120 mm Hg with fixative (4% paraformaldehyde in PBS) from a 18-gauge cannula inserted into the aorta via an incision in the left ventricle. The right atrium was incised to create a route for the fixative to escape. After removal, tissues were processed for immunohistochemistry.  Immunofluorescence 10×105 endothelial cells/ml were plated onto gelatin-coated glass coverslips overnight. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min followed by blocking in 3% milk in TBS-T for 45 min. Anti-VEGF-R2 mAb (1:500; Cell Signaling) or anti-mouse NF-ATc1 (1:200) or isotype matched control antibodies was added for 1 hr. Cells were washed with PBS-T before the addition of rabbit anti-mouse-Alexa594 (1:500; Molecular Probes) for 30 min protected from light. Nuclei were stained with 1% Hoechst dye for 1 minute. Cells were washed with PBS-T, mounted and imaged on a fluorescence microscope.  Quantification of <italic>Dscr1</italic> and <italic>Cox-2</italic> mRNA in endothelial cells Total RNA was isolated from 5×105 endothelial cells using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). cDNA was generated from 5 ug total RNA using SuperScript III First –Strand Synthesis system (Invitrogen) and subjected to real-time PCR with PerfeCTa™ SYBR Green SuperMix (Quanta Biosciences) using the RNA Engine Opticon Monitor 2 System (MJ Research Inc). Dscr1 was amplified with forward primer: 5’-AGCTCCCTGATTGCTTGTGT-3’and reverse primer: 5’-AGGAACTCGGTCTTGTGCAG-3’. COX-2 was amplified with forward primer: 5’-CCCCCACAGTCAAAGACACT-3’and reverse primer: 5’-AGTTGCTCATCACCCCACTC-3’. GAPDH was amplified with forward primer: 5’-TGAAGGTCGGTGTGAACGGATTTGG-3’ and reverse primer: 5’-CATGTAGGCCATGAGGTCCACCAC-3’.  Retroviral expression of DYRK1A Dyrk1A cDNA was obtained from Open Biosystems, excised with EcoR1 and cloned into pBABE. DYRK1A retrovirus was generated by transfecting GPG293 cells as previously described 30 . Virus was used to infect 2×105 human microvascular endothelial cells or primary mouse endothelial cells by serial incubations with DYRK1A virus.  Supplementary Material 1 