Transient Life-Threatening Cerebral Edema in a Patient with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Central nervous system symptoms occur in a substantial portion of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. However, coma is a rare presentation and is usually secondary to complications such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, seizure, or ischemia. Here, we present a 49-year-old woman with lupus erythematosus and a history of recurrent aseptic meningitis and mild subarachnoid hemorrhage who presented with altered mental status and lethargy that progressed rapidly over hours to the herniation syndrome of coma, extensor posturing, and unilateral pupillary dilation. Spinal fluid showed massive protein elevation (>1600), and head computed tomography revealed global cerebral edema. The clinical and radiologic findings rapidly reversed with intravenous corticosteroids and mannitol within 24 hours, and her mental status improved to baseline. Her course was complicated by 2 episodes of recurrent encephalopathy when corticosteroids were tapered; these resolved after resuming high dosing. Because of ongoing pancytopenia, chemotherapy immunosuppression was delayed, and instead she received intravenous immunoglobulin with improvement in the pancytopenia. She remained cognitively intact during subsequent corticosteroid tapering. Rapid development of coma in lupus patients may be due to a primary process of the disease impacting blood brain barrier integrity. Although rare, this potentially fatal complication may be reversible with acute corticosteroid administration.  Discussion The case describes a patient with longstanding SLE mainly manifested by recurrent miscarriages, anemia, and thrombocytopenia in the context of antiphospholipid antibodies who developed multiple complications including embolic stroke (possibly paradoxical in the setting of patent foramen ovale and DVT), recurrent aseptic meningitis, and SAH (in the setting of anticoagulation). The most dramatic complication was the rapid development of diffuse life-threatening cerebral edema, which rapidly reversed with corticosteroid and mannitol treatment. There was no evidence for hypertension, metabolic or electrolyte derangement, infection, seizure, anoxia, ischemia, or venous sinus thrombosis. There was, however, severe protein elevation in the CSF, as well as contrast extravasation on CT scans, suggesting profound blood brain barrier (BBB) compromise. Although there was evidence for mild subarachnoid hemorrhage, we do not feel this accounted for the diffuse edema. In one study, the clinical severity and edema was related to aneurysm size, coma on presentation, and use of pressor agents. 22 In our case, the initial SAH occurred at an unknown time during 2 weeks of subacute antecedent headache, and there was no evidence of aneurysm or diffuse blood to explain her presentation. It is also unknown whether a single event or repeated leakages occurred in the context of inflamed BBB and ongoing anticoagulation. Although we cannot completely rule out a contribution of the SAH to edema and inflammation, the global edema was out of proportion to the small amount of SAH, and it resolved rapidly with anti-inflammatory and antiedema treatments, neither of which is compatible with SAH as the cause. We attribute the improvement to corticosteroids, as opposed to the mannitol, because of ( a ) the evidence of massive inflammation; ( b ) intact blood brain barrier is required for osmotic therapy efficacy; and ( c ) the recurrence of encephalopathy immediately upon weaning corticosteroids. The spectrum of neuropsychiatric complications of lupus and other rheumatologic diseases is diverse, 1 , 2 but coma from cerebral edema is a rare event. The most common causes of cerebral edema in the ICU setting are subarachnoid hemorrhage, trauma, global hypoxia (for example, after cardiac arrest), infection, or severe metabolic derangements (electrolyte, liver, or renal dysfunction). None of these mechanisms were present in our case. Lupus cerebritis is thought to be an inflammatory process, involving loss of blood brain barrier integrity, resulting in high CSF protein levels, and cerebral edema. Blood brain barrier mechanics and breakdown in disease states involving inflammatory processes has been reviewed by Petty and Lo. 23 Whether water transport via aquaporins is specifically involved in lupus cerebritis remains unknown, but the increasingly large number of lupus-related antibodies 9 and the recent evidence from a mouse model of lupus implicating aquaporins 24 raises the possibility of brain aquaporin regulation 25 as a potential diagnostic or therapeutic target. In one study, progesterone decreased the edema and aquaporin expression found in an animal model of traumatic brain injury. 26 Similarly, serum levels of adhesion molecules have been correlated with central nervous system disease activity, as well as antiphospholipid antibody levels, in lupus patients. 27 Mechanisms of vascular permeability and BBB compromise might be more likely than a possible transient (and FLAIR-negative) vasculitis process, although pathologic analysis would complement these measures. Although a nonvasculitic autoimmune inflammatory meningoencephalitis syndrome has been described, 28 the onset ranged from 3 weeks to >1 year of cognitive changes, in contrast to our case (< 18 hours onset). SLE comprises one of many diseases increasingly recognized to affect the nervous system through autoimmune mechanisms. 29 Further understanding of the effects of inflammation on blood brain barrier function may improve diagnosis and treatment of this spectrum of disorders. 30  Discussion The case describes a patient with longstanding SLE mainly manifested by recurrent miscarriages, anemia, and thrombocytopenia in the context of antiphospholipid antibodies who developed multiple complications including embolic stroke (possibly paradoxical in the setting of patent foramen ovale and DVT), recurrent aseptic meningitis, and SAH (in the setting of anticoagulation). The most dramatic complication was the rapid development of diffuse life-threatening cerebral edema, which rapidly reversed with corticosteroid and mannitol treatment. There was no evidence for hypertension, metabolic or electrolyte derangement, infection, seizure, anoxia, ischemia, or venous sinus thrombosis. There was, however, severe protein elevation in the CSF, as well as contrast extravasation on CT scans, suggesting profound blood brain barrier (BBB) compromise. Although there was evidence for mild subarachnoid hemorrhage, we do not feel this accounted for the diffuse edema. In one study, the clinical severity and edema was related to aneurysm size, coma on presentation, and use of pressor agents. 22 In our case, the initial SAH occurred at an unknown time during 2 weeks of subacute antecedent headache, and there was no evidence of aneurysm or diffuse blood to explain her presentation. It is also unknown whether a single event or repeated leakages occurred in the context of inflamed BBB and ongoing anticoagulation. Although we cannot completely rule out a contribution of the SAH to edema and inflammation, the global edema was out of proportion to the small amount of SAH, and it resolved rapidly with anti-inflammatory and antiedema treatments, neither of which is compatible with SAH as the cause. We attribute the improvement to corticosteroids, as opposed to the mannitol, because of ( a ) the evidence of massive inflammation; ( b ) intact blood brain barrier is required for osmotic therapy efficacy; and ( c ) the recurrence of encephalopathy immediately upon weaning corticosteroids. The spectrum of neuropsychiatric complications of lupus and other rheumatologic diseases is diverse, 1 , 2 but coma from cerebral edema is a rare event. The most common causes of cerebral edema in the ICU setting are subarachnoid hemorrhage, trauma, global hypoxia (for example, after cardiac arrest), infection, or severe metabolic derangements (electrolyte, liver, or renal dysfunction). None of these mechanisms were present in our case. Lupus cerebritis is thought to be an inflammatory process, involving loss of blood brain barrier integrity, resulting in high CSF protein levels, and cerebral edema. Blood brain barrier mechanics and breakdown in disease states involving inflammatory processes has been reviewed by Petty and Lo. 23 Whether water transport via aquaporins is specifically involved in lupus cerebritis remains unknown, but the increasingly large number of lupus-related antibodies 9 and the recent evidence from a mouse model of lupus implicating aquaporins 24 raises the possibility of brain aquaporin regulation 25 as a potential diagnostic or therapeutic target. In one study, progesterone decreased the edema and aquaporin expression found in an animal model of traumatic brain injury. 26 Similarly, serum levels of adhesion molecules have been correlated with central nervous system disease activity, as well as antiphospholipid antibody levels, in lupus patients. 27 Mechanisms of vascular permeability and BBB compromise might be more likely than a possible transient (and FLAIR-negative) vasculitis process, although pathologic analysis would complement these measures. Although a nonvasculitic autoimmune inflammatory meningoencephalitis syndrome has been described, 28 the onset ranged from 3 weeks to >1 year of cognitive changes, in contrast to our case (< 18 hours onset). SLE comprises one of many diseases increasingly recognized to affect the nervous system through autoimmune mechanisms. 29 Further understanding of the effects of inflammation on blood brain barrier function may improve diagnosis and treatment of this spectrum of disorders. 30 