Unraveling Breast Cancer Heterogeneity Through Transcriptomic and Epigenomic Analysis Breast cancer diversity is histologically evident as various proliferative benign lesions, in situ carcinomas, and invasive carcinomas that may develop into distant metastases. Breast tumor molecular subtypes have been defined by genome-wide expression microarray technology and reveal associations between genetic alterations and the malignant phenotype. Early work has been conducted to use subtype-specific biomarkers to elucidate targeted treatment options early in the course of breast cancer progression. Additionally, DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that contributes to breast cancer progression by transcriptionally silencing certain tumor suppressor genes. Among the genes characterized as targets for silencing are well-established tumor suppressors such as RASSF1A , RARB , SFN , and TGM2 . Measuring elevated gene copy number and aberrant gene promoter methylation can further facilitate characterization of breast tumor molecular subtype; however, profiling of breast tumors based on epigenetic criteria has yet to be established. Epigenomic analysis has been investigated for clinical applicability, and it has great promise when used in combination with minimally invasive techniques for both diagnostic and prognostic purposes.  CONCLUSION Breast tumors have diverse phenotypes affecting their interaction with the endocrine system, and translating tumor subtype microarray results from the bench to bedside is an important advance in personalizing therapeutic strategies. BLBC is a particularly aggressive subtype that currently lacks effective treatment options and differentially affects a health disparity group. Consequently, further molecular characterization of breast cancer is required to impact the future of anticancer breast therapies, and clinical trials with biomarker evaluation are underway for both HER2 + and HER2? breast cancers. Both gene copy number amplification and epigenetic gene silencing are prominent molecular mechanisms that can propel a malignant phenotype and the development of a specific breast tumor subtype. Because TSGs often undergo promoter methylation prior to observable histopathologic changes, epigenetic analysis in conjunction with minimally invasive techniques has high potential to improve risk assessment and diagnostic accuracy. Although further work is required to define and refine the accuracy of gene panels used in epigenetic analysis, determining the epigenetic signature of a suspicious breast lesion may become a routine part of clinical workup in the foreseeable future. 