Challenges in Clinical Prostate Cancer: Role of Imaging Objective This article reviews a recent 2-day workshop on prostate cancer and imaging technology that was conducted by the Cancer Imaging Program of the National Cancer Institute. The workshop dealt with research trends and avenues for improving imaging and applications across the clinical spectrum of the disease. Conclusion After a summary of prostate cancer incidence and mortality, four main clinical challenges in prostate cancer treatment and management—diagnostic accuracy; risk stratification, initial staging, active surveillance, and focal therapy; prostate-specific antigen relapse after radiation therapy or radical prostatectomy; and assessing response to therapy in advanced disease—were discussed by the 55-member panel. The overarching issue in prostate cancer is distinguishing lethal from nonlethal disease. New technologies and fresh uses for established procedures make imaging effective in both assessing and treating prostate cancer.  Strategies and Clinical Imaging Research Needed to Address Clinical Management Problems in Prostate Cancer Following is a summary of the considerations and research recommendations for addressing the four problems in prostate cancer management evaluated at the workshop. For each issue, the current state of the science is briefly reviewed, potentially useful imaging techniques are noted, and research recommendations are presented. Problem 1: Diagnostic Accuracy (Reducing False-Positive and False-Negative Biopsies) Clinical issues As noted above, prostate cancer is diagnosed by pathologic examination of needle biopsy specimens, commonly prompted by abnormal findings in DRE and by elevated serum PSA. Although PSA level has been correlated with prostate cancer risk and aggressiveness, a large portion of PSA-triggered biopsies are found to contain no disease, whereas high-grade prostate cancer has also been detected in patients with PSA levels below 0.5 ng/mL [ 35 ]. In addition, because of the inherent heterogeneity of prostate cancer (approximately 85% of prostate cancer being multifocal in origin [ 36 ]), current systematic biopsy methods (6–12 spatially distributed prostate core biopsies under TRUS guidance) may not provide accurate information on location, size, extent, and grade of the disease. Even systematic sampling done with TRUS guidance often results in underdiagnosis of prostate cancer extent. In fact, the histologic grade is almost always underestimated by needle biopsy [ 37 ]. Thus, using current diagnostic schemes, both overdiagnosis of clinically insignificant cancer and underdiagnosis of potentially lethal cancer exist in the population at risk of prostate cancer. To address the limitations of current PSA screening and biopsy techniques in prostate cancer detection, a comprehensive approach is urgently needed. For example, new serum–tissue biomarkers with greater sensitivity and specificity need to be developed and validated. In addition, novel imaging techniques need to be explored for their potential in detecting early disease, guiding tissue biopsy, and planning treatment. More accurate characterization of the local tumor by serum–tissue markers, biopsy techniques, imaging, and nomograms is critical in improving risk assessment, which may translate into differential management of low- and high-risk cancers in the clinical setting. As a noninvasive means, imaging has an integral role in the management of prostate cancer. As a first step, images depicting sites of cancer burden should be investigated and integrated in the diagnostic scheme before biopsy, so the information can be applied to guide tissue sampling. Role of ultrasound TRUS is primarily used to direct the biopsy needle to desired anatomic locations to estimate the volume of the prostate and assist in sampling prostate tissue in a spatially systematic way, but it is unreliable in differentiating normal prostate gland from cancer tissue. As a result, biopsies are not specifically targeted to areas most likely to be malignant. To increase biopsy sensitivity and reduce the number of core biopsies required for detecting clinically significant prostate cancer, several new technologies in conjunction with standard TRUS have been investigated, including contrast-enhanced color Doppler imaging, intermittent harmonic imaging, and contrast-enhanced flash replenishment imaging [ 9 ]. One particularly promising strategy, contrast-enhanced ultrasound, takes advantage of the difference in microvasculature between areas of prostate cancer and benign prostate tissue. Cancer presents increased microvessel density; these microvessels, although below the resolution of conventional ultrasound, can be visualized using microbubble contrast agents. After IV administration, microbubbles (1–10 ?m in size) can diffuse into microvessels to selectively enhance areas with increased vascularity. Targeted biopsy guided by contrast-enhanced ultrasound detected significantly more cancer and was twice as likely to sample cancerous tissue in the prostate as conventional systematic biopsy. The majority of cancers detected were high-grade (Gleason score > 6). Nevertheless, the ability of this technique to discriminate benign from malignant tissue is low [ 38 ], and its application in guiding ultrasound biopsy needs further validation in larger studies. Another factor that may impede its application in the oncology setting is that microbubble contrast agents approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for echocardiography have a boxed warning requiring close monitoring of high-risk patients receiving the agents to avoid potentially serious cardiopulmonary reactions that may occur ( www.fda.gov/cder/drug/Info-Sheets/HCP/microbubbleHCP.htm ). Ultrasound spectroscopy uses radiofrequency echo signals expressed as spectral parameters to characterize tissue microarchitecture in order to discriminate malignant from benign prostate tissue. During a spectrum analysis, a region of interest is drawn surrounding the suspected area, and the spectrum of radiofrequency signals is compared with that from a normal reference area [ 10 ]. The utility of ultrasound spectroscopy in detecting prostate cancer has been shown in a clinical trial involving 300 patients conducted by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; a trial involving 64 patients at the Washington, DC, VA Medical Center; and a group in Germany independently [ 39 ]. However, more studies are needed to validate its potential application. Role of MRI As previously discussed, conventional prostate MRI uses an endorectal coil in combination with phased-array surface coils depicting the presence and extent of cancer [ 11 ]; it provides higher spatial and contrast resolution than TRUS or CT but has low specificity [ 14 ]. Endorectal-coil T2-weighted MRI shows decreased signal intensity for prostate cancer relative to normal peripheral zone tissue but is less sensitive at detecting cancer in other prostatic zones. Also, low signal intensity is not specific for prostate cancer because benign conditions such as prostatitis, hemorrhage, and therapeutic effects also have a similar appearance at MRI [ 12 , 13 ]. Functional MRI techniques, such as MRS, DWI, and DCE-MRI, have been investigated for their potential to complement morphologic T2-weighted MRI in improving prostate cancer localization. MRS is an FDA-cleared technology for noninvasively measuring metabolic activity on the basis of relative concentrations of metabolites in tissues. In the prostate, cancer tissue shows a decreased concentration of citrate but an elevated concentration of choline relative to normal prostate tissue. Studies showed that adding metabolic information obtained from MRS to morphologic information obtained by MRI improved cancer localization and predicted prostate cancer aggressiveness [ 11 , 40 ]. But results have been mixed. A recently completed multiinstitutional study concluded that there was no incremental benefit for MRI–MRS compared with MRI alone in tumor [ 41 ]. Furthermore, the technology is complex and requires physics support to ensure the quality of data acquisition. Cancer cells in general have elevated glycolytic activity. By measuring the relative conversion of pyruvate into lactate or alanine, the glycolysis rate of the cells can be quantified. After injection of hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate, its metabolic products lactate and alanine can be quantitatively measured in a short time frame using a dynamic nuclear polarization technique [ 42 , 43 ]. In a transgenic murine prostate cancer model, prostate cancer showed significantly higher lactate content relative to normal tissues on MRI–MRS after injection of 13C-pyruvate. The utility of this technical advance in prostate cancer detection has not been investigated in human trials. A phase 1 dose-escalation clinical trial of hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate in prostate cancer patients is planned for 2009 [ 44 ]. DWI is based on the diffusion properties of water within tissue. Regions of prostate cancer show increased cell density and reduced apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) relative to normal prostate [ 45 ]. DWI has improved prostate cancer detection accuracy when combined with either MRI or MRS [ 46 , 47 ]. The biologic significance of diffusion, however, is unclear. Although the technology has shown high resolution, further validation in larger trials is required. DCE-MRI measures tumor vascularity. After injecting a gadolinium chelate contrast agent, areas of hypervasculature such as prostate cancer show rapid enhancement and early washout of signal intensity. However, some prostate cancers are not detectable by this method because of low vascularity. Combining DCE-MRI with T2-weighted MRI improved prostate cancer detection and staging accuracy [ 48 , 49 ]. For DCE-MRI results to be comparable among studies from different institutions, a standardized technique and analytic tools need to be further developed. The most appealing aspect of these MRI techniques is an ability to conduct a single comprehensive multiparametric MRI examination that integrates all data acquisitions relevant to cancer diagnosis, staging, and characterization. In this way, the overall diagnostic performance of MRI is expected to improve. Roles of PET and SPECT As noted earlier, the results of FDG PET in detecting prostate cancer have been mixed. In one report, FDG PET only detected one of 24 locally confined prostate cancers in untreated patients [ 15 ]. FDG PET was incapable of differentiating prostate cancer from benign hyperplasia [ 16 ] or detecting pelvic lymph node metastases [ 50 ]; other studies reported good accuracy in detecting primary or locally recurrent prostate cancer [ 17 , 18 ]. As noted, the utility of PET and SPECT to detect locally confined prostate cancer will be improved by molecular probes with higher sensitivity and specificity. Early results are promising, with increasing interest in 18F-choline for lesion detection [ 23 ]. Other investigational imaging methods Raman spectroscopy is an optical imaging technique to measure the properties of molecules in the tissue. The technology has only been tested on tissue specimens in vitro; thus, its clinical utility is unclear. Another investigational imaging technique is smart-needle optical scattering spectroscopy to probe tissue of interest in real time to identify the presence of cancer. If validated, this technology potentially could reduce the number of biopsies required for prostate cancer diagnosis. It could be used in combination with other imaging techniques for biopsy guidance. A drawback of the technology is that it is invasive. Problem 2: Risk Stratification, Initial Staging, Active Surveillance, and Focal Therapy Clinical issues Imaging as a predictive tool for patient outcomes can be successfully evaluated by comparing models that incorporate the outcome of imaging with models that do not to determine incremental predictive value. The TNM staging system describes the extent of the primary tumor, the spread of tumor to nearby lymph nodes and glands, and the presence or absence of distal metastasis. In the United States, emphasis is placed on the T and N stages for initial prostate cancer staging because relatively few patients present with metastatic disease. However, detecting extracapsular extension and locating the intraprostatic extent of disease are important issues in disease management. The incidence of extracapsular extension, particularly early microscopic extracapsular extension, is unknown. Statistically, patients with pathologic extracapsular penetration tend to have relatively worse 10-year disease-free survival than patients with organ-confined disease; the significance of extracapsular extension requires investigation to determine what findings could be seen from the imaging perspective. Although recent studies found that lymph node metastasis incidence dropped to less than 10%, these numbers do not reflect true incidence [ 51 ] because patients who receive neoadjuvant hormonal therapy or radiation, those with high-risk prostate cancer, and those who have positive nodes with extended nodal dissection are excluded from these numbers. So, although the percentage of patients with positive lymph nodes has declined, a significant number of patients have lymph node–positive cancer (about 39% in high-risk patients). Knowing the lymph node status helps to inform decisions on therapy, predict recurrence, and assess prognosis. Imaging has not been reliable in identifying lymph node disease; until recently, lymph node size was the only widely used method of ascertaining nodal disease. However, size criteria are limited in accuracy because of significant overlap between the size of normal and malignant nodes. The major challenge to improving staging technology is the need for improved pathologic markers. These markers serve as reference standards to find imaging techniques that predict patient outcomes and help guide therapy. Other important issues remain, including knowing what patient cohorts benefit most from nodal imaging and staging and learning how the predictive value of an accurate technique affects therapeutic options. Traditionally, active surveillance (formerly called “watchful waiting”) in prostate cancer was a consideration for older men and men with significant health problems. It was applied ad hoc with limited success. The patient would be diagnosed with stage A1 prostate cancer after transurethral resection of the prostate and there would be nonstandardized follow-up. Contemporary active surveillance includes low-risk patients with low tumor volumes, low PSA levels, and low Gleason scores. Follow-up is standardized, patients are well informed, and periodic repeat prostate biopsies are performed. Although active surveillance may not be advised for all men, in general, it is underused. Although prostate cancer is mainly a multifocal disease, about 15–30% of patients have unifocal or unilateral disease. Localized, unifocal cancer of clinical significance is usually considered the prerequisite for successful focal therapy. However, unilateral (multifocal but all on one side) disease may make performing focal therapy easier. With multifocal cancer, a dominating index lesion probably drives progression; thus, the cancer may be considered biologically unifocal disease. Focal tumor ablation is feasible with low morbidity. The problem is localizing suitable tumors and monitoring tissue ablation. In addition to identifying patients who are candidates for focal therapy, imaging may play a role in identifying the target lesion. An important issue is relating the target delivery device to the imaging technique to deliver treatment to the target. Another critical issue with focal therapy is residual PSA, which makes posttherapy follow-up more challenging. The biologic potential of not treating missed secondary tumors and the role of adjuvant therapy are additional issues. There is interest in combining active surveillance with other interventions (“active surveillance plus”), such as aggressive dietary and lifestyle modification, perhaps 5?-reductase inhibitor drugs, complementary alternative medicines, oral antiandrogens, and novel future agents. Active surveillance remains debated because of the lack of adequate modern randomized controlled trials and lack of robust imaging. There are clearly social and economic factors that impact the use of active surveillance. A major concern with current protocols of active surveillance remains the limited ability to closely and noninvasively monitor tumor progression within the prostate gland. Imaging is well poised to address this concern, and imaging integration may improve general acceptance of active surveillance in the management of low-risk disease. Outcomes of local therapy, whether delivered up front or delayed after active surveillance, stand to improve with integration of imaging guidance. Standard-care therapeutic options include radical prostatectomy, high-dose external beam radiotherapy, and brachytherapy, used alone or in combination. As a first step, recommending the most appropriate therapeutic technique depends on accurate staging and prognostication of disease. Ultimately, the objective of local therapy is to control disease with minimal collateral damage, thereby optimizing both cancer and toxicity outcomes. Because of the historical inability to accurately visualize the local extent of disease, all local therapeutic interventions were simply targeted to the prostate gland as a surrogate for cancer. This paradigm has invariably led to both over- and undertreatment of low-burden and locally extensive disease, respectively. In this manner, visualizing the location and extent of disease burden stands to more appropriately guide the execution of both surgery and radiation delivery. Visualizing disease that extends beyond the prostate gland could reduce the incidence of incomplete cancer resections and modify radiation delivery to include extraprostatic disease. Similarly, prostatic subsites of tumor burden can be focally selected for radiation dose intensification to improve cancer control and reduce unnecessary dose exposure to adjacent organs at risk of injury and subsequent toxicity. It is important to recognize that the radiation dose required to control microscopic disease is much lower than that required to control gross (dense) disease, and modulation of dose intensity on the basis of spatial distribution of disease burden has yet to be fully explored. Focal ablative approaches do not deliver therapy to regions bearing microscopic disease within and around the prostate gland, which may impact cancer control. To address this concern, adjuvant therapies to focal ablation may be considered. In fact, immediate radiotherapy to presumed residual microscopic disease after prostatectomy has recently been shown to improve overall survival in patients with localized prostate cancer. Imaging techniques that could monitor progression of microscopic disease may obviate adjuvant local therapies altogether, restricting their use to the salvage of microscopic progression. Role of imaging The incremental predictive accuracy of imaging is of great interest in prostate cancer. However, before this can be determined, imaging technology must be more mature, stable, and standardized. MRI has been useful in identifying prostate cancer on the basis of reduced T2 signal intensity, increased choline, and decreased citrate and spermine [ 52 ]. Intraprostatic molecular imaging may identify areas of high tumor burden using techniques such as SPECT, MRS, and PET with choline. Improved tumor localization and lymph node staging can be achieved by combining molecular imaging with registration to anatomic CT and MR image sets [ 21 ]. In addition, validating intraprostatic biologic target volumes using in vivo fiducial markers has been shown to be feasible [ 53 ]. The correlated histopathology and marker placement system uniquely correlates pathology data for molecular image validation and discrete dose intensification, targeting tumor while sparing normal radiosensitive tissues (urethra, rectum, and neurovascular bundle). The correlated histopathology and marker placement system protocol showed clinical feasibility as a validation method for molecular imaging techniques such as SPECT-CT. Techniques to directly integrate images in the offline and online guidance of local therapies are currently being developed and tested for technical performance. These include techniques for image display, registration, navigation, and online adaptation to movements and deformations that occur throughout the therapeutic intervention [ 54 , 55 ]. DCE-MRI is a powerful tool for visualizing the vascularity of solid tumors. DCE-MRI of the prostate gland has also provided useful information for prostate cancer detection and staging [ 56 ]. DWI uses diffusion constants to map the intraprostatic extent of cancer. The data are integrated into models to predict cancer localization [ 57 ]. CT and MRI are the main imaging technologies currently used for staging nodal disease. PET and FDG PET have also been evaluated for prostate cancer staging, but because prostate cancer has variable accumulation of FDG, FDG PET is not widely used. However, FDG PET is gaining use for restaging [ 58 ]. Lymphotropic nanoparticle-enhanced imaging, a promising technique for malignant nodal evaluation, is highly accurate for nodal staging in patients with various primary cancers [ 59 ]. It evaluates nodal macrophage function and does not rely on nodal size to detect metastatic disease. The software module MRProstateCare (Image Guided Prostate Therapy Core) was created for use with Slicer (open-source software), a computerized surgical navigation platform to help plan, control, and direct prostate biopsies [ 54 , 55 ]. MrBot (URobotics), a robot, was created to provide imaging-guided access to the prostate gland [ 60 ]. The robot is customized for transperineal needle insertion and designed to be compatible with MRI. It can accommodate various needle drivers for different percutaneous interventions, such as biopsy, thermal ablation, or brachytherapy. TRUS-guided radiofrequency ablation involves ultrasound monitoring of the thermoablative technique. Several problems are associated with radiofrequency ablation in the prostate. The distributed energy is prone to variation because of heat sink by vasculature and is diffused over a wide area, making the temperature of adjacent organs difficult to control; and heating is slow, often resulting in insufficient apex ablation. There is also poor geometric correlation between the target lesion and energy input. Additionally, the procedure is difficult to monitor intraoperatively. These issues reduce the viability of radiofrequency ablation as an appropriate technique for definitive prostate cancer treatment; however, in later stages of the disease when targeting and monitoring are less critical, radiofrequency ablation may be useful as a palliative procedure. High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) delivers heat energy in focused ultrasound pulses. One advantage of HIFU is that it facilitates focal prostate ablation therapy without requiring direct tissue invasion and resultant direct damage to surrounding structures [ 61 ]. Another advantage of HIFU is that tissue heating is very rapid, causing immediate coagulation and necrosis. Full prostate ablation with HIFU is relatively straightforward to implement but associated with significant morbidity. Focal HIFU was attempted early on, and has been found to be feasible with low morbidity. Imaging-guided HIFU ablation allows the process to be monitored using ultrasound to detect lesions. MR-guided HIFU systems allow use of real-time MR thermometry to effectively optimize heat deposition. However, there are challenges with measuring efficacy because of persisting PSA elevation after treatment; also complicating treatment is variability in lesion size and location. Problem 3: D<sub>0</sub> Disease: Role of Imaging in Disease Management Clinical issues After definitive local radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy, a rise in serum PSA, also known as biochemical recurrence, is usually the first indication of cancer recurrence. Biochemical recurrence occurs in 20–40% of patients within 10 years of definitive prostate cancer therapy [ 62 – 64 ]. It often precedes clinically detectable recurrence by years [ 62 ]. However, disease progression within the group of patients with rising PSA is heterogeneous; only 30% eventually progress to clinical disease [ 65 , 66 ]. Biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy After radical prostatectomy, serum PSA should fall to undetectable levels (< 0.1 ng/mL) within 3–4 weeks, as measured by standard immunoassays. However, the definition of biochemical recurrence in the literature varies from a cutoff value of 0.2–0.5 ng/mL for a single measurement or two consecutive values exceeding 0.2 or 0.4 ng/mL [ 66 – 68 ]. A PSA level of 0.4 ng/mL or greater is associated most strongly with PSA progression or disease progression, and is considered most meaningful to define biochemical recurrence [ 68 , 69 ], which can occur years after radical prostatectomy. For example, about 20% of PSA recurrences happened 5 or more years after radical prostatectomy, suggesting the necessity of prolonged PSA follow-up. Current clinical practice monitors patients for PSA levels every 3 months in year 1, every 6 months for years 2–5, and annually thereafter [ 70 ]. The time from biochemical recurrence to metastases depends on preoperative pathologic stage, Gleason score, and postoperative PSA doubling time [ 65 , 66 ]. A shorter PSA doubling time (< 10 months) is the most powerful predictor for disease progression [ 65 , 66 ]. In rare cases, patients may develop distant metastatic disease after radical prostatectomy without an elevated PSA level [ 71 ]. Biochemical recurrence after radiation therapy After radiation, PSA levels decrease slowly and may never reach undetectable levels. The time to reach nadir after radiation therapy may be months or even years, depending on factors such as radiation dose, prostate size, and pretreatment PSA level [ 72 ]. Defining biochemical recurrence after radiation therapy is more complex. The American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) recommended in 1997 that the definition of biochemical recurrence be three consecutive PSA increases after PSA nadir has been reached, with the date of failure backdated to the mid point between the nadir and the first of these three increases. The definition has been criticized for biases caused by backdating. In 2006, a revised definition known as the Phoenix definition ([Radiation Therapy Oncology Group] RTOG-ASTRO) was devised, which defines biochemical recurrence as an absolute increase of 2 ng/mL or greater above the nadir with no backdating. This definition has higher sensitivity and specificity in predicting clinical failure after external radiation therapy and brachytherapy compared with the original ASTRO definition [ 73 ]. However, as with radical prostatectomy, clinical failure after radiation therapy can be better predicted by PSA doubling time than by absolute PSA levels [ 74 ]. Role of imaging When a rise in PSA is observed in patients after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy, the next step is to determine whether cancer recurs locally or in distant organs. Accurately delineating the location and the extent of cancer is critical in selecting appropriate treatment, that is, local salvage therapy or systemic therapy. The primary role of imaging in this setting is to help distinguish local recurrence from distant metastatic disease. PET and SPECT As noted, prostate cancer grows slowly and is rarely FDG avid. Consequently, FDG is not an optimal PET tracer in assessing recurrence, although FDG PET detected local or systemic disease in 31% of 91 patients with PSA relapse referred for this test [ 75 ]. However, recent studies suggested a high sensitivity with 11C-acetate and 11C-choline PET in detecting local recurrence and regional lymph node involvement after radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy [ 5 , 6 , 8 , 76 ]. The very short half-life of 11C (20 minutes) may make it less practical than 18F as a PET label because of logistic issues. Recently, a novel PET tracer, anti-1-amino-3-18F-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid (anti-18F-FACBC), a synthetic L-leucine analog, was evaluated in six patients with recurrent prostate cancer. Anti-18F-FACBC showed very low renal excretion; it showed intensive uptake in lymph node metastases and recurrent prostate bed cancer and was found superior to ProstaScint (111In-capromab pendetide, Cytogen) SPECT in detecting lymph nodes [ 77 ]. ProstaScint SPECT uses a murine monoclonal antibody that reacts against prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), which is overexpressed in prostate cancer compared with normal tissues. ProstaScint SPECT has been used to detect lymph node metastases and recurrent prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy. However, its sensitivity and specificity in detecting recurrent disease are suboptimal [ 78 ]. Other novel SPECT tracers currently in preclinical and early clinical development include small-molecule PSMA inhibitors [ 79 – 81 ]. These molecules selectively accumulated in PSMA-positive human prostate cancer xenografts. Also, a PMSA inhibitor, MIP-1095 (Molecular Insight Pharmaceuticals), accumulated in metastatic prostate cancer in a human study [ 82 ]; its utility requires further validation in larger clinical studies. Bone is the most common site for prostate cancer metastasis. Radionuclide bone scanning is a sensitive method to assess skeleton metastases. Currently, 99mTc-MDP planar bone scintigraphy is the standard bone imaging technique. However, accurate detection of bone metastases may be improved by SPECT with rotating 3D acquisition [ 83 ]. Studies also suggested that 18F-NaF PET is superior to 99mTc-MDP planar scintigraphy or SPECT in detecting skeleton metastases from prostate cancer [ 84 ]; 18F-NaF PET detected more lesions and showed higher contrast between malignant and normal bone. Unlike 99mTc-MDP scanning, which has a low detection rate for lesions in the spine and pelvis, the detection efficiency of 18F-NaF PET is independent of anatomic lesion localization [ 85 ]. The very high resolution and target-to-background contrast of 18F-NaF PET can potentially reduce its specificity; however, correlating PET with CT findings substantially helps to differentiate malignant from benign lesions [ 84 ]. MRI and CT Although MRI is widely used in assessing local recurrence after prostatectomy and/or radiation therapy, interpretation can be confounded due to tissue changes such as glandular atrophy and fibrosis induced by radiation, the presence of radiotherapy seeds, and scarring and the presence of surgical clips. Because of reports that MRI and CT detection of nodal recurrence is limited by low sensitivity (? 36%) and poor spatial resolution (? 8 mm) for MRI, some centers consider MRI and CT to be of benefit only to high-risk patients with PSA levels > 20 ng/mL. Consequently, improved functional or contrast-enhanced imaging methods such as MRS, DWI, and DCE-MRI are being explored [ 86 , 87 ]. In a recent study, MRI with a superparamagnetic nanoparticle (monocrystalline iron oxide, Combidex, Advanced Magnetics) showed higher accuracy than conventional MRI in detecting pelvic lymph node metastases. Lymph node metastases as small as 2 mm in diameter were detected using this technique [ 88 ]. Problem 4: Assessing the Response to Therapy and the Role of Imaging in Prostate Cancer Drug Development and Management of Advanced Disease Clinical issues Despite an array of imaging techniques, assessing prostate cancer with imaging remains challenging in many important clinical situations, including detecting recurrent disease in men with biochemical failure after definitive therapy. Advances in imaging technology, such as the development of hybrid imaging systems (e.g., PET/CT and SPECT-CT), which depict both structural and metabolic information, have contributed to more accurate imaging assessment by reducing false-positive and false-negative findings. Initial interest was also generated by the use of tracers such as radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies to PSMA; however, results are mixed. The patient populations studied were varied, the imaging protocols required multiday imaging sessions, and image interpretation was challenging due to nonspecific tracer accumulation and delayed clearance. Various clinical and pathologic parameters, including surgical Gleason score, pain, time to PSA relapse after primary treatment, and PSA doubling time, have been used to predict the probability of distant metastasis development in prostate cancer patients with rising serum PSA. PSA doubling time appears to be the most important predictor of distant metastasis development and prostate cancer–specific mortality [ 89 – 91 ]. As previously indicated, prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed lethal malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in American men. Although high response rates are achieved using androgen blockade as first-line therapy, most men progress toward hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Systemic chemotherapies have been shown to improve clinical outcome in hormone-refractory prostate cancer patients; however, such thrapies are not curative. Advanced prostate cancer has a particular propensity to metastasize to lymph nodes and bones, where it produces predominantly osteoblastic lesions and local bone formation. The tropism for bone is thought to be due in part to specific interactions between prostate cancer cells and cells present in the bone environment, particularly bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblasts [ 92 ]. Such interactions involve numerous signaling pathways that could serve as targets for new therapeutic agents. For example, agents that block the activity of growth factors implicated in advanced prostate cancer development (e.g., ET-1 or vascular endothelial growth factor) are being tested for their effect on bone metastases. Other strategies involve the development of PHSCN, a synthetic peptide analog that acts to decrease fibronectin-mediated basement membrane invasion and inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases. Bone metastasis significantly affects quality of life through symptoms such as bone pain, pathologic fractures, anemia, and nerve impingement; incidence varies from 5% to 27% [ 92 ]. With the advent of PSA testing and earlier detection, few patients (< 5%) present with metastases at the time of diagnosis. However, despite early detection and intervention, disease in many men will still progress to bone metastasis. In addition to its negative effects on quality of life, the development of bone metastases also significantly affects survival—median survival time for men with metastatic hormone-resistant disease is less than 12 months [ 92 ]. Thus, detection of bone metastases is clinically important because the onset of bone metastasis often warrants initiation of chemotherapy and/or bone-targeted therapy. Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), the published rules that define when cancer patients respond, remain stable, or progress during treatments, considers bone metastasis a nontarget lesion. Therefore, RECIST is not useful in measuring antitumor effects. Technology that could reliably and accurately measure antitumor effects would provide a significant advance in prostate cancer because it would facilitate timely evaluation of new agents in clinical trials. Role of imaging The utility of molecular imaging for clinical medicine includes early detection of changes occurring in tissue, enabling changes in individual patient management in real time and facilitating drug development. A promising new imaging technique, 18F-fluorodihydrotestosterone (FDHT) PET, may help to define the exact role of androgen receptor imaging in prostate cancer, including predicting and assessing response to hormonal ablation therapy. In patients with advanced metastatic prostate cancer, abnormal localization of FDHT was seen in most metastatic lesions but only in a few primary tumors, and FDHT uptake in metastatic lesions decreased after hormonal ablation therapy with flutamide [ 93 ]. Animal and preliminary clinical studies have shown that FDG PET may be useful in evaluating advanced disease in patients with high Gleason scores and serum PSA levels, to detect active osseous and soft-tissue metastases, and to assess response after androgen ablation and treatment with novel chemotherapies [ 94 – 96 ]. Three-dimensional volumetric CT is an effective method for localizing prostatic structures for radiation therapy treatment planning in prostate cancer patients because it eliminates the need for an invasive procedure and the related side effects [ 97 ]. Three-dimensional volumetric CT may also play a role in measuring response to therapy. Early data suggest that the response of prostate cancer bone metastases to treatment can be quantitatively assessed using DWI, with functional diffusion mapping [ 98 ] having greater utility for lytic than for sclerotic disease. The functional diffusion mapping biomarker is based on MRI diffusion maps used to quantify spatially distinct therapy-induced changes in the diffusion of water within tumor tissue. Initial studies verified the capability of functional diffusion mapping as a biomarker for detecting bone cancer treatment efficacy, thus warranting further clinical evaluation [ 99 ]. Whole-body planar bone scanning using 99mTc-MDP is the established clinical standard for imaging bone metastasis. For SPECT of the bone, metastable 99mTc is tagged onto a phosphonate compound such as MDP to generate 99mTc-MDP, which selectively concentrates in the bone. For scintigraphy, the labeled compound is administered IV and SPECT is subsequently performed after a suitable time period. Imaging with 99mTc-MDP is the initial method of choice for detecting skeletal metastases in cancer patients. Compared with other imaging techniques such as planar scintigraphy, SPECT provides detailed information about the anatomy and physiologic state of the bone and has been used to monitor bone metastasis in prostate cancers. Early metastases may be missed with 99mTc-MDP uptake because this technique relies on the osteoblastic reaction rather than the actual tumor being detected [ 100 ]; 18F-NaF PET has been shown to have a high sensitivity for detecting bone metastases due to increased 18F-NaF uptake in malignant bone lesions. Taking advantage of favorable characteristics of 18F-NaF and better performance of PET, 18F-NaF PET has been reported to be more sensitive for detecting bone metastases than 99mTc-MDP bone scanning. In light of the increased sensitivity of 18F-NaF PET and the advent of novel therapies to treat bone metastases, it is possible that planar bone scanning should be replaced with PET, including FDG PET, in which there is promising data, as well as 18F-NaF PET.  Problem 1: Diagnostic Accuracy (Reducing False-Positive and False-Negative Biopsies) Clinical issues As noted above, prostate cancer is diagnosed by pathologic examination of needle biopsy specimens, commonly prompted by abnormal findings in DRE and by elevated serum PSA. Although PSA level has been correlated with prostate cancer risk and aggressiveness, a large portion of PSA-triggered biopsies are found to contain no disease, whereas high-grade prostate cancer has also been detected in patients with PSA levels below 0.5 ng/mL [ 35 ]. In addition, because of the inherent heterogeneity of prostate cancer (approximately 85% of prostate cancer being multifocal in origin [ 36 ]), current systematic biopsy methods (6–12 spatially distributed prostate core biopsies under TRUS guidance) may not provide accurate information on location, size, extent, and grade of the disease. Even systematic sampling done with TRUS guidance often results in underdiagnosis of prostate cancer extent. In fact, the histologic grade is almost always underestimated by needle biopsy [ 37 ]. Thus, using current diagnostic schemes, both overdiagnosis of clinically insignificant cancer and underdiagnosis of potentially lethal cancer exist in the population at risk of prostate cancer. To address the limitations of current PSA screening and biopsy techniques in prostate cancer detection, a comprehensive approach is urgently needed. For example, new serum–tissue biomarkers with greater sensitivity and specificity need to be developed and validated. In addition, novel imaging techniques need to be explored for their potential in detecting early disease, guiding tissue biopsy, and planning treatment. More accurate characterization of the local tumor by serum–tissue markers, biopsy techniques, imaging, and nomograms is critical in improving risk assessment, which may translate into differential management of low- and high-risk cancers in the clinical setting. As a noninvasive means, imaging has an integral role in the management of prostate cancer. As a first step, images depicting sites of cancer burden should be investigated and integrated in the diagnostic scheme before biopsy, so the information can be applied to guide tissue sampling. Role of ultrasound TRUS is primarily used to direct the biopsy needle to desired anatomic locations to estimate the volume of the prostate and assist in sampling prostate tissue in a spatially systematic way, but it is unreliable in differentiating normal prostate gland from cancer tissue. As a result, biopsies are not specifically targeted to areas most likely to be malignant. To increase biopsy sensitivity and reduce the number of core biopsies required for detecting clinically significant prostate cancer, several new technologies in conjunction with standard TRUS have been investigated, including contrast-enhanced color Doppler imaging, intermittent harmonic imaging, and contrast-enhanced flash replenishment imaging [ 9 ]. One particularly promising strategy, contrast-enhanced ultrasound, takes advantage of the difference in microvasculature between areas of prostate cancer and benign prostate tissue. Cancer presents increased microvessel density; these microvessels, although below the resolution of conventional ultrasound, can be visualized using microbubble contrast agents. After IV administration, microbubbles (1–10 ?m in size) can diffuse into microvessels to selectively enhance areas with increased vascularity. Targeted biopsy guided by contrast-enhanced ultrasound detected significantly more cancer and was twice as likely to sample cancerous tissue in the prostate as conventional systematic biopsy. The majority of cancers detected were high-grade (Gleason score > 6). Nevertheless, the ability of this technique to discriminate benign from malignant tissue is low [ 38 ], and its application in guiding ultrasound biopsy needs further validation in larger studies. Another factor that may impede its application in the oncology setting is that microbubble contrast agents approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for echocardiography have a boxed warning requiring close monitoring of high-risk patients receiving the agents to avoid potentially serious cardiopulmonary reactions that may occur ( www.fda.gov/cder/drug/Info-Sheets/HCP/microbubbleHCP.htm ). Ultrasound spectroscopy uses radiofrequency echo signals expressed as spectral parameters to characterize tissue microarchitecture in order to discriminate malignant from benign prostate tissue. During a spectrum analysis, a region of interest is drawn surrounding the suspected area, and the spectrum of radiofrequency signals is compared with that from a normal reference area [ 10 ]. The utility of ultrasound spectroscopy in detecting prostate cancer has been shown in a clinical trial involving 300 patients conducted by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; a trial involving 64 patients at the Washington, DC, VA Medical Center; and a group in Germany independently [ 39 ]. However, more studies are needed to validate its potential application. Role of MRI As previously discussed, conventional prostate MRI uses an endorectal coil in combination with phased-array surface coils depicting the presence and extent of cancer [ 11 ]; it provides higher spatial and contrast resolution than TRUS or CT but has low specificity [ 14 ]. Endorectal-coil T2-weighted MRI shows decreased signal intensity for prostate cancer relative to normal peripheral zone tissue but is less sensitive at detecting cancer in other prostatic zones. Also, low signal intensity is not specific for prostate cancer because benign conditions such as prostatitis, hemorrhage, and therapeutic effects also have a similar appearance at MRI [ 12 , 13 ]. Functional MRI techniques, such as MRS, DWI, and DCE-MRI, have been investigated for their potential to complement morphologic T2-weighted MRI in improving prostate cancer localization. MRS is an FDA-cleared technology for noninvasively measuring metabolic activity on the basis of relative concentrations of metabolites in tissues. In the prostate, cancer tissue shows a decreased concentration of citrate but an elevated concentration of choline relative to normal prostate tissue. Studies showed that adding metabolic information obtained from MRS to morphologic information obtained by MRI improved cancer localization and predicted prostate cancer aggressiveness [ 11 , 40 ]. But results have been mixed. A recently completed multiinstitutional study concluded that there was no incremental benefit for MRI–MRS compared with MRI alone in tumor [ 41 ]. Furthermore, the technology is complex and requires physics support to ensure the quality of data acquisition. Cancer cells in general have elevated glycolytic activity. By measuring the relative conversion of pyruvate into lactate or alanine, the glycolysis rate of the cells can be quantified. After injection of hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate, its metabolic products lactate and alanine can be quantitatively measured in a short time frame using a dynamic nuclear polarization technique [ 42 , 43 ]. In a transgenic murine prostate cancer model, prostate cancer showed significantly higher lactate content relative to normal tissues on MRI–MRS after injection of 13C-pyruvate. The utility of this technical advance in prostate cancer detection has not been investigated in human trials. A phase 1 dose-escalation clinical trial of hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate in prostate cancer patients is planned for 2009 [ 44 ]. DWI is based on the diffusion properties of water within tissue. Regions of prostate cancer show increased cell density and reduced apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) relative to normal prostate [ 45 ]. DWI has improved prostate cancer detection accuracy when combined with either MRI or MRS [ 46 , 47 ]. The biologic significance of diffusion, however, is unclear. Although the technology has shown high resolution, further validation in larger trials is required. DCE-MRI measures tumor vascularity. After injecting a gadolinium chelate contrast agent, areas of hypervasculature such as prostate cancer show rapid enhancement and early washout of signal intensity. However, some prostate cancers are not detectable by this method because of low vascularity. Combining DCE-MRI with T2-weighted MRI improved prostate cancer detection and staging accuracy [ 48 , 49 ]. For DCE-MRI results to be comparable among studies from different institutions, a standardized technique and analytic tools need to be further developed. The most appealing aspect of these MRI techniques is an ability to conduct a single comprehensive multiparametric MRI examination that integrates all data acquisitions relevant to cancer diagnosis, staging, and characterization. In this way, the overall diagnostic performance of MRI is expected to improve. Roles of PET and SPECT As noted earlier, the results of FDG PET in detecting prostate cancer have been mixed. In one report, FDG PET only detected one of 24 locally confined prostate cancers in untreated patients [ 15 ]. FDG PET was incapable of differentiating prostate cancer from benign hyperplasia [ 16 ] or detecting pelvic lymph node metastases [ 50 ]; other studies reported good accuracy in detecting primary or locally recurrent prostate cancer [ 17 , 18 ]. As noted, the utility of PET and SPECT to detect locally confined prostate cancer will be improved by molecular probes with higher sensitivity and specificity. Early results are promising, with increasing interest in 18F-choline for lesion detection [ 23 ]. Other investigational imaging methods Raman spectroscopy is an optical imaging technique to measure the properties of molecules in the tissue. The technology has only been tested on tissue specimens in vitro; thus, its clinical utility is unclear. Another investigational imaging technique is smart-needle optical scattering spectroscopy to probe tissue of interest in real time to identify the presence of cancer. If validated, this technology potentially could reduce the number of biopsies required for prostate cancer diagnosis. It could be used in combination with other imaging techniques for biopsy guidance. A drawback of the technology is that it is invasive.  Clinical issues As noted above, prostate cancer is diagnosed by pathologic examination of needle biopsy specimens, commonly prompted by abnormal findings in DRE and by elevated serum PSA. Although PSA level has been correlated with prostate cancer risk and aggressiveness, a large portion of PSA-triggered biopsies are found to contain no disease, whereas high-grade prostate cancer has also been detected in patients with PSA levels below 0.5 ng/mL [ 35 ]. In addition, because of the inherent heterogeneity of prostate cancer (approximately 85% of prostate cancer being multifocal in origin [ 36 ]), current systematic biopsy methods (6–12 spatially distributed prostate core biopsies under TRUS guidance) may not provide accurate information on location, size, extent, and grade of the disease. Even systematic sampling done with TRUS guidance often results in underdiagnosis of prostate cancer extent. In fact, the histologic grade is almost always underestimated by needle biopsy [ 37 ]. Thus, using current diagnostic schemes, both overdiagnosis of clinically insignificant cancer and underdiagnosis of potentially lethal cancer exist in the population at risk of prostate cancer. To address the limitations of current PSA screening and biopsy techniques in prostate cancer detection, a comprehensive approach is urgently needed. For example, new serum–tissue biomarkers with greater sensitivity and specificity need to be developed and validated. In addition, novel imaging techniques need to be explored for their potential in detecting early disease, guiding tissue biopsy, and planning treatment. More accurate characterization of the local tumor by serum–tissue markers, biopsy techniques, imaging, and nomograms is critical in improving risk assessment, which may translate into differential management of low- and high-risk cancers in the clinical setting. As a noninvasive means, imaging has an integral role in the management of prostate cancer. As a first step, images depicting sites of cancer burden should be investigated and integrated in the diagnostic scheme before biopsy, so the information can be applied to guide tissue sampling.  Role of ultrasound TRUS is primarily used to direct the biopsy needle to desired anatomic locations to estimate the volume of the prostate and assist in sampling prostate tissue in a spatially systematic way, but it is unreliable in differentiating normal prostate gland from cancer tissue. As a result, biopsies are not specifically targeted to areas most likely to be malignant. To increase biopsy sensitivity and reduce the number of core biopsies required for detecting clinically significant prostate cancer, several new technologies in conjunction with standard TRUS have been investigated, including contrast-enhanced color Doppler imaging, intermittent harmonic imaging, and contrast-enhanced flash replenishment imaging [ 9 ]. One particularly promising strategy, contrast-enhanced ultrasound, takes advantage of the difference in microvasculature between areas of prostate cancer and benign prostate tissue. Cancer presents increased microvessel density; these microvessels, although below the resolution of conventional ultrasound, can be visualized using microbubble contrast agents. After IV administration, microbubbles (1–10 ?m in size) can diffuse into microvessels to selectively enhance areas with increased vascularity. Targeted biopsy guided by contrast-enhanced ultrasound detected significantly more cancer and was twice as likely to sample cancerous tissue in the prostate as conventional systematic biopsy. The majority of cancers detected were high-grade (Gleason score > 6). Nevertheless, the ability of this technique to discriminate benign from malignant tissue is low [ 38 ], and its application in guiding ultrasound biopsy needs further validation in larger studies. Another factor that may impede its application in the oncology setting is that microbubble contrast agents approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for echocardiography have a boxed warning requiring close monitoring of high-risk patients receiving the agents to avoid potentially serious cardiopulmonary reactions that may occur ( www.fda.gov/cder/drug/Info-Sheets/HCP/microbubbleHCP.htm ). Ultrasound spectroscopy uses radiofrequency echo signals expressed as spectral parameters to characterize tissue microarchitecture in order to discriminate malignant from benign prostate tissue. During a spectrum analysis, a region of interest is drawn surrounding the suspected area, and the spectrum of radiofrequency signals is compared with that from a normal reference area [ 10 ]. The utility of ultrasound spectroscopy in detecting prostate cancer has been shown in a clinical trial involving 300 patients conducted by the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; a trial involving 64 patients at the Washington, DC, VA Medical Center; and a group in Germany independently [ 39 ]. However, more studies are needed to validate its potential application.  Role of MRI As previously discussed, conventional prostate MRI uses an endorectal coil in combination with phased-array surface coils depicting the presence and extent of cancer [ 11 ]; it provides higher spatial and contrast resolution than TRUS or CT but has low specificity [ 14 ]. Endorectal-coil T2-weighted MRI shows decreased signal intensity for prostate cancer relative to normal peripheral zone tissue but is less sensitive at detecting cancer in other prostatic zones. Also, low signal intensity is not specific for prostate cancer because benign conditions such as prostatitis, hemorrhage, and therapeutic effects also have a similar appearance at MRI [ 12 , 13 ]. Functional MRI techniques, such as MRS, DWI, and DCE-MRI, have been investigated for their potential to complement morphologic T2-weighted MRI in improving prostate cancer localization. MRS is an FDA-cleared technology for noninvasively measuring metabolic activity on the basis of relative concentrations of metabolites in tissues. In the prostate, cancer tissue shows a decreased concentration of citrate but an elevated concentration of choline relative to normal prostate tissue. Studies showed that adding metabolic information obtained from MRS to morphologic information obtained by MRI improved cancer localization and predicted prostate cancer aggressiveness [ 11 , 40 ]. But results have been mixed. A recently completed multiinstitutional study concluded that there was no incremental benefit for MRI–MRS compared with MRI alone in tumor [ 41 ]. Furthermore, the technology is complex and requires physics support to ensure the quality of data acquisition. Cancer cells in general have elevated glycolytic activity. By measuring the relative conversion of pyruvate into lactate or alanine, the glycolysis rate of the cells can be quantified. After injection of hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate, its metabolic products lactate and alanine can be quantitatively measured in a short time frame using a dynamic nuclear polarization technique [ 42 , 43 ]. In a transgenic murine prostate cancer model, prostate cancer showed significantly higher lactate content relative to normal tissues on MRI–MRS after injection of 13C-pyruvate. The utility of this technical advance in prostate cancer detection has not been investigated in human trials. A phase 1 dose-escalation clinical trial of hyperpolarized 13C-labeled pyruvate in prostate cancer patients is planned for 2009 [ 44 ]. DWI is based on the diffusion properties of water within tissue. Regions of prostate cancer show increased cell density and reduced apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) relative to normal prostate [ 45 ]. DWI has improved prostate cancer detection accuracy when combined with either MRI or MRS [ 46 , 47 ]. The biologic significance of diffusion, however, is unclear. Although the technology has shown high resolution, further validation in larger trials is required. DCE-MRI measures tumor vascularity. After injecting a gadolinium chelate contrast agent, areas of hypervasculature such as prostate cancer show rapid enhancement and early washout of signal intensity. However, some prostate cancers are not detectable by this method because of low vascularity. Combining DCE-MRI with T2-weighted MRI improved prostate cancer detection and staging accuracy [ 48 , 49 ]. For DCE-MRI results to be comparable among studies from different institutions, a standardized technique and analytic tools need to be further developed. The most appealing aspect of these MRI techniques is an ability to conduct a single comprehensive multiparametric MRI examination that integrates all data acquisitions relevant to cancer diagnosis, staging, and characterization. In this way, the overall diagnostic performance of MRI is expected to improve.  Roles of PET and SPECT As noted earlier, the results of FDG PET in detecting prostate cancer have been mixed. In one report, FDG PET only detected one of 24 locally confined prostate cancers in untreated patients [ 15 ]. FDG PET was incapable of differentiating prostate cancer from benign hyperplasia [ 16 ] or detecting pelvic lymph node metastases [ 50 ]; other studies reported good accuracy in detecting primary or locally recurrent prostate cancer [ 17 , 18 ]. As noted, the utility of PET and SPECT to detect locally confined prostate cancer will be improved by molecular probes with higher sensitivity and specificity. Early results are promising, with increasing interest in 18F-choline for lesion detection [ 23 ].  Other investigational imaging methods Raman spectroscopy is an optical imaging technique to measure the properties of molecules in the tissue. The technology has only been tested on tissue specimens in vitro; thus, its clinical utility is unclear. Another investigational imaging technique is smart-needle optical scattering spectroscopy to probe tissue of interest in real time to identify the presence of cancer. If validated, this technology potentially could reduce the number of biopsies required for prostate cancer diagnosis. It could be used in combination with other imaging techniques for biopsy guidance. A drawback of the technology is that it is invasive.  Problem 2: Risk Stratification, Initial Staging, Active Surveillance, and Focal Therapy Clinical issues Imaging as a predictive tool for patient outcomes can be successfully evaluated by comparing models that incorporate the outcome of imaging with models that do not to determine incremental predictive value. The TNM staging system describes the extent of the primary tumor, the spread of tumor to nearby lymph nodes and glands, and the presence or absence of distal metastasis. In the United States, emphasis is placed on the T and N stages for initial prostate cancer staging because relatively few patients present with metastatic disease. However, detecting extracapsular extension and locating the intraprostatic extent of disease are important issues in disease management. The incidence of extracapsular extension, particularly early microscopic extracapsular extension, is unknown. Statistically, patients with pathologic extracapsular penetration tend to have relatively worse 10-year disease-free survival than patients with organ-confined disease; the significance of extracapsular extension requires investigation to determine what findings could be seen from the imaging perspective. Although recent studies found that lymph node metastasis incidence dropped to less than 10%, these numbers do not reflect true incidence [ 51 ] because patients who receive neoadjuvant hormonal therapy or radiation, those with high-risk prostate cancer, and those who have positive nodes with extended nodal dissection are excluded from these numbers. So, although the percentage of patients with positive lymph nodes has declined, a significant number of patients have lymph node–positive cancer (about 39% in high-risk patients). Knowing the lymph node status helps to inform decisions on therapy, predict recurrence, and assess prognosis. Imaging has not been reliable in identifying lymph node disease; until recently, lymph node size was the only widely used method of ascertaining nodal disease. However, size criteria are limited in accuracy because of significant overlap between the size of normal and malignant nodes. The major challenge to improving staging technology is the need for improved pathologic markers. These markers serve as reference standards to find imaging techniques that predict patient outcomes and help guide therapy. Other important issues remain, including knowing what patient cohorts benefit most from nodal imaging and staging and learning how the predictive value of an accurate technique affects therapeutic options. Traditionally, active surveillance (formerly called “watchful waiting”) in prostate cancer was a consideration for older men and men with significant health problems. It was applied ad hoc with limited success. The patient would be diagnosed with stage A1 prostate cancer after transurethral resection of the prostate and there would be nonstandardized follow-up. Contemporary active surveillance includes low-risk patients with low tumor volumes, low PSA levels, and low Gleason scores. Follow-up is standardized, patients are well informed, and periodic repeat prostate biopsies are performed. Although active surveillance may not be advised for all men, in general, it is underused. Although prostate cancer is mainly a multifocal disease, about 15–30% of patients have unifocal or unilateral disease. Localized, unifocal cancer of clinical significance is usually considered the prerequisite for successful focal therapy. However, unilateral (multifocal but all on one side) disease may make performing focal therapy easier. With multifocal cancer, a dominating index lesion probably drives progression; thus, the cancer may be considered biologically unifocal disease. Focal tumor ablation is feasible with low morbidity. The problem is localizing suitable tumors and monitoring tissue ablation. In addition to identifying patients who are candidates for focal therapy, imaging may play a role in identifying the target lesion. An important issue is relating the target delivery device to the imaging technique to deliver treatment to the target. Another critical issue with focal therapy is residual PSA, which makes posttherapy follow-up more challenging. The biologic potential of not treating missed secondary tumors and the role of adjuvant therapy are additional issues. There is interest in combining active surveillance with other interventions (“active surveillance plus”), such as aggressive dietary and lifestyle modification, perhaps 5?-reductase inhibitor drugs, complementary alternative medicines, oral antiandrogens, and novel future agents. Active surveillance remains debated because of the lack of adequate modern randomized controlled trials and lack of robust imaging. There are clearly social and economic factors that impact the use of active surveillance. A major concern with current protocols of active surveillance remains the limited ability to closely and noninvasively monitor tumor progression within the prostate gland. Imaging is well poised to address this concern, and imaging integration may improve general acceptance of active surveillance in the management of low-risk disease. Outcomes of local therapy, whether delivered up front or delayed after active surveillance, stand to improve with integration of imaging guidance. Standard-care therapeutic options include radical prostatectomy, high-dose external beam radiotherapy, and brachytherapy, used alone or in combination. As a first step, recommending the most appropriate therapeutic technique depends on accurate staging and prognostication of disease. Ultimately, the objective of local therapy is to control disease with minimal collateral damage, thereby optimizing both cancer and toxicity outcomes. Because of the historical inability to accurately visualize the local extent of disease, all local therapeutic interventions were simply targeted to the prostate gland as a surrogate for cancer. This paradigm has invariably led to both over- and undertreatment of low-burden and locally extensive disease, respectively. In this manner, visualizing the location and extent of disease burden stands to more appropriately guide the execution of both surgery and radiation delivery. Visualizing disease that extends beyond the prostate gland could reduce the incidence of incomplete cancer resections and modify radiation delivery to include extraprostatic disease. Similarly, prostatic subsites of tumor burden can be focally selected for radiation dose intensification to improve cancer control and reduce unnecessary dose exposure to adjacent organs at risk of injury and subsequent toxicity. It is important to recognize that the radiation dose required to control microscopic disease is much lower than that required to control gross (dense) disease, and modulation of dose intensity on the basis of spatial distribution of disease burden has yet to be fully explored. Focal ablative approaches do not deliver therapy to regions bearing microscopic disease within and around the prostate gland, which may impact cancer control. To address this concern, adjuvant therapies to focal ablation may be considered. In fact, immediate radiotherapy to presumed residual microscopic disease after prostatectomy has recently been shown to improve overall survival in patients with localized prostate cancer. Imaging techniques that could monitor progression of microscopic disease may obviate adjuvant local therapies altogether, restricting their use to the salvage of microscopic progression. Role of imaging The incremental predictive accuracy of imaging is of great interest in prostate cancer. However, before this can be determined, imaging technology must be more mature, stable, and standardized. MRI has been useful in identifying prostate cancer on the basis of reduced T2 signal intensity, increased choline, and decreased citrate and spermine [ 52 ]. Intraprostatic molecular imaging may identify areas of high tumor burden using techniques such as SPECT, MRS, and PET with choline. Improved tumor localization and lymph node staging can be achieved by combining molecular imaging with registration to anatomic CT and MR image sets [ 21 ]. In addition, validating intraprostatic biologic target volumes using in vivo fiducial markers has been shown to be feasible [ 53 ]. The correlated histopathology and marker placement system uniquely correlates pathology data for molecular image validation and discrete dose intensification, targeting tumor while sparing normal radiosensitive tissues (urethra, rectum, and neurovascular bundle). The correlated histopathology and marker placement system protocol showed clinical feasibility as a validation method for molecular imaging techniques such as SPECT-CT. Techniques to directly integrate images in the offline and online guidance of local therapies are currently being developed and tested for technical performance. These include techniques for image display, registration, navigation, and online adaptation to movements and deformations that occur throughout the therapeutic intervention [ 54 , 55 ]. DCE-MRI is a powerful tool for visualizing the vascularity of solid tumors. DCE-MRI of the prostate gland has also provided useful information for prostate cancer detection and staging [ 56 ]. DWI uses diffusion constants to map the intraprostatic extent of cancer. The data are integrated into models to predict cancer localization [ 57 ]. CT and MRI are the main imaging technologies currently used for staging nodal disease. PET and FDG PET have also been evaluated for prostate cancer staging, but because prostate cancer has variable accumulation of FDG, FDG PET is not widely used. However, FDG PET is gaining use for restaging [ 58 ]. Lymphotropic nanoparticle-enhanced imaging, a promising technique for malignant nodal evaluation, is highly accurate for nodal staging in patients with various primary cancers [ 59 ]. It evaluates nodal macrophage function and does not rely on nodal size to detect metastatic disease. The software module MRProstateCare (Image Guided Prostate Therapy Core) was created for use with Slicer (open-source software), a computerized surgical navigation platform to help plan, control, and direct prostate biopsies [ 54 , 55 ]. MrBot (URobotics), a robot, was created to provide imaging-guided access to the prostate gland [ 60 ]. The robot is customized for transperineal needle insertion and designed to be compatible with MRI. It can accommodate various needle drivers for different percutaneous interventions, such as biopsy, thermal ablation, or brachytherapy. TRUS-guided radiofrequency ablation involves ultrasound monitoring of the thermoablative technique. Several problems are associated with radiofrequency ablation in the prostate. The distributed energy is prone to variation because of heat sink by vasculature and is diffused over a wide area, making the temperature of adjacent organs difficult to control; and heating is slow, often resulting in insufficient apex ablation. There is also poor geometric correlation between the target lesion and energy input. Additionally, the procedure is difficult to monitor intraoperatively. These issues reduce the viability of radiofrequency ablation as an appropriate technique for definitive prostate cancer treatment; however, in later stages of the disease when targeting and monitoring are less critical, radiofrequency ablation may be useful as a palliative procedure. High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) delivers heat energy in focused ultrasound pulses. One advantage of HIFU is that it facilitates focal prostate ablation therapy without requiring direct tissue invasion and resultant direct damage to surrounding structures [ 61 ]. Another advantage of HIFU is that tissue heating is very rapid, causing immediate coagulation and necrosis. Full prostate ablation with HIFU is relatively straightforward to implement but associated with significant morbidity. Focal HIFU was attempted early on, and has been found to be feasible with low morbidity. Imaging-guided HIFU ablation allows the process to be monitored using ultrasound to detect lesions. MR-guided HIFU systems allow use of real-time MR thermometry to effectively optimize heat deposition. However, there are challenges with measuring efficacy because of persisting PSA elevation after treatment; also complicating treatment is variability in lesion size and location.  Clinical issues Imaging as a predictive tool for patient outcomes can be successfully evaluated by comparing models that incorporate the outcome of imaging with models that do not to determine incremental predictive value. The TNM staging system describes the extent of the primary tumor, the spread of tumor to nearby lymph nodes and glands, and the presence or absence of distal metastasis. In the United States, emphasis is placed on the T and N stages for initial prostate cancer staging because relatively few patients present with metastatic disease. However, detecting extracapsular extension and locating the intraprostatic extent of disease are important issues in disease management. The incidence of extracapsular extension, particularly early microscopic extracapsular extension, is unknown. Statistically, patients with pathologic extracapsular penetration tend to have relatively worse 10-year disease-free survival than patients with organ-confined disease; the significance of extracapsular extension requires investigation to determine what findings could be seen from the imaging perspective. Although recent studies found that lymph node metastasis incidence dropped to less than 10%, these numbers do not reflect true incidence [ 51 ] because patients who receive neoadjuvant hormonal therapy or radiation, those with high-risk prostate cancer, and those who have positive nodes with extended nodal dissection are excluded from these numbers. So, although the percentage of patients with positive lymph nodes has declined, a significant number of patients have lymph node–positive cancer (about 39% in high-risk patients). Knowing the lymph node status helps to inform decisions on therapy, predict recurrence, and assess prognosis. Imaging has not been reliable in identifying lymph node disease; until recently, lymph node size was the only widely used method of ascertaining nodal disease. However, size criteria are limited in accuracy because of significant overlap between the size of normal and malignant nodes. The major challenge to improving staging technology is the need for improved pathologic markers. These markers serve as reference standards to find imaging techniques that predict patient outcomes and help guide therapy. Other important issues remain, including knowing what patient cohorts benefit most from nodal imaging and staging and learning how the predictive value of an accurate technique affects therapeutic options. Traditionally, active surveillance (formerly called “watchful waiting”) in prostate cancer was a consideration for older men and men with significant health problems. It was applied ad hoc with limited success. The patient would be diagnosed with stage A1 prostate cancer after transurethral resection of the prostate and there would be nonstandardized follow-up. Contemporary active surveillance includes low-risk patients with low tumor volumes, low PSA levels, and low Gleason scores. Follow-up is standardized, patients are well informed, and periodic repeat prostate biopsies are performed. Although active surveillance may not be advised for all men, in general, it is underused. Although prostate cancer is mainly a multifocal disease, about 15–30% of patients have unifocal or unilateral disease. Localized, unifocal cancer of clinical significance is usually considered the prerequisite for successful focal therapy. However, unilateral (multifocal but all on one side) disease may make performing focal therapy easier. With multifocal cancer, a dominating index lesion probably drives progression; thus, the cancer may be considered biologically unifocal disease. Focal tumor ablation is feasible with low morbidity. The problem is localizing suitable tumors and monitoring tissue ablation. In addition to identifying patients who are candidates for focal therapy, imaging may play a role in identifying the target lesion. An important issue is relating the target delivery device to the imaging technique to deliver treatment to the target. Another critical issue with focal therapy is residual PSA, which makes posttherapy follow-up more challenging. The biologic potential of not treating missed secondary tumors and the role of adjuvant therapy are additional issues. There is interest in combining active surveillance with other interventions (“active surveillance plus”), such as aggressive dietary and lifestyle modification, perhaps 5?-reductase inhibitor drugs, complementary alternative medicines, oral antiandrogens, and novel future agents. Active surveillance remains debated because of the lack of adequate modern randomized controlled trials and lack of robust imaging. There are clearly social and economic factors that impact the use of active surveillance. A major concern with current protocols of active surveillance remains the limited ability to closely and noninvasively monitor tumor progression within the prostate gland. Imaging is well poised to address this concern, and imaging integration may improve general acceptance of active surveillance in the management of low-risk disease. Outcomes of local therapy, whether delivered up front or delayed after active surveillance, stand to improve with integration of imaging guidance. Standard-care therapeutic options include radical prostatectomy, high-dose external beam radiotherapy, and brachytherapy, used alone or in combination. As a first step, recommending the most appropriate therapeutic technique depends on accurate staging and prognostication of disease. Ultimately, the objective of local therapy is to control disease with minimal collateral damage, thereby optimizing both cancer and toxicity outcomes. Because of the historical inability to accurately visualize the local extent of disease, all local therapeutic interventions were simply targeted to the prostate gland as a surrogate for cancer. This paradigm has invariably led to both over- and undertreatment of low-burden and locally extensive disease, respectively. In this manner, visualizing the location and extent of disease burden stands to more appropriately guide the execution of both surgery and radiation delivery. Visualizing disease that extends beyond the prostate gland could reduce the incidence of incomplete cancer resections and modify radiation delivery to include extraprostatic disease. Similarly, prostatic subsites of tumor burden can be focally selected for radiation dose intensification to improve cancer control and reduce unnecessary dose exposure to adjacent organs at risk of injury and subsequent toxicity. It is important to recognize that the radiation dose required to control microscopic disease is much lower than that required to control gross (dense) disease, and modulation of dose intensity on the basis of spatial distribution of disease burden has yet to be fully explored. Focal ablative approaches do not deliver therapy to regions bearing microscopic disease within and around the prostate gland, which may impact cancer control. To address this concern, adjuvant therapies to focal ablation may be considered. In fact, immediate radiotherapy to presumed residual microscopic disease after prostatectomy has recently been shown to improve overall survival in patients with localized prostate cancer. Imaging techniques that could monitor progression of microscopic disease may obviate adjuvant local therapies altogether, restricting their use to the salvage of microscopic progression.  Role of imaging The incremental predictive accuracy of imaging is of great interest in prostate cancer. However, before this can be determined, imaging technology must be more mature, stable, and standardized. MRI has been useful in identifying prostate cancer on the basis of reduced T2 signal intensity, increased choline, and decreased citrate and spermine [ 52 ]. Intraprostatic molecular imaging may identify areas of high tumor burden using techniques such as SPECT, MRS, and PET with choline. Improved tumor localization and lymph node staging can be achieved by combining molecular imaging with registration to anatomic CT and MR image sets [ 21 ]. In addition, validating intraprostatic biologic target volumes using in vivo fiducial markers has been shown to be feasible [ 53 ]. The correlated histopathology and marker placement system uniquely correlates pathology data for molecular image validation and discrete dose intensification, targeting tumor while sparing normal radiosensitive tissues (urethra, rectum, and neurovascular bundle). The correlated histopathology and marker placement system protocol showed clinical feasibility as a validation method for molecular imaging techniques such as SPECT-CT. Techniques to directly integrate images in the offline and online guidance of local therapies are currently being developed and tested for technical performance. These include techniques for image display, registration, navigation, and online adaptation to movements and deformations that occur throughout the therapeutic intervention [ 54 , 55 ]. DCE-MRI is a powerful tool for visualizing the vascularity of solid tumors. DCE-MRI of the prostate gland has also provided useful information for prostate cancer detection and staging [ 56 ]. DWI uses diffusion constants to map the intraprostatic extent of cancer. The data are integrated into models to predict cancer localization [ 57 ]. CT and MRI are the main imaging technologies currently used for staging nodal disease. PET and FDG PET have also been evaluated for prostate cancer staging, but because prostate cancer has variable accumulation of FDG, FDG PET is not widely used. However, FDG PET is gaining use for restaging [ 58 ]. Lymphotropic nanoparticle-enhanced imaging, a promising technique for malignant nodal evaluation, is highly accurate for nodal staging in patients with various primary cancers [ 59 ]. It evaluates nodal macrophage function and does not rely on nodal size to detect metastatic disease. The software module MRProstateCare (Image Guided Prostate Therapy Core) was created for use with Slicer (open-source software), a computerized surgical navigation platform to help plan, control, and direct prostate biopsies [ 54 , 55 ]. MrBot (URobotics), a robot, was created to provide imaging-guided access to the prostate gland [ 60 ]. The robot is customized for transperineal needle insertion and designed to be compatible with MRI. It can accommodate various needle drivers for different percutaneous interventions, such as biopsy, thermal ablation, or brachytherapy. TRUS-guided radiofrequency ablation involves ultrasound monitoring of the thermoablative technique. Several problems are associated with radiofrequency ablation in the prostate. The distributed energy is prone to variation because of heat sink by vasculature and is diffused over a wide area, making the temperature of adjacent organs difficult to control; and heating is slow, often resulting in insufficient apex ablation. There is also poor geometric correlation between the target lesion and energy input. Additionally, the procedure is difficult to monitor intraoperatively. These issues reduce the viability of radiofrequency ablation as an appropriate technique for definitive prostate cancer treatment; however, in later stages of the disease when targeting and monitoring are less critical, radiofrequency ablation may be useful as a palliative procedure. High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) delivers heat energy in focused ultrasound pulses. One advantage of HIFU is that it facilitates focal prostate ablation therapy without requiring direct tissue invasion and resultant direct damage to surrounding structures [ 61 ]. Another advantage of HIFU is that tissue heating is very rapid, causing immediate coagulation and necrosis. Full prostate ablation with HIFU is relatively straightforward to implement but associated with significant morbidity. Focal HIFU was attempted early on, and has been found to be feasible with low morbidity. Imaging-guided HIFU ablation allows the process to be monitored using ultrasound to detect lesions. MR-guided HIFU systems allow use of real-time MR thermometry to effectively optimize heat deposition. However, there are challenges with measuring efficacy because of persisting PSA elevation after treatment; also complicating treatment is variability in lesion size and location.  Problem 3: D<sub>0</sub> Disease: Role of Imaging in Disease Management Clinical issues After definitive local radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy, a rise in serum PSA, also known as biochemical recurrence, is usually the first indication of cancer recurrence. Biochemical recurrence occurs in 20–40% of patients within 10 years of definitive prostate cancer therapy [ 62 – 64 ]. It often precedes clinically detectable recurrence by years [ 62 ]. However, disease progression within the group of patients with rising PSA is heterogeneous; only 30% eventually progress to clinical disease [ 65 , 66 ]. Biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy After radical prostatectomy, serum PSA should fall to undetectable levels (< 0.1 ng/mL) within 3–4 weeks, as measured by standard immunoassays. However, the definition of biochemical recurrence in the literature varies from a cutoff value of 0.2–0.5 ng/mL for a single measurement or two consecutive values exceeding 0.2 or 0.4 ng/mL [ 66 – 68 ]. A PSA level of 0.4 ng/mL or greater is associated most strongly with PSA progression or disease progression, and is considered most meaningful to define biochemical recurrence [ 68 , 69 ], which can occur years after radical prostatectomy. For example, about 20% of PSA recurrences happened 5 or more years after radical prostatectomy, suggesting the necessity of prolonged PSA follow-up. Current clinical practice monitors patients for PSA levels every 3 months in year 1, every 6 months for years 2–5, and annually thereafter [ 70 ]. The time from biochemical recurrence to metastases depends on preoperative pathologic stage, Gleason score, and postoperative PSA doubling time [ 65 , 66 ]. A shorter PSA doubling time (< 10 months) is the most powerful predictor for disease progression [ 65 , 66 ]. In rare cases, patients may develop distant metastatic disease after radical prostatectomy without an elevated PSA level [ 71 ]. Biochemical recurrence after radiation therapy After radiation, PSA levels decrease slowly and may never reach undetectable levels. The time to reach nadir after radiation therapy may be months or even years, depending on factors such as radiation dose, prostate size, and pretreatment PSA level [ 72 ]. Defining biochemical recurrence after radiation therapy is more complex. The American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) recommended in 1997 that the definition of biochemical recurrence be three consecutive PSA increases after PSA nadir has been reached, with the date of failure backdated to the mid point between the nadir and the first of these three increases. The definition has been criticized for biases caused by backdating. In 2006, a revised definition known as the Phoenix definition ([Radiation Therapy Oncology Group] RTOG-ASTRO) was devised, which defines biochemical recurrence as an absolute increase of 2 ng/mL or greater above the nadir with no backdating. This definition has higher sensitivity and specificity in predicting clinical failure after external radiation therapy and brachytherapy compared with the original ASTRO definition [ 73 ]. However, as with radical prostatectomy, clinical failure after radiation therapy can be better predicted by PSA doubling time than by absolute PSA levels [ 74 ]. Role of imaging When a rise in PSA is observed in patients after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy, the next step is to determine whether cancer recurs locally or in distant organs. Accurately delineating the location and the extent of cancer is critical in selecting appropriate treatment, that is, local salvage therapy or systemic therapy. The primary role of imaging in this setting is to help distinguish local recurrence from distant metastatic disease. PET and SPECT As noted, prostate cancer grows slowly and is rarely FDG avid. Consequently, FDG is not an optimal PET tracer in assessing recurrence, although FDG PET detected local or systemic disease in 31% of 91 patients with PSA relapse referred for this test [ 75 ]. However, recent studies suggested a high sensitivity with 11C-acetate and 11C-choline PET in detecting local recurrence and regional lymph node involvement after radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy [ 5 , 6 , 8 , 76 ]. The very short half-life of 11C (20 minutes) may make it less practical than 18F as a PET label because of logistic issues. Recently, a novel PET tracer, anti-1-amino-3-18F-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid (anti-18F-FACBC), a synthetic L-leucine analog, was evaluated in six patients with recurrent prostate cancer. Anti-18F-FACBC showed very low renal excretion; it showed intensive uptake in lymph node metastases and recurrent prostate bed cancer and was found superior to ProstaScint (111In-capromab pendetide, Cytogen) SPECT in detecting lymph nodes [ 77 ]. ProstaScint SPECT uses a murine monoclonal antibody that reacts against prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), which is overexpressed in prostate cancer compared with normal tissues. ProstaScint SPECT has been used to detect lymph node metastases and recurrent prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy. However, its sensitivity and specificity in detecting recurrent disease are suboptimal [ 78 ]. Other novel SPECT tracers currently in preclinical and early clinical development include small-molecule PSMA inhibitors [ 79 – 81 ]. These molecules selectively accumulated in PSMA-positive human prostate cancer xenografts. Also, a PMSA inhibitor, MIP-1095 (Molecular Insight Pharmaceuticals), accumulated in metastatic prostate cancer in a human study [ 82 ]; its utility requires further validation in larger clinical studies. Bone is the most common site for prostate cancer metastasis. Radionuclide bone scanning is a sensitive method to assess skeleton metastases. Currently, 99mTc-MDP planar bone scintigraphy is the standard bone imaging technique. However, accurate detection of bone metastases may be improved by SPECT with rotating 3D acquisition [ 83 ]. Studies also suggested that 18F-NaF PET is superior to 99mTc-MDP planar scintigraphy or SPECT in detecting skeleton metastases from prostate cancer [ 84 ]; 18F-NaF PET detected more lesions and showed higher contrast between malignant and normal bone. Unlike 99mTc-MDP scanning, which has a low detection rate for lesions in the spine and pelvis, the detection efficiency of 18F-NaF PET is independent of anatomic lesion localization [ 85 ]. The very high resolution and target-to-background contrast of 18F-NaF PET can potentially reduce its specificity; however, correlating PET with CT findings substantially helps to differentiate malignant from benign lesions [ 84 ]. MRI and CT Although MRI is widely used in assessing local recurrence after prostatectomy and/or radiation therapy, interpretation can be confounded due to tissue changes such as glandular atrophy and fibrosis induced by radiation, the presence of radiotherapy seeds, and scarring and the presence of surgical clips. Because of reports that MRI and CT detection of nodal recurrence is limited by low sensitivity (? 36%) and poor spatial resolution (? 8 mm) for MRI, some centers consider MRI and CT to be of benefit only to high-risk patients with PSA levels > 20 ng/mL. Consequently, improved functional or contrast-enhanced imaging methods such as MRS, DWI, and DCE-MRI are being explored [ 86 , 87 ]. In a recent study, MRI with a superparamagnetic nanoparticle (monocrystalline iron oxide, Combidex, Advanced Magnetics) showed higher accuracy than conventional MRI in detecting pelvic lymph node metastases. Lymph node metastases as small as 2 mm in diameter were detected using this technique [ 88 ].  Clinical issues After definitive local radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy, a rise in serum PSA, also known as biochemical recurrence, is usually the first indication of cancer recurrence. Biochemical recurrence occurs in 20–40% of patients within 10 years of definitive prostate cancer therapy [ 62 – 64 ]. It often precedes clinically detectable recurrence by years [ 62 ]. However, disease progression within the group of patients with rising PSA is heterogeneous; only 30% eventually progress to clinical disease [ 65 , 66 ].  Biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy After radical prostatectomy, serum PSA should fall to undetectable levels (< 0.1 ng/mL) within 3–4 weeks, as measured by standard immunoassays. However, the definition of biochemical recurrence in the literature varies from a cutoff value of 0.2–0.5 ng/mL for a single measurement or two consecutive values exceeding 0.2 or 0.4 ng/mL [ 66 – 68 ]. A PSA level of 0.4 ng/mL or greater is associated most strongly with PSA progression or disease progression, and is considered most meaningful to define biochemical recurrence [ 68 , 69 ], which can occur years after radical prostatectomy. For example, about 20% of PSA recurrences happened 5 or more years after radical prostatectomy, suggesting the necessity of prolonged PSA follow-up. Current clinical practice monitors patients for PSA levels every 3 months in year 1, every 6 months for years 2–5, and annually thereafter [ 70 ]. The time from biochemical recurrence to metastases depends on preoperative pathologic stage, Gleason score, and postoperative PSA doubling time [ 65 , 66 ]. A shorter PSA doubling time (< 10 months) is the most powerful predictor for disease progression [ 65 , 66 ]. In rare cases, patients may develop distant metastatic disease after radical prostatectomy without an elevated PSA level [ 71 ].  Biochemical recurrence after radiation therapy After radiation, PSA levels decrease slowly and may never reach undetectable levels. The time to reach nadir after radiation therapy may be months or even years, depending on factors such as radiation dose, prostate size, and pretreatment PSA level [ 72 ]. Defining biochemical recurrence after radiation therapy is more complex. The American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology (ASTRO) recommended in 1997 that the definition of biochemical recurrence be three consecutive PSA increases after PSA nadir has been reached, with the date of failure backdated to the mid point between the nadir and the first of these three increases. The definition has been criticized for biases caused by backdating. In 2006, a revised definition known as the Phoenix definition ([Radiation Therapy Oncology Group] RTOG-ASTRO) was devised, which defines biochemical recurrence as an absolute increase of 2 ng/mL or greater above the nadir with no backdating. This definition has higher sensitivity and specificity in predicting clinical failure after external radiation therapy and brachytherapy compared with the original ASTRO definition [ 73 ]. However, as with radical prostatectomy, clinical failure after radiation therapy can be better predicted by PSA doubling time than by absolute PSA levels [ 74 ].  Role of imaging When a rise in PSA is observed in patients after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy, the next step is to determine whether cancer recurs locally or in distant organs. Accurately delineating the location and the extent of cancer is critical in selecting appropriate treatment, that is, local salvage therapy or systemic therapy. The primary role of imaging in this setting is to help distinguish local recurrence from distant metastatic disease.  PET and SPECT As noted, prostate cancer grows slowly and is rarely FDG avid. Consequently, FDG is not an optimal PET tracer in assessing recurrence, although FDG PET detected local or systemic disease in 31% of 91 patients with PSA relapse referred for this test [ 75 ]. However, recent studies suggested a high sensitivity with 11C-acetate and 11C-choline PET in detecting local recurrence and regional lymph node involvement after radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy [ 5 , 6 , 8 , 76 ]. The very short half-life of 11C (20 minutes) may make it less practical than 18F as a PET label because of logistic issues. Recently, a novel PET tracer, anti-1-amino-3-18F-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid (anti-18F-FACBC), a synthetic L-leucine analog, was evaluated in six patients with recurrent prostate cancer. Anti-18F-FACBC showed very low renal excretion; it showed intensive uptake in lymph node metastases and recurrent prostate bed cancer and was found superior to ProstaScint (111In-capromab pendetide, Cytogen) SPECT in detecting lymph nodes [ 77 ]. ProstaScint SPECT uses a murine monoclonal antibody that reacts against prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), which is overexpressed in prostate cancer compared with normal tissues. ProstaScint SPECT has been used to detect lymph node metastases and recurrent prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy or radiation therapy. However, its sensitivity and specificity in detecting recurrent disease are suboptimal [ 78 ]. Other novel SPECT tracers currently in preclinical and early clinical development include small-molecule PSMA inhibitors [ 79 – 81 ]. These molecules selectively accumulated in PSMA-positive human prostate cancer xenografts. Also, a PMSA inhibitor, MIP-1095 (Molecular Insight Pharmaceuticals), accumulated in metastatic prostate cancer in a human study [ 82 ]; its utility requires further validation in larger clinical studies. Bone is the most common site for prostate cancer metastasis. Radionuclide bone scanning is a sensitive method to assess skeleton metastases. Currently, 99mTc-MDP planar bone scintigraphy is the standard bone imaging technique. However, accurate detection of bone metastases may be improved by SPECT with rotating 3D acquisition [ 83 ]. Studies also suggested that 18F-NaF PET is superior to 99mTc-MDP planar scintigraphy or SPECT in detecting skeleton metastases from prostate cancer [ 84 ]; 18F-NaF PET detected more lesions and showed higher contrast between malignant and normal bone. Unlike 99mTc-MDP scanning, which has a low detection rate for lesions in the spine and pelvis, the detection efficiency of 18F-NaF PET is independent of anatomic lesion localization [ 85 ]. The very high resolution and target-to-background contrast of 18F-NaF PET can potentially reduce its specificity; however, correlating PET with CT findings substantially helps to differentiate malignant from benign lesions [ 84 ].  MRI and CT Although MRI is widely used in assessing local recurrence after prostatectomy and/or radiation therapy, interpretation can be confounded due to tissue changes such as glandular atrophy and fibrosis induced by radiation, the presence of radiotherapy seeds, and scarring and the presence of surgical clips. Because of reports that MRI and CT detection of nodal recurrence is limited by low sensitivity (? 36%) and poor spatial resolution (? 8 mm) for MRI, some centers consider MRI and CT to be of benefit only to high-risk patients with PSA levels > 20 ng/mL. Consequently, improved functional or contrast-enhanced imaging methods such as MRS, DWI, and DCE-MRI are being explored [ 86 , 87 ]. In a recent study, MRI with a superparamagnetic nanoparticle (monocrystalline iron oxide, Combidex, Advanced Magnetics) showed higher accuracy than conventional MRI in detecting pelvic lymph node metastases. Lymph node metastases as small as 2 mm in diameter were detected using this technique [ 88 ].  Problem 4: Assessing the Response to Therapy and the Role of Imaging in Prostate Cancer Drug Development and Management of Advanced Disease Clinical issues Despite an array of imaging techniques, assessing prostate cancer with imaging remains challenging in many important clinical situations, including detecting recurrent disease in men with biochemical failure after definitive therapy. Advances in imaging technology, such as the development of hybrid imaging systems (e.g., PET/CT and SPECT-CT), which depict both structural and metabolic information, have contributed to more accurate imaging assessment by reducing false-positive and false-negative findings. Initial interest was also generated by the use of tracers such as radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies to PSMA; however, results are mixed. The patient populations studied were varied, the imaging protocols required multiday imaging sessions, and image interpretation was challenging due to nonspecific tracer accumulation and delayed clearance. Various clinical and pathologic parameters, including surgical Gleason score, pain, time to PSA relapse after primary treatment, and PSA doubling time, have been used to predict the probability of distant metastasis development in prostate cancer patients with rising serum PSA. PSA doubling time appears to be the most important predictor of distant metastasis development and prostate cancer–specific mortality [ 89 – 91 ]. As previously indicated, prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed lethal malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in American men. Although high response rates are achieved using androgen blockade as first-line therapy, most men progress toward hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Systemic chemotherapies have been shown to improve clinical outcome in hormone-refractory prostate cancer patients; however, such thrapies are not curative. Advanced prostate cancer has a particular propensity to metastasize to lymph nodes and bones, where it produces predominantly osteoblastic lesions and local bone formation. The tropism for bone is thought to be due in part to specific interactions between prostate cancer cells and cells present in the bone environment, particularly bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblasts [ 92 ]. Such interactions involve numerous signaling pathways that could serve as targets for new therapeutic agents. For example, agents that block the activity of growth factors implicated in advanced prostate cancer development (e.g., ET-1 or vascular endothelial growth factor) are being tested for their effect on bone metastases. Other strategies involve the development of PHSCN, a synthetic peptide analog that acts to decrease fibronectin-mediated basement membrane invasion and inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases. Bone metastasis significantly affects quality of life through symptoms such as bone pain, pathologic fractures, anemia, and nerve impingement; incidence varies from 5% to 27% [ 92 ]. With the advent of PSA testing and earlier detection, few patients (< 5%) present with metastases at the time of diagnosis. However, despite early detection and intervention, disease in many men will still progress to bone metastasis. In addition to its negative effects on quality of life, the development of bone metastases also significantly affects survival—median survival time for men with metastatic hormone-resistant disease is less than 12 months [ 92 ]. Thus, detection of bone metastases is clinically important because the onset of bone metastasis often warrants initiation of chemotherapy and/or bone-targeted therapy. Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), the published rules that define when cancer patients respond, remain stable, or progress during treatments, considers bone metastasis a nontarget lesion. Therefore, RECIST is not useful in measuring antitumor effects. Technology that could reliably and accurately measure antitumor effects would provide a significant advance in prostate cancer because it would facilitate timely evaluation of new agents in clinical trials. Role of imaging The utility of molecular imaging for clinical medicine includes early detection of changes occurring in tissue, enabling changes in individual patient management in real time and facilitating drug development. A promising new imaging technique, 18F-fluorodihydrotestosterone (FDHT) PET, may help to define the exact role of androgen receptor imaging in prostate cancer, including predicting and assessing response to hormonal ablation therapy. In patients with advanced metastatic prostate cancer, abnormal localization of FDHT was seen in most metastatic lesions but only in a few primary tumors, and FDHT uptake in metastatic lesions decreased after hormonal ablation therapy with flutamide [ 93 ]. Animal and preliminary clinical studies have shown that FDG PET may be useful in evaluating advanced disease in patients with high Gleason scores and serum PSA levels, to detect active osseous and soft-tissue metastases, and to assess response after androgen ablation and treatment with novel chemotherapies [ 94 – 96 ]. Three-dimensional volumetric CT is an effective method for localizing prostatic structures for radiation therapy treatment planning in prostate cancer patients because it eliminates the need for an invasive procedure and the related side effects [ 97 ]. Three-dimensional volumetric CT may also play a role in measuring response to therapy. Early data suggest that the response of prostate cancer bone metastases to treatment can be quantitatively assessed using DWI, with functional diffusion mapping [ 98 ] having greater utility for lytic than for sclerotic disease. The functional diffusion mapping biomarker is based on MRI diffusion maps used to quantify spatially distinct therapy-induced changes in the diffusion of water within tumor tissue. Initial studies verified the capability of functional diffusion mapping as a biomarker for detecting bone cancer treatment efficacy, thus warranting further clinical evaluation [ 99 ]. Whole-body planar bone scanning using 99mTc-MDP is the established clinical standard for imaging bone metastasis. For SPECT of the bone, metastable 99mTc is tagged onto a phosphonate compound such as MDP to generate 99mTc-MDP, which selectively concentrates in the bone. For scintigraphy, the labeled compound is administered IV and SPECT is subsequently performed after a suitable time period. Imaging with 99mTc-MDP is the initial method of choice for detecting skeletal metastases in cancer patients. Compared with other imaging techniques such as planar scintigraphy, SPECT provides detailed information about the anatomy and physiologic state of the bone and has been used to monitor bone metastasis in prostate cancers. Early metastases may be missed with 99mTc-MDP uptake because this technique relies on the osteoblastic reaction rather than the actual tumor being detected [ 100 ]; 18F-NaF PET has been shown to have a high sensitivity for detecting bone metastases due to increased 18F-NaF uptake in malignant bone lesions. Taking advantage of favorable characteristics of 18F-NaF and better performance of PET, 18F-NaF PET has been reported to be more sensitive for detecting bone metastases than 99mTc-MDP bone scanning. In light of the increased sensitivity of 18F-NaF PET and the advent of novel therapies to treat bone metastases, it is possible that planar bone scanning should be replaced with PET, including FDG PET, in which there is promising data, as well as 18F-NaF PET.  Clinical issues Despite an array of imaging techniques, assessing prostate cancer with imaging remains challenging in many important clinical situations, including detecting recurrent disease in men with biochemical failure after definitive therapy. Advances in imaging technology, such as the development of hybrid imaging systems (e.g., PET/CT and SPECT-CT), which depict both structural and metabolic information, have contributed to more accurate imaging assessment by reducing false-positive and false-negative findings. Initial interest was also generated by the use of tracers such as radiolabeled monoclonal antibodies to PSMA; however, results are mixed. The patient populations studied were varied, the imaging protocols required multiday imaging sessions, and image interpretation was challenging due to nonspecific tracer accumulation and delayed clearance. Various clinical and pathologic parameters, including surgical Gleason score, pain, time to PSA relapse after primary treatment, and PSA doubling time, have been used to predict the probability of distant metastasis development in prostate cancer patients with rising serum PSA. PSA doubling time appears to be the most important predictor of distant metastasis development and prostate cancer–specific mortality [ 89 – 91 ]. As previously indicated, prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed lethal malignancy and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in American men. Although high response rates are achieved using androgen blockade as first-line therapy, most men progress toward hormone-refractory prostate cancer. Systemic chemotherapies have been shown to improve clinical outcome in hormone-refractory prostate cancer patients; however, such thrapies are not curative. Advanced prostate cancer has a particular propensity to metastasize to lymph nodes and bones, where it produces predominantly osteoblastic lesions and local bone formation. The tropism for bone is thought to be due in part to specific interactions between prostate cancer cells and cells present in the bone environment, particularly bone marrow endothelial cells and osteoblasts [ 92 ]. Such interactions involve numerous signaling pathways that could serve as targets for new therapeutic agents. For example, agents that block the activity of growth factors implicated in advanced prostate cancer development (e.g., ET-1 or vascular endothelial growth factor) are being tested for their effect on bone metastases. Other strategies involve the development of PHSCN, a synthetic peptide analog that acts to decrease fibronectin-mediated basement membrane invasion and inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases. Bone metastasis significantly affects quality of life through symptoms such as bone pain, pathologic fractures, anemia, and nerve impingement; incidence varies from 5% to 27% [ 92 ]. With the advent of PSA testing and earlier detection, few patients (< 5%) present with metastases at the time of diagnosis. However, despite early detection and intervention, disease in many men will still progress to bone metastasis. In addition to its negative effects on quality of life, the development of bone metastases also significantly affects survival—median survival time for men with metastatic hormone-resistant disease is less than 12 months [ 92 ]. Thus, detection of bone metastases is clinically important because the onset of bone metastasis often warrants initiation of chemotherapy and/or bone-targeted therapy. Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), the published rules that define when cancer patients respond, remain stable, or progress during treatments, considers bone metastasis a nontarget lesion. Therefore, RECIST is not useful in measuring antitumor effects. Technology that could reliably and accurately measure antitumor effects would provide a significant advance in prostate cancer because it would facilitate timely evaluation of new agents in clinical trials.  Role of imaging The utility of molecular imaging for clinical medicine includes early detection of changes occurring in tissue, enabling changes in individual patient management in real time and facilitating drug development. A promising new imaging technique, 18F-fluorodihydrotestosterone (FDHT) PET, may help to define the exact role of androgen receptor imaging in prostate cancer, including predicting and assessing response to hormonal ablation therapy. In patients with advanced metastatic prostate cancer, abnormal localization of FDHT was seen in most metastatic lesions but only in a few primary tumors, and FDHT uptake in metastatic lesions decreased after hormonal ablation therapy with flutamide [ 93 ]. Animal and preliminary clinical studies have shown that FDG PET may be useful in evaluating advanced disease in patients with high Gleason scores and serum PSA levels, to detect active osseous and soft-tissue metastases, and to assess response after androgen ablation and treatment with novel chemotherapies [ 94 – 96 ]. Three-dimensional volumetric CT is an effective method for localizing prostatic structures for radiation therapy treatment planning in prostate cancer patients because it eliminates the need for an invasive procedure and the related side effects [ 97 ]. Three-dimensional volumetric CT may also play a role in measuring response to therapy. Early data suggest that the response of prostate cancer bone metastases to treatment can be quantitatively assessed using DWI, with functional diffusion mapping [ 98 ] having greater utility for lytic than for sclerotic disease. The functional diffusion mapping biomarker is based on MRI diffusion maps used to quantify spatially distinct therapy-induced changes in the diffusion of water within tumor tissue. Initial studies verified the capability of functional diffusion mapping as a biomarker for detecting bone cancer treatment efficacy, thus warranting further clinical evaluation [ 99 ]. Whole-body planar bone scanning using 99mTc-MDP is the established clinical standard for imaging bone metastasis. For SPECT of the bone, metastable 99mTc is tagged onto a phosphonate compound such as MDP to generate 99mTc-MDP, which selectively concentrates in the bone. For scintigraphy, the labeled compound is administered IV and SPECT is subsequently performed after a suitable time period. Imaging with 99mTc-MDP is the initial method of choice for detecting skeletal metastases in cancer patients. Compared with other imaging techniques such as planar scintigraphy, SPECT provides detailed information about the anatomy and physiologic state of the bone and has been used to monitor bone metastasis in prostate cancers. Early metastases may be missed with 99mTc-MDP uptake because this technique relies on the osteoblastic reaction rather than the actual tumor being detected [ 100 ]; 18F-NaF PET has been shown to have a high sensitivity for detecting bone metastases due to increased 18F-NaF uptake in malignant bone lesions. Taking advantage of favorable characteristics of 18F-NaF and better performance of PET, 18F-NaF PET has been reported to be more sensitive for detecting bone metastases than 99mTc-MDP bone scanning. In light of the increased sensitivity of 18F-NaF PET and the advent of novel therapies to treat bone metastases, it is possible that planar bone scanning should be replaced with PET, including FDG PET, in which there is promising data, as well as 18F-NaF PET.  Summary The overall goal of this workshop was to bring together multidisciplinary scientists to consider new or improved imaging strategies that could help address four major challenges in prostate cancer treatment and management—diagnostic accuracy; risk stratification, particularly for application of active surveillance and focal therapy; D0 disease; and assessing response to treatment—as well as methods for evaluating these strategies in clinical settings. A discussion of these four clinical challenges was preceded by a summary of prostate cancer incidence and mortality; the current role of imaging across the spectrum of early through metastatic prostate cancer; and the overarching issue in prostate cancer, which is distinguishing lethal from nonlethal disease. The discussions then focused on the specific clinical issues and the role of imaging in addressing the four defined clinical management problems. These discussions and accompanying recommendations are summarized in the text and Tables 1 – 4 .  Tables TABLE 1 Current and Future Imaging Techniques for Detecting, Staging, and Managing Prostate Cancer Disease Stage Available Clinical and Laboratory Assessment Methods Currently Used Imaging Techniques Pros and Cons, Utility Future Opportunities for Imaging Technology Development Diagnosis and detection PSA, DRE TRUS for biopsy guidance Most cancers cannot be seen by current TRUS techniques TRUS with microbubble contrast agents, color Doppler imaging MRI examination before biopsy Development of imaging-guidance techniques for biopsy Smart-needle optical imaging Localized, organ-confined cancer PSA, Gleason score, T stage, tumor burden as represented by biopsy core cancer involvement TRUS (with or without MRI) for conventional BT guidance Poor spatial representation of disease Advanced ultrasound for tumor localization and therapy guidance, multiparametric MRI depicting cancer boundaries Extracapsular extension CT (with or without MRI) for conventional RT treatment planning Patient-specific representation of prostate gland location and geometry USPIO MRI LN contrast agent After radical prostatectomy RT local recurrence (D0) Regional (lymph nodes, pelvis) Advanced metastatic disease PSA, histopathology MRI ProstaScint a using SPECT Limited diagnostic accuracy (poor sensitivity and specificity) 11C Choline/acetate, (13C hyperpolarized) anti-18F FACBC, androgen receptor probe, radiolabeled PSMA antibodies, FLT, possibly 18F-NaF Bone scan 18F-NaF Metastatic disease PSA>20, bone pain 99mTc-MDP bone scan Sensitive, but poor spatial resolution Visceral disease, limited specificity Radiolabeled PSMA antibodies, FLT CT staging Not dependent on bone remodeling by lesion (i.e., shows more lesions) 11C choline/acetate (13C hyperpolarized); anti-18F-FACBC, androgen receptor probe Note—PSA = prostate-specific antigen, DRE = digital rectal examination, TRUS = transrectal ultrasound, RP = radical prostatectomy, RT = radiation therapy, BT = brachytherapy, D0 = PSA relapse after RT or RP, USPIO = ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide, LN = lymphotropic nanoparticle, anti-18F-FACBC = anti-1-amino-3-18F-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid, PSMA = prostate-specific membrane antigen, FLT = 18F-3?-fluoro-3?-deoxy-L-thymidine, 18F-NaF = 18F sodium fluoride, MDP = methylene diphosphonate. a Indium-111-capromab pendetide manufactured by Cytogen. TABLE 2 Prostate Cancer Risk Definitions, Incidence, Screening Parameters, Treatments, and Imaging Use Risk Category a Incidence Definition Screening Parameters Disease Management/Treatments Treatment Trends a Imaging Techniques Used to Monitor and Stage b Normal NA Age?55y, normal PSA and DRE Regular PSA and/or DRE screening None None None Elevated NA PSA>4 ng/mL, negative biopsy or HGPIN Active surveillance to differentiate BPH Periodic repeat biopsy, dietary and lifestyle modification NA TRUS, MRI Low 34 PSA ? 10 ng/mL, Gleason score < 6, and stage T1–T2a Confirmed cancer, tumor confined to prostate, no extracapsular penetration Possibly neoadjuvant hormonal therapy or focal treatment Watchful waiting (8.9), brachytherapy (18.4) external-beam RT (6.8), prostatectomy (52), ADT (14.2) CT (10.4), MRI (0.9), bone scanning (18.6) Intermediate 36 PSA 10.1–20 ng/mL, Gleason score 7, and stage T2b Confirmed cancer, tumor confined to prostate, no extracapsular penetration Radiation therapy (brachytherapy, external-beam irradiation), RP Watchful waiting (4.5), brachytherapy (11.8), external-beam RT (19.1), prostatectomy (45), ADT (19.7) CT (15.3), MRI (1.4), bone scanning (50.9) High 30 PSA > 20 ng/mL, Gleason score 8–10, and stage T3–T4 TMN, extracapsular extension, local lymph nodes, seminal vesicles, pelvic structures Same as for intermediate risk plus pelvic dissection, increased radiation field, ADT Watchful waiting (4.8), brachytherapy (2.4), external-beam RT (23), prostatectomy (22.7), ADT (48.2) CT (25), MRI (2.5), bone scanning (69) Relapse or recurrence after definitive therapy 30–50% of previously treated patients Any PSA after nadir (RP vs RT definitions distinct) PSA doubling time ADT, salvage RT, RP; if moving toward advanced disease, treatment and techniques are indicated below No definitive data of overall trends for ADT; possibly adjuvant, cytotoxics, etc. Multiple techniques used: TRUS, CT, MRI, MRS, DWI, DCE-MRI, bone scanning, ProstaScint d , FDG PET; 18F-NaF, FLT, FDHT, etc.; no definitive data on trends for extent of use; radiolabeled choline, acetate Advanced disease, bone metastases c NA Visceral, axial, or appendicular skeletal lesions Pain, markedly elevated PSA, bone scanning-detected lesions ADT, bisphosphonates, chemotherapy, RT, bone-targeted radioisotopes FDA-approved therapies (e.g., docetaxel) vs investigational drugs Multiple techniques used: TRUS, CT, MRI, MRS, DWI, DCE-MRI, bone scanning, ProstaScint d , FDG PET; 18F-NaF, FLT, FDHT, etc.; no definitive data on trends for extent of use; radiolabeled choline, acetate Note—Numbers in parentheses are percentages. PSA = prostate-specific antigen, DRE = digital rectal examination, HGPIN = high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, BPH = benign prostatic hyperplasia, TRUS = transrectal ultrasound, RP = radical prostatectomy, RT = radiation therapy, ADT = androgen deprivation therapy, MRS = MR spectroscopy, DWI = diffusion-weighted MRI, DCE-MRI = dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, FDG PET = 18fluoro-2-deoxyglucose PET, 18F-NaF = 18F sodium fluoride, FLT = 18F-3?-fluoro-3?-deoxy-L-thymidine, FDHT = 18F-fluorodihydrotestosterone, N A = not available. a Based on 1999–2001 data; adapted from [ 101 ]. b Data are based on information available through 1997. Since that time, there has been increased use of MRI. Adapted from [ 102 ]. c Median actuarial time to metastases = 8 years from biochemical recurrence and median time to death after metastases detected = 5 years [ 66 ]. d ProstaScint: 111In-capromab pendetide manufactured by Cytogen. TABLE 3 Recommendations for Future Work Directed at Challenges in Prostate Cancer Treatment and Patient Management Challenge Recommendation Imaging Methods to Develop or Improve Diagnostic accuracy Supplement PSA screening to increase accuracy of diagnosis, develop more sensitive serum and/or tissue biomarkers, consider cancer imaging before biopsy, move from 2D to 3D imaging and/or histopathologic validation, develop new imaging techniques that depict disease and guide tissue biopsy Contrast-enhanced ultrasound, ultrasound spectroscopy, MRS, DWI, DCE-MRI, molecular probes with SPECT/PET, Raman spectroscopy, smart needle Risk stratification, initial staging, active surveillance, focal therapy Imaging-based monitoring during active surveillance (with or without other interventions such as dietary and lifestyle modifications, 5?-reductase inhibitors, complementary alternative medicines, oral antiandrogens, or chemoprevention), imaging guidance of focal therapies MRI, MRS, SPECT or CT, CHAMPS, DCE-MRI, DWI, LNMRI, MRProstateCare a and Slicer b , MrBot c , HIFU D0 disease Accurately determine location and extent (local or distant) of cancer recurrence, assist in treatment planning PET and SPECT with 11C tracers and/or rotating 3D acquisition, anti-18F-FACBC, 99mTc-MDP, 18F-NaF PET, MRI, MRI with Combidex d Assessing response to therapy and/or role of imaging in drug development and advanced disease management Develop technology to reliably and accurately measure antitumor effects via change in metastatic bone images, conduct clinical trials to evaluate new treatment and new agents and qualify new biomarkers FDHT PET, FDG PET, 3D volumetric CT, fDM, 99mTc-MDP/SPECT, 18F-NaF PET, DCE-MRI, DWI, HIFU, and MR-guided HIFU Note—PSA = prostate-specific antigen, MRS = MR spectroscopy, DWI = diffusion-weighted MRI, DCE-MRI = dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, CHAMPS = correlated histopathology and marker placement system, LNMRI = lymphotrophic nanoparticle–enhanced MRI, HIFU = high-intensity focused ultrasound, D0 = PSA relapse after radiation therapy or radical prostatectomy, anti-18F-FACBC = anti-1-amino-3-18F-fluorocyclobutane-1-carboxylic acid, MDP = methylene diphosphonate, 18F-NaF = 18F sodium fluoride, FDHT = 18F-fluorodihydrotestosterone, fDM = functional diffusion mapping. a MRProstateCare: software module manufactured by Image Guided Prostate Therapy Core. b Slicer surgical navigator platform is open-source software. c MrBot robot for imaging-guided access to the prostate manufactured by URobotics. d Combidex: monocrystalline iron oxide manufactured by Advanced Magnetics. TABLE 4 Example Clinical Trial Design Opportunities for Qualifying Novel Imaging Techniques and Probes in Prostate Cancer Imaging Probe or Technology Clinical Setting End Point/Comparator Value Proposition 18F-NaF Bone metastatic disease Correlation with treatment response and/or survival, 99mTc-MDP scan Simpler preparation, more sensitive MRI (T2-weighted, DCE-MRI, DWI, MRS) All localized or locally recurrent disease Repeat biopsy and/or PSA outcomes, disease control outcomes, pathological outcomes Identification of indolent vs aggressive lesions, active surveillance more acceptable to patients Localized disease—androgen deprivation therapy before RP or RT Ktrans response to therapy, histopathology, conventional MRI, TRUS Prediction of antiangiogenic therapy performance in other stages and other cancer types DWI, FDG PET, FDHT, FLT, or other tracers Bone and lymph node metastatic disease Correlation with treatment response and/or survival; 99mTc-MDP scanning Assess relative performance of probes to cytotoxic vs androgen targeting agents, evaluate standards for lesion enumeration, SUV quantitation, etc. Note—18F-NAF = 18F sodium fluoride, MDP = methylene diphosphonate, MRS = MR spectroscopy, DWI = diffusion-weighted MRI, DCE-MRI = dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, RP = radical prostatectomy, RT = radiation therapy, PSA = prostate-specific antigen, Ktrans = volume transfer constant, TRUS = transrectal ultrasound, FDG PET = 18fluoro-2-deoxyglucose PET, FLT = 18F-3?-fluoro-3?-deoxy-L-thymidine, FDHT = 18F-fluorodihydrotestosterone, SUV = standardized uptake value. 