Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors: Potential in Cancer Therapy The role of histone deacetylases (HDAC) and the potential of these enzymes as therapeutic targets for cancer, neurodegenerative diseases and a number of other disorders is an area of rapidly expanding investigation. There are 18 HDACs in humans. These enzymes are not redundant in function. Eleven of the HDACs are zinc dependent, classified on the basis of homology to yeast HDACs: Class I includes HDACs 1, 2, 3, and 8; Class IIA includes HDACs 4, 5, 7, and 9; Class IIB, HDACs 6 and 10; and Class IV, HDAC11. Class III HDACs, sirtuins 1–7, have an absolute requirement for NAD+, are not zinc dependent and generally not inhibited by compounds that inhibit zinc dependent deacetylases. In addition to histones, HDACs have many nonhistone protein substrates which have a role in regulation of gene expression, cell proliferation, cell migration, cell death, and angiogenesis. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have been discovered of different chemical structure. HDACi cause accumulation of acetylated forms of proteins which can alter their structure and function. HDACi can induce different phenotypes in various transformed cells, including growth arrest, apoptosis, reactive oxygen species facilitated cell death and mitotic cell death. Normal cells are relatively resistant to HDACi induced cell death. Several HDACi are in various stages of development, including clinical trials as monotherapy and in combination with other anti-cancer drugs and radiation. The first HDACi approved by the FDA for cancer therapy is suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA, vorinostat, Zolinza), approved for treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.  Perspectives and Conclusions HDACi are a promising new group of anticancer agents. We anticipate that developing HDACi and increasing our understanding of the effect of targeted inhibitors of HDACs will lead to anti-cancer drugs that are safer and more effective than so called non-targeted agents. HDACi can induce cancer cell death across a broad spectrum of different types of hematologic and solid neoplasms. The mechanisms of HDACi induced tumor cell death require further elucidation. It is clear that these agents can cause cancer cell growth arrest and cell death by more than one pathway including: extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic cell death, autophagy, and mitotic cell death, and inhibit cell migration, and tumor angiogenesis and alter immune response. HDACi have histone and many non-histone protein substrates. Normal cells are relatively resistant to HDACi induced cell death. The basis of normal cell resistance to HDACi is not understood. It may be speculated that cancer cells, with multiple defects, can not reverse the critical effects of HDACi as normal cells may do. A consequence of the relative resistance of normal cells to HDACi is the fact that HDACi, in general, are well-tolerated in clinical trials. The HDACi developed to date are structurally diverse and generally inhibit several HDACs. While HDACi have demonstrated anti-tumor effect both pre-clinically and in clinical trials to date across a broad variety of different cancers, only a proportion of patients with a given diagnosis appear to respond to the HDACi. The accumulated evidence to date indicate that HDACi may be most useful in combination with other targeted or cytotoxic anti-cancer drugs. It is clearly important to have a better understanding of the mechanisms of action of HDACi and identify markers that may predict response. Our best chance to identify predictive biomarkers is to continue to gain better understanding of the targets of HDACs and, it follows, of HDACi. The structural variety of active HDACi suggest that, in part at least, HDACs may have effects consequent to protein-protein interactions as well as, their catalytic deacetylase activities. The fact that many non-histone proteins are HDAC substrates suggest that these enzymes may more properly be referred to as “lysine deacetylases”. The development of isoforms HDACi will be very useful in elucidating the mechanism of action of each of the HDACs and understanding which isoforms are necessary for therapeutic efficacy and which contribute to off target toxicity. Among the questions that remain to be addressed is whether isoform specific HDACi may be clinically more useful than “pan” inhibitors. Currently a number of clinical trials are going forward with HDACi as monotherapy but an increasing number are with HDACi in combination with different anticancer agents both chemotherapy, as well as, targeted agents and radiotherapy, against abroad spectrum of both hematologic and solid tumors. Cancer cells typically contain multiple genetic deficits that disrupt key cell pathways including regulation of cell division, cell migration, and cell death. Recent studies have shown that tumors such as pancreatic cancer and glioblastomas have a large number of genetic defects revealing an extremely complex pattern of abnormalities which suggest that therapeutic strategies that target biological pathways and in particular, multiple biological pathways are likely to be more effective therapeutics than drugs targeted at a single gene or protein. This concept supports the need for continued development of HDACi, particularly, in combination therapeutic strategies.  Figure and Tables Figure 1 Zinc-dependent histone deacetylase inhibitors can induce transformed cell growth arrest and death by different pathways. HDAC6, histone deacetylase 6; HIF-1?, hypoxia induced factor-1?; HSP90, heat shock protein 90; PP1, protein phosphatase 1; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TBP2, thioredoxin binding protein 2; Trx, thioredoxin; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor. Table 1 Zinc-Dependent Histone Deacetylases HDAC Localization Size (AA) Chromosomal site Tissue distribution * Class I ?HDAC1 Nucleus 483 1p34.1 ubiquitous ?HDAC2 Nucleus 488 6p21 ubiquitous ?HDAC3 Nucleus 423 5q31 ubiquitous ?HDAC8 Nucleus 377 Xq13 ubiquitous CLASS IIa ?HDAC4 Nuc/Cyt 1084 2q372 H, SM, B ?HDAC5 Nuc/Cyt 1122 17q21 H, SM, B ?HDAC7 Nuc/Cyt 855 12q13 H, PL, PA, SM ?HDAC9 Nuc/Cyt 1011 7p21-p15 SM, B Calss IIb ?HDAC6 Mainly Cyt 1215 Xp11.22–33 H, L, K, PA ?HDAC10 Mainly Cyt 669 22q13.31–33 L, S, K Class V ?HDAC11 Nuc/Cyt 347 3p25.2 B, H, SM, K * SM=skeletal muscle; B=brain; PL=platelet; L=liver; K=kidney; S=spleen; H=heart; PA=pancreas. Table 2 Substrates of histone deacetylases (partial list) * Pathway Protein HDACs HDAC1 and ? other HDACs Cell motility ?-tubulin, cortactin Chaperones HSAP90, HSP70 Gene transcription factors and co-regulators P53, p73, GATA-1, 2 and 3, MyoD, E2F1, 2 and 3, PLAG-1 and PLAGL-2, c-myc, BCL-2, Rb, PGC-? Chromatin structure HMG-A1, B1, B2, N1 and N2, SRY Nuclear receptors (DNA) Androgen receptor, glucocorticoid receptor, estrogen receptor ? Signaling mediators SAT3, Smad7, ?-Catenin DNA repair Ku70, WRN Nuclear import Importin-?7 Inflammation mediator HMGB1 Viral protein E1A, L-HDAg, S-HDAg * See text for references. Table 3 Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors in Clinical Trials (partial list) * Drug Name Structure Potency (in vitro) Clinical Trials Vorinosat (SAHA, Zolinza) ?Mol/L FDA approved - CTCL, PhII–III (p.o.) Panobinostat (LBH589) nMol/L PhI–II (p.o.), PhII (i.v.) Belinostat (PXD101) ?Mol/L PhII (i.v.), PhI (p.o.) ITF-2357 nMol/L PhI–II (p.o.) PCI-24781 (CRA-024781) NA PhI (p.o.) Romidepsin (Depsipeptide, FK228) nMol/L PhI–II (i.v.) Valproic acid mMol/L PhII–III (p.o.), PhII (p.o.) Phenylbutyrate (VP-101, EL- 532) mMol/L PhII (p.o.) Pivanex (AN-9) mMol/L PhI–II (i.v.) SB-939 ?MolL PhI (p.o.) Entinostat (MS-275, SNDX-275) ?Mol/L PhI–II (p.o.) MGCD0103 ?Mol/L PhI–II (p.o.) JHJ-26481585 ?Mol/L PhI–II (p.o.) * See text for references. 