Clinical Collection and Protein Properties of Expressed Prostatic Secretions as a Source for Biomarkers of Prostatic Disease The prostate gland secretes many proteins in a prostatic fluid that combines with seminal vesicle derived fluids to promote sperm activation and function. Proximal fluids of the prostate that can be collected clinically are seminal plasma and expressed-prostatic secretion (EPS) fluids. EPS represents the fluid being secreted by the prostate following a digital rectal prostate massage, which in turn can be collected in voided urine post-exam. This collection is not disruptive to a standard urological exam, and it can be repeatedly collected from men across all prostatic disease states. A direct EPS fluid can also be collected under anesthesia prior to prostatectomy. While multiple genetic assays for prostate cancer detection are being developed for the shed epithelial cell fraction of EPS urines, the remaining fluid that contains many prostate-derived proteins has been minimally characterized. Approaches to optimization and standardization of EPS collection consistent with current urological exam and surgical practices are described, and initial proteomic and glycomic evaluations of the of EPS fluid are summarized for prostate specific antigen and prostatic acid phosphatase. Continued characterization of the prostate specific protein components of EPS urine combined with optimization of clinical collection procedures should facilitate discovery of new biomarkers for prostate cancer.  9. Summary and Future Directions EPS urine is routinely collected for diagnosing prostatitis and increasingly for development of genetic and metabolic markers of prostate cancer. It is also a rich source of prostate derived proteins, particularly secreted glycoproteins, and by extension, their glycan constituents. Our initial proteomic studies have focused on characterizing the most prevalent constituents in these EPS fluids that we believe will be the initial targets for biomarker assay development. The relative high expression of these proteins makes the fluid amenable to all current forms of mass spectrometry analysis with minimal front-end processing or purification. The fluid is particularly attractive for emerging selective reaction monitoring and multiple reaction monitoring approaches currently being developed for MS based assays. Our ongoing efforts are focusing on characterizing and comparing N-linked glycan constituents of PSA, PAP and total protein from EPS fluids. From a clinical chemistry standpoint for its use in protein based diagnostics, there remain many unknowns for what constitutes a “good” EPS urine sample for clinical assays. At the individual patient level, the known limitations of the digital rectal exam will also affect collection of the EPS urine samples. This includes parameters such as the size of the urologist’s hand and their ability to reach the base of the prostate with their finger, as well as known problems performing DRE’s on obese patients. How much discomfort individual subjects can tolerate is also an issue, but at least for cancer diagnostic purposes, the prostate massage is gentle in comparison to the procedure done routinely for EPS collection for prostatitis assays. As with standard DRE practices, repositioning of the patient on the exam table can address some of the aforementioned aspects, but physical collection variabilities will always remain a concern and will require development of internal standards of sample quality. For the emerging genetic assays from the EPS urine derived sediment/cells, the ratio of PSA to GAPDH housekeeping transcript levels has been used as a standardization measure [ 46 , 48 ]. As these genetic assays rely on amplification reactions of signal, it is likely and probable that transcript levels may not reflect the levels of expressed proteins. This remains to be directly evaluated. Following initial assessments as shown in Figure 7 , stability of the major proteins does not appear to be a problem under normal clinical laboratory conditions. Determining what concentration of protein constitutes a minimally acceptable clinical sample, as well as the significance of outlier samples with abnormally high or low levels of proteins, remains to be done. Identifying an appropriate prostate derived protein as a potential internal standard, alone or in combination with a resident urine protein, and its relationship to the standards used in the genetic assays, will be necessary before moving protein based assays in EPS urine toward clinical use. In conclusion, full cataloguing and characterization of the cellular, genetic, metabolomic, proteomic and glycomic constituents of EPS urines could generate multiple biomarker candidates for prostatic diseases. The EPS urines can be readily obtained in any urology clinical practice, so implementation and standardization of collection protocols should be relatively straightforward.  Supplementary Material 01  Figures and Table Figure 1 SDS-PAGE separation of different prostatic disease EPS urine pools Individual EPS urine sample pools (n=6) representative of BPH, low risk prostate cancer (PCa), high risk PCa and metastatic PCa conditions were generated by 10X concentration through a 5000 MW Amicon cut-off filter (Millipore). Protein loading was normalized to 20 ug total protein per pool, and separated on a 12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE SDS-gel (Invitrogen) visualized by silver staining (Invitrogen). The indicated protein band at 17 kDa was identified by LC-MS/MS as ?-2-microglobulin (?-2-MG; Mascot score of 1264), essentially as described in the legend to Table 1 . Figure 2 Concentration of PSA and PAP in non-cancer and prostate cancer EPS urines An ELISA assay was done by directly adsorbing the EPS fluids (50 ul) diluted 1:1 in coating buffer (10 mM NaCl/50 mM NaPO4, pH 7.5) incubated overnight at 4°C. Wells were subsequently blocked with the same buffer plus 0.5% bovine serum albumin, followed by primary antibody incubation overnight at 4°C with rabbit polyclonal antibodies for PSA (1:500 dilution) or PAP (1:1000) (Abcam). Detection was done the following day with a secondary antibody conjugated peroxidase (Bio-Rad) assay. Linear standard curves for PAP and PSA were generated using commercially available purified standards from seminal fluids (Fitzgerald Industries). The box plot plots the mean, 10th, 25th, 75th and 90th percentiles as vertical boxes with error bars. Outlier samples are shown as dots outside of the box. Figure 3 SDS-PAGE separation of thiophilic adsorption chromatography purified pooled seminal plasma, EPS urines and direct EPS from prostate cancer subjects Pooled seminal plasma (n =10; 2 mg), EPS urine (n = 6; 1 mg) or direct EPS (n = 4; 2 mg) pools were loaded onto 3 cm × 1 cm columns in a total of 1.0 ml 1M NaSO4/25mM HEPES and batch eluted as Unbound, in 0.8M, 0.6M or 0.4M NaSO4/25mM HEPES fractions. Aliquots of each fraction were separated on 12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE SDS-gels (Invitrogen) and visualized by silver staining (Invitrogen). The migration of PAP (*) and PSA (**) were confirmed in the above fractions by staining, western blotting and MALDI-TOF analysis. Figure 4 Two-dimensional SDS-PAGE separation of EPS urine and western blot of PSA and PAP Pooled EPS urines (n=10) inclusive of all prostatic disease conditions was concentrated 10X to 3ml, and a 0.3 ml aliquot was depleted of albumin and immunoglobulin using a ProteoPrep column (Sigma). Two protein aliquots (50 ug) were denatured for isoelectrofocusing on 11 cm pH 3-10 IEF strips (Bio-Rad), followed by separation on Criterion 8–16% Tris/glycine gels as per manufacturer’s directions (Bio-Rad). One gel was silver stained, and the other blotted to PVDF for anti-PAP and anti-PSA western blot analysis via ECL detection (Pierce). The ECL developed film images are inset to indicate the western blot pattern of PAP and PSA relative to their silver stained patterns. Figure 5 Differential lectin capture of EPS urine glycoproteins Aliquots (0.3 ml) of the EPS urine pool were incubated with 0.3 ml of agarose-bound lectin bead slurry pairs, either ConA/WGA, AAA/AAL or SNA1/MAL (E.Y. Labs and Vector Laboratories) in binding buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM MnCl2 and 1 mM CaCl2) overnight. Bound proteins were eluted with competitive sugar combinations 0.2M mannose/0.2M GlcNAc, 0.2M fucose, or 0.1M lactose/0.1M glycine, pH 3.5. Eluted proteins were precipitated in 10% TCA, and resuspended in gel loading buffer for separation on a Criterion 8–16% Tris/glycine gel (Bio-Rad) and silver staining. The lanes were rearranged after processing to create the representative gel image shown. Protein identities were determined following in-gel trypsin digestion and MALDI-TOF peptide mass fingerprinting (UltraFlex III, Bruker Daltonics). FlexAnalysis software (Bruker Daltonics) running the MASCOT search algorithm with the NCBI protein database was used. Figure 6 MALDI-TOF analysis of permethylated glycans from direct EPS fluids An aliquot (0.3 ml) of pooled direct EPS fluids (n=6) from intermediate risk prostate cancer subjects were digested in-solution with 25 ul of immobilized trypsin beads (Agro-Bio) overnight. The resulting peptide solution was incubated with 1500 units of PNGase F (New England Biolabs) to release N-glycans. N-glycans were permethylated following the protocol described by Ciucanu and Kerek [ 64 ], and reconstituted in 20 ul of 100% methanol. Sample was mixed 1:1 with 2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) matrix and spotted on a polished steel MALDI-TOF plate for analysis in positive ion mode on an UltraFlex III MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics). The Consortium for Functional Glycomics ( http://www.functionalglycomics.org ) glycan database was used to search permethylated glycan masses correlating to peaks of interest in MALDI-TOF spectra. Glycan “cartoons” representing mass peaks were built using GlycanBuilder ver 1.2 build 3353 [ 68 ]. Cartoon representations are as follows: =GlcNAc, =Mannose, =Galactose, =Fucose, =NeuAc. Figure 7 Time and temperature stability of EPS urine proteins Following removal of cell sediment, 3 ml each of EPS urine supernatant was set aside at room temperature (25°C) or on ice (4°C). Aliquots of EPS urine (0.1 ml) were removed at time zero, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 5.0 and 22 hrs for SDS-PAGE separation on Criterion 8–16% Tris/glycine gels (Bio-Rad). Protein was visualized by silver staining (Bio-Rad). Table 1 Abundant EPS Urine Proteins Identified Following 2D-Gel Separation Protein Name a Score Peptide matches AMBP/Alpha-1-microglobulin 1160 254 Gelsolin 1097 97 Serotransferrin 1001 32 Basement membrane-specific HS proteoglycan 981 60 Serum albumin 890 66 Ig kappa chain C regions 673 102 Inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H4 657 45 Alpha-1B-glycoprotein 518 28 Prostate-specific antigen 478 31 Vesicular integral-membrane protein, VIP36 477 12 Ig lambda chain C regions 455 41 Complement C3 432 9 Actin, cytoplasmic 1 391 18 Epithelial cadherin 352 7 Prostatic acid phosphatase 349 17 Protein S100-A9 312 11 Cell adhesion molecule 4 234 5 Apolipoprotein D 230 9 Prostaglandin-H2 D-isomerase 227 5 Carboxypeptidase E 217 6 Zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein 208 7 Triosephosphate isomerase 202 4 Cathepsin H 185 7 Alpha-1-antitrypsin 151 2 Histidine-rich glycoprotein 134 2 Annexin A5 133 5 Uromodulin precursor 124 5 14-3-3 protein epsilon 119 3 Proactivator polypeptide/Saposin-A 118 10 Monocyte differentiation antigen CD14 85 2 Endothelial protein C receptor 77 3 Metalloproteinase inhibitor 1 76 2 14-3-3 protein zeta/delta 70 2 Neural cell adhesion molecule 1 68 2 a Gel spots were excised from 2D gels, then reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin to release peptides. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on an LTQ™ Linear Ion Trap (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer in the data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1800) were acquired and the four most intense ions in a scan were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap (MS/MS). The peptide sequences were identified from their tandem mass spectra using Mascot a probability based search engine ( www.matrixscience.com ) using the SwissProt database. The following search criteria were used: variable modifications; carbamido-methylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine residues, 1 missed enzyme cleavage site and an error tolerance of 1.5Da for MS and 0.8 Da for MS/MS. 