Matrix metalloproteinase inhibition reduces oxidative stress associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy in vivo in transgenic mice Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), characterized by extracellular ?-amyloid peptide (A?) deposits in vessel walls, is present in the majority of cases of Alzheimer disease and is a major cause of hemorrhagic stroke. Although the molecular pathways activated by vascular A? are poorly understood, extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and A?-induced oxidative stress appear to play important roles. We adapted fluorogenic assays for MMP activity and ROS generation for use in vivo. Using multiphoton microcopy in APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg-2576 transgenic mice, we observed strong associations between MMP activation, oxidative stress and CAA deposition in leptomeningeal vessels. Antioxidant treatment with ?-phenyl-N-tert-butyl-nitrone (PBN) reduced oxidative stress associated with CAA (~50% reduction) without affecting MMP activation. Conversely, a selection of agents that inhibit MMP by different mechanisms of action, including minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001, reduced not only CAA-associated MMP activation (~30-40% reduction) but also oxidative stress (~40% reduction). The inhibitors of MMP did not have direct antioxidant effects. Treatment of animals with PBN or minocycline did not have a significant effect on CAA progression rates. These data suggest a close association between A?-related MMP activation and oxidative stress in vivo and raise the possibility that treatment with MMP inhibitors may have beneficial effects by indirectly reducing the oxidative stress associated with CAA.  Introduction Dementia is a devastating condition associated with aging that is characterized by cognitive deterioration, memory loss and behavioral disorders. Alzheimer disease (AD) and vascular dementia account for the majority of cases of dementia ( Evans et al. 1989 ; O'Brien et al. 2003 ). The 40-42 aa peptide amyloid-beta (A?) deposits as senile plaques in the brain parenchyma in AD and also deposits in the wall of cortical and leptomeningeal vessels as cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). CAA leads to loss of vascular smooth muscle cells and ultimately increases the risk of hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke ( Zhang-Nunes et al. 2006 ). CAA is present in ~80 % of brains from AD patients and may help account for the failure of elimination of A? from the brain in AD, thus linking aging in cerebral arteries with the pathogenesis of AD ( Weller et al. 2002 ; Nicoll et al. 2004 ; Weller et al. 2004 ). Recent evidence suggests that cerebrovascular abnormalities associated with AD may have been underestimated and that cerebrovascular morphometry and function are compromised relatively early in AD ( Stopa et al. 2008 ). However, how AD pathology influences or is affected by these changes is unclear. The factors that cause A? to deposit in vessels versus senile plaques, as well as the molecular pathways activated by vascular A? in causing breakdown of the vessel wall are poorly understood. Among potential candidates are A?-induced activation of the extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) and A?-induced oxidative stress. MMP have been recently identified as relevant molecular targets activated by CAA ( Asahina et al. 2001 ; Jung et al. 2003 ; Lee et al. 2005 ; Previti et al. 2006 ). MMP degrade basement membranes and connective tissue, and seem to play an essential role in the homeostasis of the extracellular matrix. A? stimulates the expression and activation of MMP-2 in smooth muscle cells ( Jung et al. 2003 ), and can induce the synthesis, release and activation of MMP-9, resulting in increased extracellular matrix degradation that may induce spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage in patients with CAA ( Lee et al. 2003 ; Lee et al. 2005 ). On the other hand, recent evidence suggests that glyco- and lipid oxidation occurs in CAA patients, probably as a direct consequence of A? deposition, and supporting a role for oxidative stress in CAA ( Santpere et al. 2007 ). It has also been shown in APP mice that vascular oxidative stress precedes parenchymal oxidative stress and therefore that vascular oxidative stress could be a target of early therapeutic interventions ( Park et al. 2004 ). The APP transgenic mouse models develop CAA over time in a predictable manner and can be used to probe the molecular pathways involved during the progression of vascular amyloid ( Domnitz et al. 2005 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ). In the present work, we translated the fluorogenic probe for MMP activity (DQ-gelatin) for use in intact, living brain along with a fluorescent probe for ROS detection (Amplex Red). We used multiphoton microscopy in vivo to study the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and MMP activity activated by vascular A?, in both APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. Our results suggest that these two molecular pathways may share common steps.  Material and methods Animals APPswe/PS1dE9 mice ( Jankowsky et al. 2001 ) aged 7-8 months old and aged matched nontransgenic littermate mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine), and Tg2576 mice aged 12-14 months were used. All studies were conducted with approval of the Massachusetts General Hospital Animal Care and Use Committee and in compliance with NIH guidelines for the use of experimental animals. Reagents Amplex Red (10-actyl-3,7-dihydroxyphenoxazine), Texas Red dextran 70,000 D and DQ™ gelatin, 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate and collagenase IV from Clostridium histolyticum were obtained from Molecular Probes/Invitrogen (Eugene, OR) as part of the EnzChek gelatinase/collagenase assay kit. Tissue-Tek OCT compound was obtained from Sakura Finechemical Co. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). Methoxy-XO4 was a gift from Dr. Klunk (U. Pittsburgh). GM6001 (Llomastat, Galardin) was obtained from USBiological (Swampscott, MA). PBN, minocycline hydrochloride, simvastatin, thioflavin S, peroxidase and common chemical reagents where obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). <italic>Ex vivo</italic> antioxidant activity Paraformaldehyde fixed brain sections of a Tg2576 mouse were used for the ex vivo assays as previously described with minor modifications ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). Mounted tissue was dehydrated and treated for 45 minutes with PBN (100 ?M), minocycline, simvastatin or GM6001 (10 and 100 ?M). Control tissue was incubated in PBS without drug treatment. Sections were carefully washed and incubated for 45 minutes with 200 ?M AR (in the presence of 0.5 mg/ml peroxidase) along with the previously used antioxidants at the same concentrations, whereas control tissue was incubated in AR and peroxidase only. The tissue was covered to minimize light and air exposure. Sections were washed in PBS to rinse excess reagent, aqueously coverslipped, and imaged. Afterwards, brain tissue was washed in PBS and incubated for 20 minutes in thioflavin S (0.01%). After washing, the sections were covered and imaged again. Measuring the ROS-dependent fluorescence of AR from individual senile plaques in the tissue followed by the thioflavin S intensity for each plaque allows plaque-by-plaque normalization of the ROS signal to plaque size and morphology. In situ MMP zymography in fresh frozen tissue Brains from Tg2576 mice were dissected on ice, embedded without fixation in Tissue-Tek OCT compound and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Serial 10 ?m thick sections were obtained using a cryostat microtome. The EnzCheck Gelatinase Assay Kit was used for in situ zymography according to the provided protocol. Sections were incubated at 37C and divided into three experimental groups. Sections from Tg2576 and aged matched wild type mice were incubated with DQ™ gelatin, fluorescein conjugate for 90 min. A second set of sections were preincubated for 30 minutes with the general metalloproteinase inhibitor 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate, and a third group of sections was incubated with DQ gelatin previously cleaved by mixing the DQ™ gelatin with type IV collagenase purified from Clostridium histolyticum. Sections were then viewed with widefield fluorescence microscopy and photographed. <italic>In vivo</italic> antioxidant and MMP inhibition treatments The effect of antioxidant treatment and MMP inhibiting agents on oxidative stress and MMP activity associated with CAA was measured in APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. The doses and treatment schedules were selected based on previous reports in the literature for the selected compounds. APPswe/PS1dE9 mice were treated with the spin trap antioxidant PBN (100mg/Kg ip) for 2 consecutive days ( McLellan et al. 2003 ) before implanting a 6 mm cranial window. APPswe/PS1dE9 mice were also treated with agents that inhibit MMP: one group received minocycline (100mg/Kg ip) ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2007b ) for 7 days before surgery and a second group received the same dose of minocycline for 14 days before surgery was done. Simvastatin was administered ip for 14 days (20 mg/Kg ip in 10% cremophor) ( Obama et al. 2004 ) and a final group received GM6001 100mg/Kg ip for 3 days (in 10%DMSO) ( Lee et al. 2006 ). Tg2576 mice were also used to assess the effect of the treatments on CAA progression, since this animal model shows a much more robust CAA progression than APPswe/PS1dE9 mice ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ). Mini-osmotic ALZET pumps 2000 (0.5 ?l/hour, 14 days) (Durect Corporatgion, Cupertino, CA) were subcutaneously placed in the back of the mice for long term delivery of PBN (10 mg/Kg in 10% cremaphor EL). Oxidative stress and MMP activity were checked 2 weeks later and pumps were replaced in order to assess the effect of PBN on CAA progression during the two next consecutive weeks. Minocycline (100 or 50 mg/Kg) was administered daily ip for 2 weeks before oxidative stress and MMP activity was assessed. Animals were treated with 50 mg/Kg minocycline for 2 more weeks to assess the effect of MMP inhibition on CAA progression. Surgical preparation Surgery was performed as previously described ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ) with minor modifications. Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane. Oxidative stress was measured using Amplex Red, and MMP activity was measured using the green fluorescent substrate (DQ™ gelatin) both in APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. Both compounds are non-fluorescent until oxidized or proteolytically cleaved, respectively. We also included thioflavin S for histochemical confirmation. Since the thioflavin S signal is very strong we imaged the 3 compounds in 3 immediately consecutive sessions so the signal detected was exclusively derived from the marker under study at each time. After removing the dura, 200 ?l of Amplex red (1mM) in 0.5 mg/ml peroxidase was locally applied for 20 minutes, adding 50 ?l every 5 minutes and covering the head to protect from light and air exposure. The site was then washed, a coverslip was attached over the site and the animal was imaged. Prior to the second imaging session, the coverslip was removed and animals were treated with 50 ?l of the green fluorescent substrate DQ™ gelatin (1mg/ml) for 20 minutes. The site was washed and a coverslip was attached to re-image the same sites and vessel segments. Cranial windows were removed a third time and animals were incubated with thioflavin S (0.1 mg/ml) for 10 minutes and the coverslip was replaced and fixed with dental cement. Wild type mice were treated following the same protocol and vessels were imaged after Amplex Red, DQ™ gelatin and thioflavin S as described above in order to assess the specificity of the signal detected in transgenic mice. In separate experiments, to evaluate the time-course of fluorescence generation resulting from proteolytic cleavage of DQ™ gelatin in vivo , we imaged the brain of mice immediately after topical application of the substrate for up to1 h at 5 minute intervals. We measured progression of CAA in Tg2576 mice for 3 consecutive weeks as previously described ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ). At day 0, A? was imaged with topical thioflavin S application as described above. After assessing oxidative stress and MMP activity, animals were re-imaged on a weekly basis. For these subsequent imaging sessions, A? was visualized with methoxy-XO4, a Congo Red derivative that binds fibrillar A? in a pattern identical to thioflavin S. Methoxy-X04 was injected i.p. the day before each imaging session ( Klunk et al. 2002 ). Multiphoton imaging and processing As previously described ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ), two-photon fluorescence was generated with 800 nm excitation from a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser (MaiTai, Spectra-Physics, Mountain View, CA mounted on a multiphoton imaging system (Bio-Rad 1024ES, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). A custom-built external detector containing three photomultiplier tubes (Hamamatsu Photonics, Bridgewater, NJ) collected emitted light in the range 380-480, 500-540 and 560-650 nm. Ex vivo imaging of plaques in tissue sections was performed using the normal scan speed and multiple z-series were collected after adding AR and again after adding thioflavin S using a 20X water immersion objective (615×615 ?m, z/step 2?, depth of approximately 50 ?m). Using Image-J software (NIH, freeware) the intensity of the immediate surroundings of the dense-core plaques was subtracted from the dense core fluorescence for AR and thioflavin S to correct for background levels. AR is a very sensitive probe for H2O2 ( Zhou et al. 1997 ), although H2O2 can lead to the production of many other ROS. A ratio between AR intensity and thioflavin S intensity was calculated for each plaque to normalize across images and mice. This ratio provides a quantitative, dimensionless index of plaque-associated oxidative stress. Results are expressed as a percentage of control values ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). In vivo imaging of CAA affected vessels was conducted under the same conditions (615×615 ?m; z-step, 5 ?m, depth, 200 ?m approximately). Images were analyzed with Photoshop and Image J as previously described ( Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ). We measured the effect of PBN and the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001 on oxidative stress and MMP activity associated with CAA. Vessels were outlined and the oxidative stress signal (Amplex Red), MMP activity (DQ™ gelatin) signal and CAA deposits (thioflavin S signal), appearing as bright areas circumferential to the vessels, were manually thresholded so that signal-positive regions were set white and negative regions were set black. The number of pixels in white clusters composed of greater than 6 contiguous pixels was counted. For each vessel segment, the Amplex Red signal and the green fluorescent substrate DQ™ gelatin signal were expressed as a percentage of the histochemical confirmation signal from thioflavin S. Image volumes focused on leptomeningeal vessels and not parenchymal plaques in order to obtain sufficient high quality images, however, a small number of plaques that were Amplex red, MMP, and thioflavin S positive were detected, but not included in this study. Quantitative analysis of CAA progression in Tg2576 mice was performed as previously described ( Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ). Vessels were outlined and the CAA deposits were manually thresholded and segmented. Greater than 6 contiguous pixels were required for a segmented region to be counted. The CAA burden was calculated as the percentage of the vessel area affected by CAA. The vessel area from the initial imaging session was used for the calculation of CAA burden because of the tendency for vessels to dilate in subsequent weeks. New growth of CAA deposits was measured from week to week. Vessel diameter was measured in ImageJ at three points along each vessel segment and the average diameter was taken from these three measurements. Statistical analysis To compare the levels of oxidative stress and MMP activity in the ex vivo and in vivo experiments, one-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc Tamhane or Tuckey b test as appropriate was used. Correlation between fluorescent signal from thioflavin S, oxidative stress and MMP activity was assessed by Pearson's correlation. To assess the nature of disease progression we used a linear model as previously described ( Robbins et al. 2006 ). In this modeling process, variability was assumed to originate on the basis of mouse-to-mouse variation (internal variation) as well as be influenced by location in the vascular tree (intra-animal variation), as suggested in previous studies ( Domnitz et al. 2005 ). In practice, this amounted to allowing for mouse-specific and vessel segment-specific intercepts in the linear model.  Animals APPswe/PS1dE9 mice ( Jankowsky et al. 2001 ) aged 7-8 months old and aged matched nontransgenic littermate mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine), and Tg2576 mice aged 12-14 months were used. All studies were conducted with approval of the Massachusetts General Hospital Animal Care and Use Committee and in compliance with NIH guidelines for the use of experimental animals.  Reagents Amplex Red (10-actyl-3,7-dihydroxyphenoxazine), Texas Red dextran 70,000 D and DQ™ gelatin, 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate and collagenase IV from Clostridium histolyticum were obtained from Molecular Probes/Invitrogen (Eugene, OR) as part of the EnzChek gelatinase/collagenase assay kit. Tissue-Tek OCT compound was obtained from Sakura Finechemical Co. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). Methoxy-XO4 was a gift from Dr. Klunk (U. Pittsburgh). GM6001 (Llomastat, Galardin) was obtained from USBiological (Swampscott, MA). PBN, minocycline hydrochloride, simvastatin, thioflavin S, peroxidase and common chemical reagents where obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).  <italic>Ex vivo</italic> antioxidant activity Paraformaldehyde fixed brain sections of a Tg2576 mouse were used for the ex vivo assays as previously described with minor modifications ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). Mounted tissue was dehydrated and treated for 45 minutes with PBN (100 ?M), minocycline, simvastatin or GM6001 (10 and 100 ?M). Control tissue was incubated in PBS without drug treatment. Sections were carefully washed and incubated for 45 minutes with 200 ?M AR (in the presence of 0.5 mg/ml peroxidase) along with the previously used antioxidants at the same concentrations, whereas control tissue was incubated in AR and peroxidase only. The tissue was covered to minimize light and air exposure. Sections were washed in PBS to rinse excess reagent, aqueously coverslipped, and imaged. Afterwards, brain tissue was washed in PBS and incubated for 20 minutes in thioflavin S (0.01%). After washing, the sections were covered and imaged again. Measuring the ROS-dependent fluorescence of AR from individual senile plaques in the tissue followed by the thioflavin S intensity for each plaque allows plaque-by-plaque normalization of the ROS signal to plaque size and morphology.  In situ MMP zymography in fresh frozen tissue Brains from Tg2576 mice were dissected on ice, embedded without fixation in Tissue-Tek OCT compound and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Serial 10 ?m thick sections were obtained using a cryostat microtome. The EnzCheck Gelatinase Assay Kit was used for in situ zymography according to the provided protocol. Sections were incubated at 37C and divided into three experimental groups. Sections from Tg2576 and aged matched wild type mice were incubated with DQ™ gelatin, fluorescein conjugate for 90 min. A second set of sections were preincubated for 30 minutes with the general metalloproteinase inhibitor 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate, and a third group of sections was incubated with DQ gelatin previously cleaved by mixing the DQ™ gelatin with type IV collagenase purified from Clostridium histolyticum. Sections were then viewed with widefield fluorescence microscopy and photographed.  <italic>In vivo</italic> antioxidant and MMP inhibition treatments The effect of antioxidant treatment and MMP inhibiting agents on oxidative stress and MMP activity associated with CAA was measured in APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. The doses and treatment schedules were selected based on previous reports in the literature for the selected compounds. APPswe/PS1dE9 mice were treated with the spin trap antioxidant PBN (100mg/Kg ip) for 2 consecutive days ( McLellan et al. 2003 ) before implanting a 6 mm cranial window. APPswe/PS1dE9 mice were also treated with agents that inhibit MMP: one group received minocycline (100mg/Kg ip) ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2007b ) for 7 days before surgery and a second group received the same dose of minocycline for 14 days before surgery was done. Simvastatin was administered ip for 14 days (20 mg/Kg ip in 10% cremophor) ( Obama et al. 2004 ) and a final group received GM6001 100mg/Kg ip for 3 days (in 10%DMSO) ( Lee et al. 2006 ). Tg2576 mice were also used to assess the effect of the treatments on CAA progression, since this animal model shows a much more robust CAA progression than APPswe/PS1dE9 mice ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ). Mini-osmotic ALZET pumps 2000 (0.5 ?l/hour, 14 days) (Durect Corporatgion, Cupertino, CA) were subcutaneously placed in the back of the mice for long term delivery of PBN (10 mg/Kg in 10% cremaphor EL). Oxidative stress and MMP activity were checked 2 weeks later and pumps were replaced in order to assess the effect of PBN on CAA progression during the two next consecutive weeks. Minocycline (100 or 50 mg/Kg) was administered daily ip for 2 weeks before oxidative stress and MMP activity was assessed. Animals were treated with 50 mg/Kg minocycline for 2 more weeks to assess the effect of MMP inhibition on CAA progression.  Surgical preparation Surgery was performed as previously described ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ) with minor modifications. Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane. Oxidative stress was measured using Amplex Red, and MMP activity was measured using the green fluorescent substrate (DQ™ gelatin) both in APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. Both compounds are non-fluorescent until oxidized or proteolytically cleaved, respectively. We also included thioflavin S for histochemical confirmation. Since the thioflavin S signal is very strong we imaged the 3 compounds in 3 immediately consecutive sessions so the signal detected was exclusively derived from the marker under study at each time. After removing the dura, 200 ?l of Amplex red (1mM) in 0.5 mg/ml peroxidase was locally applied for 20 minutes, adding 50 ?l every 5 minutes and covering the head to protect from light and air exposure. The site was then washed, a coverslip was attached over the site and the animal was imaged. Prior to the second imaging session, the coverslip was removed and animals were treated with 50 ?l of the green fluorescent substrate DQ™ gelatin (1mg/ml) for 20 minutes. The site was washed and a coverslip was attached to re-image the same sites and vessel segments. Cranial windows were removed a third time and animals were incubated with thioflavin S (0.1 mg/ml) for 10 minutes and the coverslip was replaced and fixed with dental cement. Wild type mice were treated following the same protocol and vessels were imaged after Amplex Red, DQ™ gelatin and thioflavin S as described above in order to assess the specificity of the signal detected in transgenic mice. In separate experiments, to evaluate the time-course of fluorescence generation resulting from proteolytic cleavage of DQ™ gelatin in vivo , we imaged the brain of mice immediately after topical application of the substrate for up to1 h at 5 minute intervals. We measured progression of CAA in Tg2576 mice for 3 consecutive weeks as previously described ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ). At day 0, A? was imaged with topical thioflavin S application as described above. After assessing oxidative stress and MMP activity, animals were re-imaged on a weekly basis. For these subsequent imaging sessions, A? was visualized with methoxy-XO4, a Congo Red derivative that binds fibrillar A? in a pattern identical to thioflavin S. Methoxy-X04 was injected i.p. the day before each imaging session ( Klunk et al. 2002 ).  Multiphoton imaging and processing As previously described ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ), two-photon fluorescence was generated with 800 nm excitation from a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser (MaiTai, Spectra-Physics, Mountain View, CA mounted on a multiphoton imaging system (Bio-Rad 1024ES, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). A custom-built external detector containing three photomultiplier tubes (Hamamatsu Photonics, Bridgewater, NJ) collected emitted light in the range 380-480, 500-540 and 560-650 nm. Ex vivo imaging of plaques in tissue sections was performed using the normal scan speed and multiple z-series were collected after adding AR and again after adding thioflavin S using a 20X water immersion objective (615×615 ?m, z/step 2?, depth of approximately 50 ?m). Using Image-J software (NIH, freeware) the intensity of the immediate surroundings of the dense-core plaques was subtracted from the dense core fluorescence for AR and thioflavin S to correct for background levels. AR is a very sensitive probe for H2O2 ( Zhou et al. 1997 ), although H2O2 can lead to the production of many other ROS. A ratio between AR intensity and thioflavin S intensity was calculated for each plaque to normalize across images and mice. This ratio provides a quantitative, dimensionless index of plaque-associated oxidative stress. Results are expressed as a percentage of control values ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). In vivo imaging of CAA affected vessels was conducted under the same conditions (615×615 ?m; z-step, 5 ?m, depth, 200 ?m approximately). Images were analyzed with Photoshop and Image J as previously described ( Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ). We measured the effect of PBN and the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001 on oxidative stress and MMP activity associated with CAA. Vessels were outlined and the oxidative stress signal (Amplex Red), MMP activity (DQ™ gelatin) signal and CAA deposits (thioflavin S signal), appearing as bright areas circumferential to the vessels, were manually thresholded so that signal-positive regions were set white and negative regions were set black. The number of pixels in white clusters composed of greater than 6 contiguous pixels was counted. For each vessel segment, the Amplex Red signal and the green fluorescent substrate DQ™ gelatin signal were expressed as a percentage of the histochemical confirmation signal from thioflavin S. Image volumes focused on leptomeningeal vessels and not parenchymal plaques in order to obtain sufficient high quality images, however, a small number of plaques that were Amplex red, MMP, and thioflavin S positive were detected, but not included in this study. Quantitative analysis of CAA progression in Tg2576 mice was performed as previously described ( Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ). Vessels were outlined and the CAA deposits were manually thresholded and segmented. Greater than 6 contiguous pixels were required for a segmented region to be counted. The CAA burden was calculated as the percentage of the vessel area affected by CAA. The vessel area from the initial imaging session was used for the calculation of CAA burden because of the tendency for vessels to dilate in subsequent weeks. New growth of CAA deposits was measured from week to week. Vessel diameter was measured in ImageJ at three points along each vessel segment and the average diameter was taken from these three measurements.  Statistical analysis To compare the levels of oxidative stress and MMP activity in the ex vivo and in vivo experiments, one-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc Tamhane or Tuckey b test as appropriate was used. Correlation between fluorescent signal from thioflavin S, oxidative stress and MMP activity was assessed by Pearson's correlation. To assess the nature of disease progression we used a linear model as previously described ( Robbins et al. 2006 ). In this modeling process, variability was assumed to originate on the basis of mouse-to-mouse variation (internal variation) as well as be influenced by location in the vascular tree (intra-animal variation), as suggested in previous studies ( Domnitz et al. 2005 ). In practice, this amounted to allowing for mouse-specific and vessel segment-specific intercepts in the linear model.  Results CAA is a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation CAA was imaged in live mice with the fluorescent histochemical marker for amyloid, thioflavin S. The oxidative stress associated with CAA was imaged using the red fluorogenic reporter Amplex Red, and activation of MMP was detected with the green fluorogenic substrate DQ™ gelatin. The three images were acquired sequentially in order to prevent spectral crosstalk of the fluorophores (order: Amplex Red, DQ gelatin and thioflavin S). After image alignment, there was an observable coincidence of the 3 markers in the leptomeningeal vessel segments ( figure 1 ). There was a strong correlation between CAA-positive, oxidative stress-positive and MMP-positive pixels in vivo , demonstrating that CAA is spatially associated with both ROS generation and MMP activation. This effect was observed both in APPswe/PS1dE9 (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.895**, p< 0.01, CAA-MMP activity r=0.764**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.783 **, p< 0.01, n=27-40 vessel segments from 6 mice, Pearson's correlation) and in Tg2576mice (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.820**, p< 0.01; CAA-MMP activity r=0.609**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.542 **, p< 0.01, n=19-25 vessel segments from 3 mice, Pearson's correlation). The fluorescence from the fluorogenic probes was also assessed in wild type mice as a negative control for these experiments. In this case, no signal was observed after adding either Amplex Red or DQ™ gelatin, demonstrating the role of CAA as a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation (not shown). This result was further confirmed using in situ zymography in thin sections that showed that MMP activation was observed in vessels with CAA. Preincubation of tissue sections with the MMP inhibitor 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate, or adding pre-cleaved substrate did not result in vessel staining ( figure 2A-D ). Because MMP cleavage of DQ™ gelatin is enzymatic, we determined the time-course of fluorescence generation to ensure that our measurements were performed at steady state conditions. We imaged the same vessels in vivo for 1 hour after applying the probe, and we observed that in as soon as 10 minutes we could observe some fluorescence signal. At 20 minutes the intensity of the signal was maximal and maintained for as long as the vessels were followed ( figure 2E-L ). We therefore selected 20 minutes or greater as the time for MMP imaging. All together, these results demonstrate that DQ™ gelatin reports MMP activation associated with CAA in vitro and in vivo . MMP inhibiting agents reduced MMP activity associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> Using DQ™ gelatin, the fluorogenic reporter of MMP activation in vivo, we tested whether inhibition of MMP activity could reduce the CAA-associated activation of MMP in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. Simvastatin (20mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA in viv o ( figure 3A ). Minocycline (100 mg/Kg) when administered for both 7 and 14 days also significantly reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA when compared to untreated control values. A similar profile was observed in Tg2576 mice, where minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg) significantly reduced MMP activation when compared to untreated control animals ( figure 3B ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). The antioxidant PBN failed to reduce the MMP activity associated with CAA in both the APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. These results show that multiple systemically active agents that inhibit MMP led to detectable reductions in MMP activation associated with CAA in vivo , while inhibition of ROS generation did not. PBN and MMP inhibiting agents reduced the oxidative stress associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> We assessed in vivo , in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice, the effects of PBN and the MMP inhibiting agents (minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001) on the oxidative stress associated with CAA. As expected, we observed that the well characterized antioxidant PBN (100 mg/Kg) reduced oxidative stress along the affected vessels. Surprisingly, the MMP inhibitors simvastatin (20 mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) were also capable of reducing oxidative stress when compared to untreated control values. Similarly, minocycline (100mg/Kg) administered for 7 days showed a trend towards reduction of oxidative stress associated with CAA that reached statistical significance when the treatment was extended for 14 days ( figure 3C ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). This effect of minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg ip, daily) was also observed in the Tg2576 mouse model ( figure 3D ). These results suggest that the reduction of oxidative stress observed in vivo may be mediated by MMP inhibition. MMP inhibiting agents showed no direct antioxidant activity <italic>ex vivo</italic> In order to exclude the possibility that the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001exerted their effects on oxidative stress associated with CAA through direct antioxidant properties, we made use of our previously described assay for plaque-derived oxidative stress with ex vivo tissue sections from transgenic mouse brain ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). As a positive control, PBN (100 ?M) significantly reduced the oxidative stress associated with senile plaques (~55%). Neither simvastatin nor minocycline nor GM6001 led to a reduction in the oxidative stress index in this assay at doses equal to or higher than anticipated with systemic administration in vivo ( figure 5 ). As an additional control experiment, we measured the ability of the MMP inhibitors to compete with Amplex red as a substrate for peroxidase in vitro. The inhibitors (100?M) were incubated with Amplex red (10 ?M), peroxidase (1U/ml), and H2O2 (1?M) and the steady state levels of resorufin production were measured in a spectrophotometer. At 10-fold molar excess over Amplex red (a stoichiometry likely to be orders of magnitude higher than achievable in vivo), neither minocycline, GM6001, nor PBN interfered with the reaction. Simvastatin, however, inhibited the reaction under these conditions by ~35% (p<0.01, n=3, Student's t-test). These results demonstrate that these inhibitors do not have direct antioxidant activities, and one of three MMP inhibitors partially interferes with the oxidative stress assay. Together, these data suggest that their effect on in vivo oxidative stress was not a direct antioxidant action. We conservatively interpret the findings as indicating that MMP activation may contribute in some manner to at least a portion of the observed oxidative stress associated with CAA. Inhibiting ROS generation or MMP activation had no effect on CAA progression <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established the ability of these therapeutic interventions to alter the consequences of CAA (oxidative stress and MMP activation), we next examined whether the reduction of these injurious processes had a secondary effect on the progression of CAA. We used longitudinal imaging and quantification of CAA burden ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ) to determine if these drug treatments had any effect on the natural history of CAA progression in our animal models. Animals were treated for 2 weeks before the cranial window implantation and for the next 2 consecutive weeks. CAA progression rates were not affected by PBN treatment (15 mg/Kg) (0.52 % of available vessel area per day vs. 0.51% in untreated mice). Similarly, minocycline treatment (50mg/Kg) (0.55 % of available vessel area per day) did not have a statistically significant effect on CAA progression rates (figure 8). These results suggest that despite the effect of these drug treatments on oxidative stress or MMP activation, that progression of CAA is unaffected and is therefore likely to be a proximal event in this cascade. While it is possible that longer term treatment or higher doses would have been more effective, we have previously shown that modulation of CAA progression rates can occur within this time frame ( Prada et al. 2007 ).  Results CAA is a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation CAA was imaged in live mice with the fluorescent histochemical marker for amyloid, thioflavin S. The oxidative stress associated with CAA was imaged using the red fluorogenic reporter Amplex Red, and activation of MMP was detected with the green fluorogenic substrate DQ™ gelatin. The three images were acquired sequentially in order to prevent spectral crosstalk of the fluorophores (order: Amplex Red, DQ gelatin and thioflavin S). After image alignment, there was an observable coincidence of the 3 markers in the leptomeningeal vessel segments ( figure 1 ). There was a strong correlation between CAA-positive, oxidative stress-positive and MMP-positive pixels in vivo , demonstrating that CAA is spatially associated with both ROS generation and MMP activation. This effect was observed both in APPswe/PS1dE9 (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.895**, p< 0.01, CAA-MMP activity r=0.764**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.783 **, p< 0.01, n=27-40 vessel segments from 6 mice, Pearson's correlation) and in Tg2576mice (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.820**, p< 0.01; CAA-MMP activity r=0.609**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.542 **, p< 0.01, n=19-25 vessel segments from 3 mice, Pearson's correlation). The fluorescence from the fluorogenic probes was also assessed in wild type mice as a negative control for these experiments. In this case, no signal was observed after adding either Amplex Red or DQ™ gelatin, demonstrating the role of CAA as a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation (not shown). This result was further confirmed using in situ zymography in thin sections that showed that MMP activation was observed in vessels with CAA. Preincubation of tissue sections with the MMP inhibitor 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate, or adding pre-cleaved substrate did not result in vessel staining ( figure 2A-D ). Because MMP cleavage of DQ™ gelatin is enzymatic, we determined the time-course of fluorescence generation to ensure that our measurements were performed at steady state conditions. We imaged the same vessels in vivo for 1 hour after applying the probe, and we observed that in as soon as 10 minutes we could observe some fluorescence signal. At 20 minutes the intensity of the signal was maximal and maintained for as long as the vessels were followed ( figure 2E-L ). We therefore selected 20 minutes or greater as the time for MMP imaging. All together, these results demonstrate that DQ™ gelatin reports MMP activation associated with CAA in vitro and in vivo . MMP inhibiting agents reduced MMP activity associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> Using DQ™ gelatin, the fluorogenic reporter of MMP activation in vivo, we tested whether inhibition of MMP activity could reduce the CAA-associated activation of MMP in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. Simvastatin (20mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA in viv o ( figure 3A ). Minocycline (100 mg/Kg) when administered for both 7 and 14 days also significantly reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA when compared to untreated control values. A similar profile was observed in Tg2576 mice, where minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg) significantly reduced MMP activation when compared to untreated control animals ( figure 3B ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). The antioxidant PBN failed to reduce the MMP activity associated with CAA in both the APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. These results show that multiple systemically active agents that inhibit MMP led to detectable reductions in MMP activation associated with CAA in vivo , while inhibition of ROS generation did not. PBN and MMP inhibiting agents reduced the oxidative stress associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> We assessed in vivo , in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice, the effects of PBN and the MMP inhibiting agents (minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001) on the oxidative stress associated with CAA. As expected, we observed that the well characterized antioxidant PBN (100 mg/Kg) reduced oxidative stress along the affected vessels. Surprisingly, the MMP inhibitors simvastatin (20 mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) were also capable of reducing oxidative stress when compared to untreated control values. Similarly, minocycline (100mg/Kg) administered for 7 days showed a trend towards reduction of oxidative stress associated with CAA that reached statistical significance when the treatment was extended for 14 days ( figure 3C ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). This effect of minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg ip, daily) was also observed in the Tg2576 mouse model ( figure 3D ). These results suggest that the reduction of oxidative stress observed in vivo may be mediated by MMP inhibition. MMP inhibiting agents showed no direct antioxidant activity <italic>ex vivo</italic> In order to exclude the possibility that the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001exerted their effects on oxidative stress associated with CAA through direct antioxidant properties, we made use of our previously described assay for plaque-derived oxidative stress with ex vivo tissue sections from transgenic mouse brain ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). As a positive control, PBN (100 ?M) significantly reduced the oxidative stress associated with senile plaques (~55%). Neither simvastatin nor minocycline nor GM6001 led to a reduction in the oxidative stress index in this assay at doses equal to or higher than anticipated with systemic administration in vivo ( figure 5 ). As an additional control experiment, we measured the ability of the MMP inhibitors to compete with Amplex red as a substrate for peroxidase in vitro. The inhibitors (100?M) were incubated with Amplex red (10 ?M), peroxidase (1U/ml), and H2O2 (1?M) and the steady state levels of resorufin production were measured in a spectrophotometer. At 10-fold molar excess over Amplex red (a stoichiometry likely to be orders of magnitude higher than achievable in vivo), neither minocycline, GM6001, nor PBN interfered with the reaction. Simvastatin, however, inhibited the reaction under these conditions by ~35% (p<0.01, n=3, Student's t-test). These results demonstrate that these inhibitors do not have direct antioxidant activities, and one of three MMP inhibitors partially interferes with the oxidative stress assay. Together, these data suggest that their effect on in vivo oxidative stress was not a direct antioxidant action. We conservatively interpret the findings as indicating that MMP activation may contribute in some manner to at least a portion of the observed oxidative stress associated with CAA. Inhibiting ROS generation or MMP activation had no effect on CAA progression <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established the ability of these therapeutic interventions to alter the consequences of CAA (oxidative stress and MMP activation), we next examined whether the reduction of these injurious processes had a secondary effect on the progression of CAA. We used longitudinal imaging and quantification of CAA burden ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ) to determine if these drug treatments had any effect on the natural history of CAA progression in our animal models. Animals were treated for 2 weeks before the cranial window implantation and for the next 2 consecutive weeks. CAA progression rates were not affected by PBN treatment (15 mg/Kg) (0.52 % of available vessel area per day vs. 0.51% in untreated mice). Similarly, minocycline treatment (50mg/Kg) (0.55 % of available vessel area per day) did not have a statistically significant effect on CAA progression rates (figure 8). These results suggest that despite the effect of these drug treatments on oxidative stress or MMP activation, that progression of CAA is unaffected and is therefore likely to be a proximal event in this cascade. While it is possible that longer term treatment or higher doses would have been more effective, we have previously shown that modulation of CAA progression rates can occur within this time frame ( Prada et al. 2007 ).  CAA is a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation CAA was imaged in live mice with the fluorescent histochemical marker for amyloid, thioflavin S. The oxidative stress associated with CAA was imaged using the red fluorogenic reporter Amplex Red, and activation of MMP was detected with the green fluorogenic substrate DQ™ gelatin. The three images were acquired sequentially in order to prevent spectral crosstalk of the fluorophores (order: Amplex Red, DQ gelatin and thioflavin S). After image alignment, there was an observable coincidence of the 3 markers in the leptomeningeal vessel segments ( figure 1 ). There was a strong correlation between CAA-positive, oxidative stress-positive and MMP-positive pixels in vivo , demonstrating that CAA is spatially associated with both ROS generation and MMP activation. This effect was observed both in APPswe/PS1dE9 (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.895**, p< 0.01, CAA-MMP activity r=0.764**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.783 **, p< 0.01, n=27-40 vessel segments from 6 mice, Pearson's correlation) and in Tg2576mice (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.820**, p< 0.01; CAA-MMP activity r=0.609**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.542 **, p< 0.01, n=19-25 vessel segments from 3 mice, Pearson's correlation). The fluorescence from the fluorogenic probes was also assessed in wild type mice as a negative control for these experiments. In this case, no signal was observed after adding either Amplex Red or DQ™ gelatin, demonstrating the role of CAA as a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation (not shown). This result was further confirmed using in situ zymography in thin sections that showed that MMP activation was observed in vessels with CAA. Preincubation of tissue sections with the MMP inhibitor 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate, or adding pre-cleaved substrate did not result in vessel staining ( figure 2A-D ). Because MMP cleavage of DQ™ gelatin is enzymatic, we determined the time-course of fluorescence generation to ensure that our measurements were performed at steady state conditions. We imaged the same vessels in vivo for 1 hour after applying the probe, and we observed that in as soon as 10 minutes we could observe some fluorescence signal. At 20 minutes the intensity of the signal was maximal and maintained for as long as the vessels were followed ( figure 2E-L ). We therefore selected 20 minutes or greater as the time for MMP imaging. All together, these results demonstrate that DQ™ gelatin reports MMP activation associated with CAA in vitro and in vivo .  CAA is a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation CAA was imaged in live mice with the fluorescent histochemical marker for amyloid, thioflavin S. The oxidative stress associated with CAA was imaged using the red fluorogenic reporter Amplex Red, and activation of MMP was detected with the green fluorogenic substrate DQ™ gelatin. The three images were acquired sequentially in order to prevent spectral crosstalk of the fluorophores (order: Amplex Red, DQ gelatin and thioflavin S). After image alignment, there was an observable coincidence of the 3 markers in the leptomeningeal vessel segments ( figure 1 ). There was a strong correlation between CAA-positive, oxidative stress-positive and MMP-positive pixels in vivo , demonstrating that CAA is spatially associated with both ROS generation and MMP activation. This effect was observed both in APPswe/PS1dE9 (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.895**, p< 0.01, CAA-MMP activity r=0.764**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.783 **, p< 0.01, n=27-40 vessel segments from 6 mice, Pearson's correlation) and in Tg2576mice (CAA-oxidative stress r=0.820**, p< 0.01; CAA-MMP activity r=0.609**, p< 0.01, oxidative stress-MMP r=0.542 **, p< 0.01, n=19-25 vessel segments from 3 mice, Pearson's correlation). The fluorescence from the fluorogenic probes was also assessed in wild type mice as a negative control for these experiments. In this case, no signal was observed after adding either Amplex Red or DQ™ gelatin, demonstrating the role of CAA as a source of oxidative stress and MMP activation (not shown). This result was further confirmed using in situ zymography in thin sections that showed that MMP activation was observed in vessels with CAA. Preincubation of tissue sections with the MMP inhibitor 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate, or adding pre-cleaved substrate did not result in vessel staining ( figure 2A-D ). Because MMP cleavage of DQ™ gelatin is enzymatic, we determined the time-course of fluorescence generation to ensure that our measurements were performed at steady state conditions. We imaged the same vessels in vivo for 1 hour after applying the probe, and we observed that in as soon as 10 minutes we could observe some fluorescence signal. At 20 minutes the intensity of the signal was maximal and maintained for as long as the vessels were followed ( figure 2E-L ). We therefore selected 20 minutes or greater as the time for MMP imaging. All together, these results demonstrate that DQ™ gelatin reports MMP activation associated with CAA in vitro and in vivo .  MMP inhibiting agents reduced MMP activity associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> Using DQ™ gelatin, the fluorogenic reporter of MMP activation in vivo, we tested whether inhibition of MMP activity could reduce the CAA-associated activation of MMP in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. Simvastatin (20mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA in viv o ( figure 3A ). Minocycline (100 mg/Kg) when administered for both 7 and 14 days also significantly reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA when compared to untreated control values. A similar profile was observed in Tg2576 mice, where minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg) significantly reduced MMP activation when compared to untreated control animals ( figure 3B ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). The antioxidant PBN failed to reduce the MMP activity associated with CAA in both the APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. These results show that multiple systemically active agents that inhibit MMP led to detectable reductions in MMP activation associated with CAA in vivo , while inhibition of ROS generation did not.  MMP inhibiting agents reduced MMP activity associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> Using DQ™ gelatin, the fluorogenic reporter of MMP activation in vivo, we tested whether inhibition of MMP activity could reduce the CAA-associated activation of MMP in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. Simvastatin (20mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA in viv o ( figure 3A ). Minocycline (100 mg/Kg) when administered for both 7 and 14 days also significantly reduced the MMP activity associated with CAA when compared to untreated control values. A similar profile was observed in Tg2576 mice, where minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg) significantly reduced MMP activation when compared to untreated control animals ( figure 3B ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). The antioxidant PBN failed to reduce the MMP activity associated with CAA in both the APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576 mice. These results show that multiple systemically active agents that inhibit MMP led to detectable reductions in MMP activation associated with CAA in vivo , while inhibition of ROS generation did not.  PBN and MMP inhibiting agents reduced the oxidative stress associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> We assessed in vivo , in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice, the effects of PBN and the MMP inhibiting agents (minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001) on the oxidative stress associated with CAA. As expected, we observed that the well characterized antioxidant PBN (100 mg/Kg) reduced oxidative stress along the affected vessels. Surprisingly, the MMP inhibitors simvastatin (20 mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) were also capable of reducing oxidative stress when compared to untreated control values. Similarly, minocycline (100mg/Kg) administered for 7 days showed a trend towards reduction of oxidative stress associated with CAA that reached statistical significance when the treatment was extended for 14 days ( figure 3C ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). This effect of minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg ip, daily) was also observed in the Tg2576 mouse model ( figure 3D ). These results suggest that the reduction of oxidative stress observed in vivo may be mediated by MMP inhibition.  PBN and MMP inhibiting agents reduced the oxidative stress associated with CAA <italic>in vivo</italic> We assessed in vivo , in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice, the effects of PBN and the MMP inhibiting agents (minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001) on the oxidative stress associated with CAA. As expected, we observed that the well characterized antioxidant PBN (100 mg/Kg) reduced oxidative stress along the affected vessels. Surprisingly, the MMP inhibitors simvastatin (20 mg/Kg) and GM6001 (100 mg/Kg) were also capable of reducing oxidative stress when compared to untreated control values. Similarly, minocycline (100mg/Kg) administered for 7 days showed a trend towards reduction of oxidative stress associated with CAA that reached statistical significance when the treatment was extended for 14 days ( figure 3C ) ( figure 4 for illustrative example). This effect of minocycline (50 and 100 mg/Kg ip, daily) was also observed in the Tg2576 mouse model ( figure 3D ). These results suggest that the reduction of oxidative stress observed in vivo may be mediated by MMP inhibition.  MMP inhibiting agents showed no direct antioxidant activity <italic>ex vivo</italic> In order to exclude the possibility that the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001exerted their effects on oxidative stress associated with CAA through direct antioxidant properties, we made use of our previously described assay for plaque-derived oxidative stress with ex vivo tissue sections from transgenic mouse brain ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). As a positive control, PBN (100 ?M) significantly reduced the oxidative stress associated with senile plaques (~55%). Neither simvastatin nor minocycline nor GM6001 led to a reduction in the oxidative stress index in this assay at doses equal to or higher than anticipated with systemic administration in vivo ( figure 5 ). As an additional control experiment, we measured the ability of the MMP inhibitors to compete with Amplex red as a substrate for peroxidase in vitro. The inhibitors (100?M) were incubated with Amplex red (10 ?M), peroxidase (1U/ml), and H2O2 (1?M) and the steady state levels of resorufin production were measured in a spectrophotometer. At 10-fold molar excess over Amplex red (a stoichiometry likely to be orders of magnitude higher than achievable in vivo), neither minocycline, GM6001, nor PBN interfered with the reaction. Simvastatin, however, inhibited the reaction under these conditions by ~35% (p<0.01, n=3, Student's t-test). These results demonstrate that these inhibitors do not have direct antioxidant activities, and one of three MMP inhibitors partially interferes with the oxidative stress assay. Together, these data suggest that their effect on in vivo oxidative stress was not a direct antioxidant action. We conservatively interpret the findings as indicating that MMP activation may contribute in some manner to at least a portion of the observed oxidative stress associated with CAA.  MMP inhibiting agents showed no direct antioxidant activity <italic>ex vivo</italic> In order to exclude the possibility that the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001exerted their effects on oxidative stress associated with CAA through direct antioxidant properties, we made use of our previously described assay for plaque-derived oxidative stress with ex vivo tissue sections from transgenic mouse brain ( McLellan et al. 2003 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ). As a positive control, PBN (100 ?M) significantly reduced the oxidative stress associated with senile plaques (~55%). Neither simvastatin nor minocycline nor GM6001 led to a reduction in the oxidative stress index in this assay at doses equal to or higher than anticipated with systemic administration in vivo ( figure 5 ). As an additional control experiment, we measured the ability of the MMP inhibitors to compete with Amplex red as a substrate for peroxidase in vitro. The inhibitors (100?M) were incubated with Amplex red (10 ?M), peroxidase (1U/ml), and H2O2 (1?M) and the steady state levels of resorufin production were measured in a spectrophotometer. At 10-fold molar excess over Amplex red (a stoichiometry likely to be orders of magnitude higher than achievable in vivo), neither minocycline, GM6001, nor PBN interfered with the reaction. Simvastatin, however, inhibited the reaction under these conditions by ~35% (p<0.01, n=3, Student's t-test). These results demonstrate that these inhibitors do not have direct antioxidant activities, and one of three MMP inhibitors partially interferes with the oxidative stress assay. Together, these data suggest that their effect on in vivo oxidative stress was not a direct antioxidant action. We conservatively interpret the findings as indicating that MMP activation may contribute in some manner to at least a portion of the observed oxidative stress associated with CAA.  Inhibiting ROS generation or MMP activation had no effect on CAA progression <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established the ability of these therapeutic interventions to alter the consequences of CAA (oxidative stress and MMP activation), we next examined whether the reduction of these injurious processes had a secondary effect on the progression of CAA. We used longitudinal imaging and quantification of CAA burden ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ) to determine if these drug treatments had any effect on the natural history of CAA progression in our animal models. Animals were treated for 2 weeks before the cranial window implantation and for the next 2 consecutive weeks. CAA progression rates were not affected by PBN treatment (15 mg/Kg) (0.52 % of available vessel area per day vs. 0.51% in untreated mice). Similarly, minocycline treatment (50mg/Kg) (0.55 % of available vessel area per day) did not have a statistically significant effect on CAA progression rates (figure 8). These results suggest that despite the effect of these drug treatments on oxidative stress or MMP activation, that progression of CAA is unaffected and is therefore likely to be a proximal event in this cascade. While it is possible that longer term treatment or higher doses would have been more effective, we have previously shown that modulation of CAA progression rates can occur within this time frame ( Prada et al. 2007 ).  Inhibiting ROS generation or MMP activation had no effect on CAA progression <italic>in vivo</italic> Having established the ability of these therapeutic interventions to alter the consequences of CAA (oxidative stress and MMP activation), we next examined whether the reduction of these injurious processes had a secondary effect on the progression of CAA. We used longitudinal imaging and quantification of CAA burden ( Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006b ; Robbins et al. 2006 ; Prada et al. 2007 ) to determine if these drug treatments had any effect on the natural history of CAA progression in our animal models. Animals were treated for 2 weeks before the cranial window implantation and for the next 2 consecutive weeks. CAA progression rates were not affected by PBN treatment (15 mg/Kg) (0.52 % of available vessel area per day vs. 0.51% in untreated mice). Similarly, minocycline treatment (50mg/Kg) (0.55 % of available vessel area per day) did not have a statistically significant effect on CAA progression rates (figure 8). These results suggest that despite the effect of these drug treatments on oxidative stress or MMP activation, that progression of CAA is unaffected and is therefore likely to be a proximal event in this cascade. While it is possible that longer term treatment or higher doses would have been more effective, we have previously shown that modulation of CAA progression rates can occur within this time frame ( Prada et al. 2007 ).  Discussion A? deposition as CAA is present in 80% or more of AD patients and is a major cause of hemorrhagic stroke. The molecular pathways activated by vascular A? in causing breakdown of the vessel wall are poorly understood. Among potential candidates, MMP and oxidative stress present special interest. Previous studies have shown that A? induces the expression and activity of MMP-2 in human cerebrovascular smooth muscle cells ( Jung et al. 2003 ). Immunohistochemistry in post mortem tissue has shown colocalization of CAA and MMP-9 ( Lee et al. 2003 ) and a reduction of astrocytic MMP-9 by apoE4 may affect A? clearance and promote A? deposition in AD ( Guo et al. 2006 ). Similarly, extensive evidence links CAA and oxidative stress ( Munoz et al. 2002 ; Mazur-Kolecka et al. 2003 ). The current report, for the first time, assesses the relationship between these potential mediators of injury and CAA in vivo and in real time, showing that CAA is a source of both oxidative stress and MMP activation. Using multiphoton microscopy, together with the fluorogenic oxidation reporter agent Amplex Red, allowed direct, quantitative examination of oxidative stress resulting from CAA. Simultaneously, we imaged MMP activity using the fluorogenic fluorescein conjugate DQ™ gelatin to measure enzymatic activity in vivo. While our imaging results do not allow us to define the precise spatial source of ROS generation or MMP activation, since various cellular and subcellular components of the vasculature may be involved, it is clear that these sources are closely associated with the deposited A?. Indeed, it has been shown that the fluorescent product of Amplex red oxidation (resorufin) can bind to amyloid deposits ( Lebouvier et al. 2009 ). This suggests that the precise spatial location of ROS generation can at best be attributed to sites near CAA. We used this approach in two different lines of transgenic mice (APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576) to explore possible crosstalk between oxidative stress and MMP activity associated with CAA. We used the antioxidant PBN, and MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001 to systematically assess the ability to protect against free radical mediated toxicity and MMP activation associated with CAA. PBN is a well-characterized spin trap with potent pharmacological activities in aging-related diseases, including AD ( Floyd et al. 2002 ). Previous studies have shown that in humans with early stroke there is increased oxidative stress associated with MMP-9 expression ( Kelly et al. 2008 ). In vitro studies have shown that ROS can activate MMP ( Haorah et al. 2007 ) and natural antioxidants can reduce MMP activity and blood-brain barrier leakage ( Demeule et al. 2000 ), raising the possibility that PBN could block CAA-associated MMP activation along with oxidative stress. Although we indeed found that PBN can reduce oxidative stress associated with CAA, we did not observe any effect on MMP activity when assessed in vivo . On the other hand, we cannot exclude that a larger level of reduction in oxidative stress than that caused by the current extent of PBN treatment might be adequate to induce a significant reduction in MMP activity in vivo . In this sense previous in vitro data have shown a more drastic effect of PBN as antioxidant in other paradigms, including induced lipid peroxidation or protein carboxylation ( Soto-Otero et al. 2008 ). However our results in vivo are in agreement with previous studies using a similar approach ( McLellan et al. 2003 ), suggesting that achieving stronger effects may be harder in complex in vivo models. Conversely, when we used the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin or GM6001, we observed that each compound was capable of reducing not only MMP activity, but also oxidative stress associated with CAA in vivo . Although it is possible that the effect of these agents on oxidative stress represented pharmacologic activity unrelated to the MMP pathway, we believe this is unlikely based on the distinct mechanisms of the three agents (see below). We therefore interpret our findings as suggesting that in the setting of CAA, MMP activation triggers oxidative stress, and that reducing MMP activity can reduce associated oxidative stress in vivo . Supporting this idea, it has been reported that MMP inhibition can reduce oxidative stress in volume overload-induced heart failure ( Wang and Tsirka 2005a ). Other studies ( Radisky et al. 2005 ) have shown that MMP-3 can increase cellular ROS and that DNA oxidation damage can be rescued by GM6001, further supporting the role of MMP in ROS production and control. We used 3 different agents that inhibit MMP inhibitors by different mechanisms of action. Minocycline is a tetracycline antibiotic that interferes with many cellular functions implicated in vascular disease, such as cell proliferation, migration and matrix remodeling. The exact mechanism of MMP inhibition by minocycline has not been completely elucidated, but may be related to modulation of gene transcription, Zn+ binding, or inhibition of the ERK and PI3K pathways ( Yao et al. 2004 ). In our hands, minocycline reduced not only MMP activity, but also the oxidative stress associated with CAA in vivo . In order to further assess this aspect we also included in the study two other MMP inhibiting agents: simvastatin and GM6001. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors such as simvastatin are cholesterol-lowering drugs that also have diverse effects on vascular smooth muscle cells, including the ability to reduce MMP activity ( Porter and Turner 2002 ). Previous work has shown that simvastatin reduces MMP-9 activity by inhibiting Rho/ROCK signaling pathways ( Turner et al. 2005 ; Wang et al. 2006 ). Similar to our observations with minocycline, simvastatin reduced both in vivo MMP activation and oxidative stress associated with CAA. Finally we included GM6001 (Llomastat, Galardin), a dipeptide analogue with the structure of N-[2(R)-2-(hydroxamido carbonylmcthyl)-4-methylpentanoyl]-L-tryptophanc methylamide. GM6001 is a broad spectrum synthetic inhibitor of MMP ( Schultz et al. 1992 ) with an extremely potent inhibitor activity of human MMP-2 (72kD gelatinase, Ki: 0.5nM), human MMP-3 (stromelysin, Ki: 27nM), human MMP-8 (neutrophil collagenase, Ki: 0.1nM) and human MMP-9 (92kD gelatinase, Ki: 0.2nM). GM6001 enhances MT1-MMP-dependent pro-MMP-2 activation ( Ikejiri et al. 2005 ). It decreases in vivo collagen synthesis and content after vessel injury ( Li et al. 2002 ) and it has been reported to inhibit induced activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) ( Santiskulvong and Rozengurt 2003 ). Although the inhibition of MMP with GM6001 in our in vivo model was more limited than that observed in postmortem or in vitro studies ( Wang and Tsirka 2005b ; Shigemori et al. 2006 ), this effect was apparently sufficient to produce a similar profile to that observed with minocycline and simvastatin, reducing both MMP and oxidative stress. The fact that all 3 compounds reduced both MMP activity and the oxidative stress associated with CAA in vivo supports the possibility of MMP-mediated modulation of oxidative stress. When we assessed the effect of long-term PBN and minocycline treatments on CAA progression rates, none of the treatments had a significant effect. The effect of antioxidants on A? deposition has been previously shown to be extremely dependent on the antioxidant under study ( Yang et al. 2005 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2007a ), and in our hands PBN did not interfere with the normal deposition of A? as CAA. It has been reported that MMP-9 can degrade A? in APP/PS1 mice ( Yan et al. 2006 ) and may contribute to clearance of A?. However, when we inhibited MMP with minocycline we did not detect an acceleration of CAA deposition. This suggests that the positive effect of minocycline on MMP activation and oxidative stress is not counterbalanced by an increase in A? deposition. Moreover, minocycline has also been shown to improve the behavioral impairment in APP mice that develop CAA and this effect seems to be independent of the accumulation and distribution of A? deposits ( Fan et al. 2007 ). On the other hand, it has been suggested that vascular MMP-9 expression induced by A? deposition may contribute to the development of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage ( Lee et al. 2003 ), presumably by triggering destruction rather than controlled remodeling of the extra-cellular matrix (for review see ( Newby 2007 )). These different lines of evidence suggesting roles for MMP overactivity in CAA-related oxidative stress, behavioral impairment, and intracerebral hemorrhage raise the possibility that MMP inhibition might be considered as a candidate therapeutic approach to CAA. Together, these data offer new insights on the molecular pathways activated by vascular amyloid and suggest a close association between A?-related MMP activity and ROS generation in vivo. They also raise the possibility that therapeutic treatment with MMP inhibitors may have beneficial effects in the A? amyloidosis by indirectly reducing the oxidative stress associated with CAA.  Discussion A? deposition as CAA is present in 80% or more of AD patients and is a major cause of hemorrhagic stroke. The molecular pathways activated by vascular A? in causing breakdown of the vessel wall are poorly understood. Among potential candidates, MMP and oxidative stress present special interest. Previous studies have shown that A? induces the expression and activity of MMP-2 in human cerebrovascular smooth muscle cells ( Jung et al. 2003 ). Immunohistochemistry in post mortem tissue has shown colocalization of CAA and MMP-9 ( Lee et al. 2003 ) and a reduction of astrocytic MMP-9 by apoE4 may affect A? clearance and promote A? deposition in AD ( Guo et al. 2006 ). Similarly, extensive evidence links CAA and oxidative stress ( Munoz et al. 2002 ; Mazur-Kolecka et al. 2003 ). The current report, for the first time, assesses the relationship between these potential mediators of injury and CAA in vivo and in real time, showing that CAA is a source of both oxidative stress and MMP activation. Using multiphoton microscopy, together with the fluorogenic oxidation reporter agent Amplex Red, allowed direct, quantitative examination of oxidative stress resulting from CAA. Simultaneously, we imaged MMP activity using the fluorogenic fluorescein conjugate DQ™ gelatin to measure enzymatic activity in vivo. While our imaging results do not allow us to define the precise spatial source of ROS generation or MMP activation, since various cellular and subcellular components of the vasculature may be involved, it is clear that these sources are closely associated with the deposited A?. Indeed, it has been shown that the fluorescent product of Amplex red oxidation (resorufin) can bind to amyloid deposits ( Lebouvier et al. 2009 ). This suggests that the precise spatial location of ROS generation can at best be attributed to sites near CAA. We used this approach in two different lines of transgenic mice (APPswe/PS1dE9 and Tg2576) to explore possible crosstalk between oxidative stress and MMP activity associated with CAA. We used the antioxidant PBN, and MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin and GM6001 to systematically assess the ability to protect against free radical mediated toxicity and MMP activation associated with CAA. PBN is a well-characterized spin trap with potent pharmacological activities in aging-related diseases, including AD ( Floyd et al. 2002 ). Previous studies have shown that in humans with early stroke there is increased oxidative stress associated with MMP-9 expression ( Kelly et al. 2008 ). In vitro studies have shown that ROS can activate MMP ( Haorah et al. 2007 ) and natural antioxidants can reduce MMP activity and blood-brain barrier leakage ( Demeule et al. 2000 ), raising the possibility that PBN could block CAA-associated MMP activation along with oxidative stress. Although we indeed found that PBN can reduce oxidative stress associated with CAA, we did not observe any effect on MMP activity when assessed in vivo . On the other hand, we cannot exclude that a larger level of reduction in oxidative stress than that caused by the current extent of PBN treatment might be adequate to induce a significant reduction in MMP activity in vivo . In this sense previous in vitro data have shown a more drastic effect of PBN as antioxidant in other paradigms, including induced lipid peroxidation or protein carboxylation ( Soto-Otero et al. 2008 ). However our results in vivo are in agreement with previous studies using a similar approach ( McLellan et al. 2003 ), suggesting that achieving stronger effects may be harder in complex in vivo models. Conversely, when we used the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline, simvastatin or GM6001, we observed that each compound was capable of reducing not only MMP activity, but also oxidative stress associated with CAA in vivo . Although it is possible that the effect of these agents on oxidative stress represented pharmacologic activity unrelated to the MMP pathway, we believe this is unlikely based on the distinct mechanisms of the three agents (see below). We therefore interpret our findings as suggesting that in the setting of CAA, MMP activation triggers oxidative stress, and that reducing MMP activity can reduce associated oxidative stress in vivo . Supporting this idea, it has been reported that MMP inhibition can reduce oxidative stress in volume overload-induced heart failure ( Wang and Tsirka 2005a ). Other studies ( Radisky et al. 2005 ) have shown that MMP-3 can increase cellular ROS and that DNA oxidation damage can be rescued by GM6001, further supporting the role of MMP in ROS production and control. We used 3 different agents that inhibit MMP inhibitors by different mechanisms of action. Minocycline is a tetracycline antibiotic that interferes with many cellular functions implicated in vascular disease, such as cell proliferation, migration and matrix remodeling. The exact mechanism of MMP inhibition by minocycline has not been completely elucidated, but may be related to modulation of gene transcription, Zn+ binding, or inhibition of the ERK and PI3K pathways ( Yao et al. 2004 ). In our hands, minocycline reduced not only MMP activity, but also the oxidative stress associated with CAA in vivo . In order to further assess this aspect we also included in the study two other MMP inhibiting agents: simvastatin and GM6001. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors such as simvastatin are cholesterol-lowering drugs that also have diverse effects on vascular smooth muscle cells, including the ability to reduce MMP activity ( Porter and Turner 2002 ). Previous work has shown that simvastatin reduces MMP-9 activity by inhibiting Rho/ROCK signaling pathways ( Turner et al. 2005 ; Wang et al. 2006 ). Similar to our observations with minocycline, simvastatin reduced both in vivo MMP activation and oxidative stress associated with CAA. Finally we included GM6001 (Llomastat, Galardin), a dipeptide analogue with the structure of N-[2(R)-2-(hydroxamido carbonylmcthyl)-4-methylpentanoyl]-L-tryptophanc methylamide. GM6001 is a broad spectrum synthetic inhibitor of MMP ( Schultz et al. 1992 ) with an extremely potent inhibitor activity of human MMP-2 (72kD gelatinase, Ki: 0.5nM), human MMP-3 (stromelysin, Ki: 27nM), human MMP-8 (neutrophil collagenase, Ki: 0.1nM) and human MMP-9 (92kD gelatinase, Ki: 0.2nM). GM6001 enhances MT1-MMP-dependent pro-MMP-2 activation ( Ikejiri et al. 2005 ). It decreases in vivo collagen synthesis and content after vessel injury ( Li et al. 2002 ) and it has been reported to inhibit induced activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) ( Santiskulvong and Rozengurt 2003 ). Although the inhibition of MMP with GM6001 in our in vivo model was more limited than that observed in postmortem or in vitro studies ( Wang and Tsirka 2005b ; Shigemori et al. 2006 ), this effect was apparently sufficient to produce a similar profile to that observed with minocycline and simvastatin, reducing both MMP and oxidative stress. The fact that all 3 compounds reduced both MMP activity and the oxidative stress associated with CAA in vivo supports the possibility of MMP-mediated modulation of oxidative stress. When we assessed the effect of long-term PBN and minocycline treatments on CAA progression rates, none of the treatments had a significant effect. The effect of antioxidants on A? deposition has been previously shown to be extremely dependent on the antioxidant under study ( Yang et al. 2005 ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2006a ; Garcia-Alloza et al. 2007a ), and in our hands PBN did not interfere with the normal deposition of A? as CAA. It has been reported that MMP-9 can degrade A? in APP/PS1 mice ( Yan et al. 2006 ) and may contribute to clearance of A?. However, when we inhibited MMP with minocycline we did not detect an acceleration of CAA deposition. This suggests that the positive effect of minocycline on MMP activation and oxidative stress is not counterbalanced by an increase in A? deposition. Moreover, minocycline has also been shown to improve the behavioral impairment in APP mice that develop CAA and this effect seems to be independent of the accumulation and distribution of A? deposits ( Fan et al. 2007 ). On the other hand, it has been suggested that vascular MMP-9 expression induced by A? deposition may contribute to the development of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage ( Lee et al. 2003 ), presumably by triggering destruction rather than controlled remodeling of the extra-cellular matrix (for review see ( Newby 2007 )). These different lines of evidence suggesting roles for MMP overactivity in CAA-related oxidative stress, behavioral impairment, and intracerebral hemorrhage raise the possibility that MMP inhibition might be considered as a candidate therapeutic approach to CAA. Together, these data offer new insights on the molecular pathways activated by vascular amyloid and suggest a close association between A?-related MMP activity and ROS generation in vivo. They also raise the possibility that therapeutic treatment with MMP inhibitors may have beneficial effects in the A? amyloidosis by indirectly reducing the oxidative stress associated with CAA.  Figures Figure 1 Representative example of cerebrovascular amyloid angiopathy, oxidative stress and MMP activation in the same vessel segment from a living APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse. The signal from amyloid angiopathy signal assessed with thioflavin S (red, A), Amplex Red (blue, B) and the fluorescein conjugate DQ™ gelatin (green, C) spatially coincide as shown after thresholding, segmenting, and aligning the image from each marker (D). Scale bar=100 ?m. Figure 2 Characterization of the in situ and in vivo imaging of MMP activation with DQ Gelatin substrate. Panels A-D show representative examples of in situ MMP zymography in fresh frozen tissue from Tg2576 mice showing MMP activation associated with CAA in leptomeningeal vessels. MMP activation was observed in the vessels with CAA (A) whereas preincubation with 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate (B) or precleavage of DQ™ gelatin with collagenase IV from Clostridium histolyticum (C) inhibit MMP activation associated with CAA. Similarly, no MMP activation was observed in sections from age-matched wild type mice (D). Panels E-L show a representative example of the time-course of activation of MMP associated with CAA after DQ™ gelatin application in vivo in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. The same vessel segment was imaged before DQ™ gelatin was topically applied (A) and after 10 minutes (B), 15 minutes (C), 20 minutes (D), 30 minutes (E), 40 minutes (F) and 50 minutes (G). By 20 minutes after the application of the substrate, the signal observed was saturated, and similar to that observed at subsequent time points. The same area was also imaged after thioflavin S incubation for histochemical assessment. Scale bar: 50 ?m. Figure 3 Quantification of MMP activity and oxidative stress associated with amyloid angiopathy in two different mouse models. The number of fluorescent pixels resulting from proteolytic digestion of DQ™ gelatin by MMP (A and B) or Amplex red (C and D) are expressed as a percentage of thioflavin S pixels on the same vessel segments. A) In APPswe/PS1dE9 mice, the percentage of MMP positive pixels is not significantly affected after antioxidant treatment with PBN (100 mg/Kg, 2 days). However, the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline (100mg/Kg, 14 days), simvastatin (20mg/Kg, 14 days) and GM6001 (100mg/Kg 3 days) significantly reduced MMP activity when compared to untreated control values. Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 21-32 vessel segments. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F(5,160)=4.896, *P<0.001 vs. Untreated and PBN}. B) In Tg2576 mice, the percentage of MMP-positive pixels was significantly reduced by the MMP inhibitor minocycline (50 and 100mg/Kg, 14 days), whereas it was not affected by antioxidant treatment with PBN (15mg/Kg, 14 days) when compared to untreated control values. Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 18-75 vessel segments. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F(3,187)=18.344, *P<0.001 vs. Untreated}. C) In APPswe/PS1dE9 mice the percentage of AR pixels is significantly reduced after antioxidant treatment with PBN (100mg/Kg 2 days) and also by the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline (100mg/Kg, 14 days), simvastatin (20mg/Kg, 14 days) and GM6001 (100mg/Kg 3 days) when compared to untreated control values. Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 20-36 vessel segments. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey t test {F5,203=7.894; *P<0.001 vs. Untreated and minocycline 7 days}. D) In Tg2576 mice, the percentage of AR-positive pixels was significantly reduced after PBN treatment (15 mg/Kg, 14 days) and also by minocycline treatment (100mg/Kg and 50 mg/Kg, 14 days). Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 25-99 vessel segments. Oneway ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F3,226=5.728, *P<0.001 vs. Untreated. Figure 4 Representative example of CAA, oxidative stress, and MMP activation in individual segments of leptomeningeal vessels from APPswe/PS1dE9 mice using in vivo multiphoton microscopy. CAA deposits were identified by fluorescence from thioflavin S staining. The oxidative stress signal was derived from Amplex Red oxidation and MMP activation was derived from the green fluorescent substrate (DQ™ gelatin). In untreated mice, ~70% of thioflavin S-positive pixels were Amplex Red and MMP positive. In PBN treated mice, only ~30% of thioflavin S-positive pixels were Amplex Red-positive. Minocycline administered for 7 days (Min7), showed no effect on the oxidative stress signal, although MMP-positive pixels were reduced to ~50% of the thioflavin S-positive pixels. Minocycline administered for 14 days (Min 14) reduced both the Amplex Red signal (~40%) and MMP signal (~50%). A similar profile was observed after simvastatin (Sim) and GM6001 treatment. Scale bar=100 ?m. Figure 5 Inhibitors of MMP do not reduce oxidative stress from senile plaques ex vivo . The quantitative oxidative stress index using the ratio of Amplex Red signal to Thioflavin S fluorescence from individual senile plaques in sections from Tg2576 mouse brain was significantly reduced with PBN treatment (100 ?M), whereas no effect was observed after minocycline, sinvastatin or GM6001 treatments. Data are representative from 14-41 plaques. Significant differences were determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F(7,202)=2.442; *P<0.05 vs. Untreated and minocycline}. Figure 6 Representative examples of cerebrovascular amyloid angiopathy progression in the same vessel segments from Tg2576 mice. A) Longitudinal imaging of identified vessels labeled with thioflavin S at day 0 and with systemic methoxy-XO4 administration at 7 and 14 days in untreated and treated animals. An ALZET minipump with PBN (15mg/Kg/day) was implanted s.c. for 14 days before cranial window surgery was performed, and replaced with a new one for an additional 14 days during the surgery. Minocycline (50mg/Kg) was administered daily, ip, for 14 days prior to cranial window implantation, and continued for the next 2 weeks. Scale bar=100 ?m. B) Quantitative measurements of CAA progression in Tg2576 mice after PBN and minocycline treatment . No statistical differences were observed in CAA progression from 3-4 mice and 14-55 vessel segments (P-values: Untreated vs. PBN=0.94, Untreated vs. minocycline=0.75 and PBN vs. Minocycline 0.73). .  Figures Figure 1 Representative example of cerebrovascular amyloid angiopathy, oxidative stress and MMP activation in the same vessel segment from a living APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse. The signal from amyloid angiopathy signal assessed with thioflavin S (red, A), Amplex Red (blue, B) and the fluorescein conjugate DQ™ gelatin (green, C) spatially coincide as shown after thresholding, segmenting, and aligning the image from each marker (D). Scale bar=100 ?m. Figure 2 Characterization of the in situ and in vivo imaging of MMP activation with DQ Gelatin substrate. Panels A-D show representative examples of in situ MMP zymography in fresh frozen tissue from Tg2576 mice showing MMP activation associated with CAA in leptomeningeal vessels. MMP activation was observed in the vessels with CAA (A) whereas preincubation with 1-10-phenanthroline monohydrate (B) or precleavage of DQ™ gelatin with collagenase IV from Clostridium histolyticum (C) inhibit MMP activation associated with CAA. Similarly, no MMP activation was observed in sections from age-matched wild type mice (D). Panels E-L show a representative example of the time-course of activation of MMP associated with CAA after DQ™ gelatin application in vivo in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. The same vessel segment was imaged before DQ™ gelatin was topically applied (A) and after 10 minutes (B), 15 minutes (C), 20 minutes (D), 30 minutes (E), 40 minutes (F) and 50 minutes (G). By 20 minutes after the application of the substrate, the signal observed was saturated, and similar to that observed at subsequent time points. The same area was also imaged after thioflavin S incubation for histochemical assessment. Scale bar: 50 ?m. Figure 3 Quantification of MMP activity and oxidative stress associated with amyloid angiopathy in two different mouse models. The number of fluorescent pixels resulting from proteolytic digestion of DQ™ gelatin by MMP (A and B) or Amplex red (C and D) are expressed as a percentage of thioflavin S pixels on the same vessel segments. A) In APPswe/PS1dE9 mice, the percentage of MMP positive pixels is not significantly affected after antioxidant treatment with PBN (100 mg/Kg, 2 days). However, the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline (100mg/Kg, 14 days), simvastatin (20mg/Kg, 14 days) and GM6001 (100mg/Kg 3 days) significantly reduced MMP activity when compared to untreated control values. Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 21-32 vessel segments. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F(5,160)=4.896, *P<0.001 vs. Untreated and PBN}. B) In Tg2576 mice, the percentage of MMP-positive pixels was significantly reduced by the MMP inhibitor minocycline (50 and 100mg/Kg, 14 days), whereas it was not affected by antioxidant treatment with PBN (15mg/Kg, 14 days) when compared to untreated control values. Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 18-75 vessel segments. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F(3,187)=18.344, *P<0.001 vs. Untreated}. C) In APPswe/PS1dE9 mice the percentage of AR pixels is significantly reduced after antioxidant treatment with PBN (100mg/Kg 2 days) and also by the MMP inhibiting agents minocycline (100mg/Kg, 14 days), simvastatin (20mg/Kg, 14 days) and GM6001 (100mg/Kg 3 days) when compared to untreated control values. Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 20-36 vessel segments. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey t test {F5,203=7.894; *P<0.001 vs. Untreated and minocycline 7 days}. D) In Tg2576 mice, the percentage of AR-positive pixels was significantly reduced after PBN treatment (15 mg/Kg, 14 days) and also by minocycline treatment (100mg/Kg and 50 mg/Kg, 14 days). Data are representative of 3-7 animals and 25-99 vessel segments. Oneway ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F3,226=5.728, *P<0.001 vs. Untreated. Figure 4 Representative example of CAA, oxidative stress, and MMP activation in individual segments of leptomeningeal vessels from APPswe/PS1dE9 mice using in vivo multiphoton microscopy. CAA deposits were identified by fluorescence from thioflavin S staining. The oxidative stress signal was derived from Amplex Red oxidation and MMP activation was derived from the green fluorescent substrate (DQ™ gelatin). In untreated mice, ~70% of thioflavin S-positive pixels were Amplex Red and MMP positive. In PBN treated mice, only ~30% of thioflavin S-positive pixels were Amplex Red-positive. Minocycline administered for 7 days (Min7), showed no effect on the oxidative stress signal, although MMP-positive pixels were reduced to ~50% of the thioflavin S-positive pixels. Minocycline administered for 14 days (Min 14) reduced both the Amplex Red signal (~40%) and MMP signal (~50%). A similar profile was observed after simvastatin (Sim) and GM6001 treatment. Scale bar=100 ?m. Figure 5 Inhibitors of MMP do not reduce oxidative stress from senile plaques ex vivo . The quantitative oxidative stress index using the ratio of Amplex Red signal to Thioflavin S fluorescence from individual senile plaques in sections from Tg2576 mouse brain was significantly reduced with PBN treatment (100 ?M), whereas no effect was observed after minocycline, sinvastatin or GM6001 treatments. Data are representative from 14-41 plaques. Significant differences were determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey-b test {F(7,202)=2.442; *P<0.05 vs. Untreated and minocycline}. Figure 6 Representative examples of cerebrovascular amyloid angiopathy progression in the same vessel segments from Tg2576 mice. A) Longitudinal imaging of identified vessels labeled with thioflavin S at day 0 and with systemic methoxy-XO4 administration at 7 and 14 days in untreated and treated animals. An ALZET minipump with PBN (15mg/Kg/day) was implanted s.c. for 14 days before cranial window surgery was performed, and replaced with a new one for an additional 14 days during the surgery. Minocycline (50mg/Kg) was administered daily, ip, for 14 days prior to cranial window implantation, and continued for the next 2 weeks. Scale bar=100 ?m. B) Quantitative measurements of CAA progression in Tg2576 mice after PBN and minocycline treatment . No statistical differences were observed in CAA progression from 3-4 mice and 14-55 vessel segments (P-values: Untreated vs. PBN=0.94, Untreated vs. minocycline=0.75 and PBN vs. Minocycline 0.73). . 