Guanylyl cyclase C in colorectal cancer: susceptibility gene and potential therapeutic target SUMMARY Colorectal cancer is one of the leading causes of tumor-related morbidity and mortality worldwide. While mechanisms underlying this disease have been elucidated over the past two decades, these molecular insights have failed to translate into efficacious therapy. The oncogenomic view of cancer suggests that terminal transformation reflects the sequential corruption of signal transduction circuits regulating key homeostatic mechanisms, whose multiplicity underlies the therapeutic resistance of most tumors to interventions targeting individual pathways. Conversely, the paucity of mechanistic insights into proximal pathophysiological processes that initiate and amplify oncogenic circuits preceding accumulation of mutations and transformation impedes development of effective prevention and therapy. In that context, guanylyl cyclase C (GCC), the intestinal receptor for the paracrine hormones guanylin and uroguanylin, whose early loss characterizes colorectal transformation, has emerged as a component of lineage-specific homeostatic programs organizing spatiotemporal patterning along the crypt-surface axis. Dysregulation of GCC signaling, reflecting hormone loss, promotes tumorigenesis through reprogramming of replicative and bioenergetic circuits and genomic instability. Compensatory up-regulation of GCC in response to hormone loss provides a unique translational opportunity for prevention and treatment of colorectal tumors by hormone replacement therapy.  Executive Summary COLORECTAL CANCER Colorectal cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer and the 2nd leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the world. COLORECTAL TUMORIGENESIS AND THE DYNAMICS OF INTESTINAL EPITHELIAL CELLS While terminal transformation and the evolution of invasive and metastatic colorectal cancer reflects accumulation of sequential mutations in pathways regulating key homeostatic pathways, there is a paucity of mechanistic insights into proximal pathophysiological processes that initiate and amplify oncogenic circuits preceding global mutations. GUANYLYL CYCLASE C Guanylyl cyclase C (GCC), the intestinal receptor for the paracrine hormones guanylin and uroguanylin, has emerged as a component of lineage-specific homeostatic programs organizing spatiotemporal patterning of proliferation, DNA damage and repair mechanisms, and the balance of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation along the crypt-surface axis. Guanylin and uroguanylin are the most frequently lost gene products in colorectal carcinogenesis and their loss occurs early along the continuum of transformation, preceding the development of the invasive metastatic phenotype. SIGNALING PATHWAYS AND LINEAGE-DEPENDENT COORDINATION BY GCC Loss of GCC signaling reprograms the cell cycle, mechanisms maintaining genomic integrity, and metabolic circuits that recapitulate the tumorigenic phenotype. Moreover, loss of GCC signaling promotes tumorigenesis in mouse models of colorectal cancer. Conversely, re-engaging GCC by ligand replacement rescues control of the cell cycle, genomic integrity and metabolism and opposes tumorigenesis. CONCLUSIONS These observations suggest a novel pathophysiological paradigm in which dysregulation of GCC signaling, reflecting early hormone loss, promotes tumorigenesis through reprogramming of replicative and bioenergetic circuits and genomic instability. This model suggests that initiation of colorectal cancer is, at least in part, a disease of hormone insufficiency. FUTURE PERSPECTIVE In the context of colorectal cancer as a disease of hormone loss, and the universal compensatory over-expression of GCC by tumor cells, there is a unique translational opportunity for prevention and treatment of colorectal tumors by hormone replacement therapy, analogous to the treatment of other diseases of endocrine insufficiency, for example the treatment of diabetes with insulin.  COLORECTAL CANCER Colorectal cancer is the 4th leading cause of cancer and the 2nd leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the world.  COLORECTAL TUMORIGENESIS AND THE DYNAMICS OF INTESTINAL EPITHELIAL CELLS While terminal transformation and the evolution of invasive and metastatic colorectal cancer reflects accumulation of sequential mutations in pathways regulating key homeostatic pathways, there is a paucity of mechanistic insights into proximal pathophysiological processes that initiate and amplify oncogenic circuits preceding global mutations.  GUANYLYL CYCLASE C Guanylyl cyclase C (GCC), the intestinal receptor for the paracrine hormones guanylin and uroguanylin, has emerged as a component of lineage-specific homeostatic programs organizing spatiotemporal patterning of proliferation, DNA damage and repair mechanisms, and the balance of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation along the crypt-surface axis. Guanylin and uroguanylin are the most frequently lost gene products in colorectal carcinogenesis and their loss occurs early along the continuum of transformation, preceding the development of the invasive metastatic phenotype.  SIGNALING PATHWAYS AND LINEAGE-DEPENDENT COORDINATION BY GCC Loss of GCC signaling reprograms the cell cycle, mechanisms maintaining genomic integrity, and metabolic circuits that recapitulate the tumorigenic phenotype. Moreover, loss of GCC signaling promotes tumorigenesis in mouse models of colorectal cancer. Conversely, re-engaging GCC by ligand replacement rescues control of the cell cycle, genomic integrity and metabolism and opposes tumorigenesis.  CONCLUSIONS These observations suggest a novel pathophysiological paradigm in which dysregulation of GCC signaling, reflecting early hormone loss, promotes tumorigenesis through reprogramming of replicative and bioenergetic circuits and genomic instability. This model suggests that initiation of colorectal cancer is, at least in part, a disease of hormone insufficiency.  FUTURE PERSPECTIVE In the context of colorectal cancer as a disease of hormone loss, and the universal compensatory over-expression of GCC by tumor cells, there is a unique translational opportunity for prevention and treatment of colorectal tumors by hormone replacement therapy, analogous to the treatment of other diseases of endocrine insufficiency, for example the treatment of diabetes with insulin.  Figures Figure 1 The adenoma-carcinoma hypothesis suggests that sequential accumulation of genetic alterations underlies the development of colorectal tumorigenesis. Mutations in the APC gene (5q21) are the earliest known event. Inactivation of APC stabilizes ?-catenin and accelerates cell cycle progression. hMSH2 and hMSH1 are human mismatch repair genes (MMR) that encode key molecules that repair DNA replication errors. Deletions or mutations in MMR genes exists in 95% of tumors in patients with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), but only 10~15% of sporadic tumors. KRAS mutations are also found in nondysplastic lesions and hyperplastic polyps. KRAS activates both MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways. SMAD4 , also known as deleted in pancreatic cancer ( DPC4 ), and SMAD2 are downstream mediators of TGF-? signaling. Inactivation of TGF-? signaling, identified in juvenile polyposis and late stage colorectal tumors, drives malignant progression of colorectal tumors. TP53 mutations occur in ~75% of colorectal carcinomas, but infrequently in benign lesions. Adopted from [ 12 ]. Dashed arrow, loss of function, solid arrow, gain of function. Figure 2 Lineage-specific tumorigenesis There is an emerging paradigm that extends the oncogenomic view of tumorigenesis suggesting that there are developmental and tissue-specific programs that indelibly restrict signaling circuits which define homeostatic repertoires in specific tissues. These executive circuits entrain and drive subordinate signaling mechanisms that control key cellular processes universally contributing to carcinogenesis across different tissues. These subordinate processes include cancer cell autonomous mechanisms like genetic stability, the balance between glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, replication and the cell cycle, and apoptosis. Also, they include non-cancer cell autonomous mechanisms like mesenchymal remodeling of the stromal niche, angiogenesis, and inflammation. In this model of lineage-specific tumorigenesis, corruption ( ) of tissue-specific executive circuits, for example by environmental insults, disrupts subordinate homeostatic programs, initiating the transformational continuum ultimately producing the invasive metastatic phenotype. Adoped from [ 141 ] Figure 3 Organization of the vertical crypt-surface axis in intestinal epithelium The intestinal epithelium undergoes continuous homeostatic cycles of proliferation, migration, differentiation, apoptosis and shedding. Rapidly proliferating progenitor cells originate from stem cells residing near the bottom of crypts. When migrating along the vertical axis, these cells reprogram nuclear and cytoplasmic circuits, coordinating proliferative restriction, lineage commitment, and metabolic programming. Progenitor cells differentiate into four cell types, including enterocytes, goblet cells, enteroendocrine cells and Paneth cells. Enterocytes, goblet cells and enteroendocrine cells reside in the villus (small intestine) or upper crypt (colon and rectum) compartments while Paneth cells reside at the bottom of crypts. Guanylin and uroguanylin are secreted in a gradient along the crypt-surface axis, lowest in the crypt and greatest near the surface. Proliferative cells are indicated by red nucleus, and differentiated cells are by blue nucleus. The pericryptal myofibroblasts are the yellow cells. Adopted from [ 70 ] Figure 4 AKT signaling and tumorigenesis Activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) recruits PI3K directly or indirectly via RAS to the plasma membrane, where it phosphorylates phosphosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to generate the phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 recruits AKT and PDK1 to the plasma membrane, and activates AKT. AKT phosphorylates a variety of downstream substrates and regulates the cell cycle, cell growth and metabolism, and cell death. PTEN antagonizes the PI3K-AKT pathway by dephosphorylating PIP3. BMP activation of receptor BMPR1A in epithelial cells prevents inhibition of PTEN through phosphorylation and facilitates PTEN function. AKT activates mTORC1 through phosphorylation of TSC2, and inactivates the GTPase activity of TSC2 for Rheb. Rheb-GTP activates mTORC1 and downstream S6 kinases. Phosphorylation of FOXO by AKT inhibits its regulation of cell metabolism. Phosphorylation of Chk1 results its nuclear exclusion and sequestration from key downstream targets, including the DNA damage-sensing kinases ATM and ATR. Phosphorylation of MDM2 by AKT activates p53 degradation. In the presence of WNT, Frizzled (FZD) interacts with Dishevelled (DVL) and inactivates the APC-destruction complex leading to the stabilization of ?-catenin and its nuclear translocation. Phosphorylation of ?-catenin or GSK3 mimics the effect of WNT signaling activation that stabilizes and mediates ?-catenin nuclear translocation, which accelerates the cell cycle and potentiates tumorigenesis, in part through CyclinD1 and Myc transcription. GCC signaling suppresses AKT activation through a multiple mechanisms, in part by increasing PTEN expression and function. Proteins activated during tumorigenesis are shown in red, and those inactivated are in blue. Proteins activated by phosphorylation are indicated by a red phosphate, while those inactivated by phosphorylation are indicated by a blue phosphate. Cellular processes regulated by AKT downstream substrates are illustrated by underline colores. Figure 5 The GCC signalome Reproduced with permission from [ 70 ]. Activation of GCC by its ligands coordinates a complex system of intracellular signaling composed of dynamically regulated proteins that control discreet biological processes maintaining intestinal epithelial cell and crypt-villus homeostasis, the corruption of which contributes to the initiation and promotion of cancer. GCC, through cGMP, activates cGMP (PKG)- and cAMP (PKA)-dependent protein kinases; phosphodiesterases (PDE), which control cGMP concentration, spatially and temporally shaping GCC signaling; and cyclic nucleotide-gated channels (CNGs), which regulate calcium signaling through calcium-sensing receptors (CaRs). PKG is the canonical intracellular effector for guanylyl cyclases, and in intestinal cells induces phosphorylation of (1) the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), mediating fluid secretion; (2) vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), constraining actin polymerization dynamics, migration, and adhesion; and (3) ?-catenin, resulting in its proteosomal degradation, restricting proliferation and promoting terminal differentiation. In turn, CNGs and CaRs form the extracellular calcium-dependent limb of the GCC signalome, cooperatively promoting differentiation and restricting proliferation of intestinal epithelial cells. GCC also inhibits the secretion of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) and transforming growth factor-? (TGF-?), key regulators of epithelial and mesenchymal remodeling and enterocyte survival and maturation. Specifically, TGF-? promotes tumor cell survival and proliferation through an oncogenic switch, recruiting stress-activated protein kinase p38 and phosphorylated c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (pJNK). Further, GCC and cGMP control genomic integrity and cellular metabolism, in part, by activating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ?, coactivator 1? (PGC1?), either directly or by inhibiting the Akt pathway. Akt regulates cell survival, cell cycle progression, glycolysis, the number and function of mitochondria, and the DNA damage response pathway by targeting intracellular effector proteins, including the forkhead (FOXO) family of transcription factors, glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1) and tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2), and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Akt-dependent functional complexes regulating proliferation and cell survival include (1) Myc, cyclin D1, and phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (pRB), which promote G1-S cell cycle transition; (2) p27kip1 and retinoblastoma-like 2 (RBL2), which induce cell cycle arrest; (3) Fas-ligand (FasL) and BCL2-like 11 (Bim), mediators of cell death; (4) BCL2-antagonist of cell death (BAD), which inhibits the B-cell lymphoma-like protein 1 (BCL-XL) and induces apoptosis; and (5) the mouse double-minute 2 (MDM2), which prevents cell arrest and apoptosis by promoting proteasome-dependent p53 degradation. The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) promotes glycolysis and inhibits respiration; reactive oxygen species (ROS) induce genomic instability and HIF stability and function; phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) are key enzymes mediating gluconeogenesis; glycogen synthase promotes HIF degradation and glycogen synthesis; and Rheb (Ras homolog enriched in brain) is a small G protein inhibited by the TSC1/TSC2 complex that promotes mTOR-mediated functions, including proliferation and metabolism. Lines and arrows, indicating functional relations between molecules, are a schematic representation of key interactions mediating biological processes in intestinal epithelial cells, and they do not exhaustively portray the complexity of signaling interconnections mediated by each molecule of the GCC signalome. 