MILD CHOLESTEROL DEPLETION REDUCES AMYLOID-? PRODUCTION BY IMPAIRING APP TRAFFICKING TO THE CELL SURFACE It has been suggested that cellular cholesterol levels can modulate the metabolism of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) but the underlying mechanism remains controversial. In the current study, we investigate in detail the relationship between cholesterol reduction, APP processing and ?-secretase function in cell culture studies. We found that mild membrane cholesterol reduction led to a decrease in A?40 and A?42 in different cell types. We did not detect changes in APP intracellular domain or Notch intracellular domain generation. Western blot analyses showed a cholesterol-dependent decrease in the APP C-terminal fragments and cell surface APP. Finally, we applied a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based technique to study APP-Presenilin 1 (PS1) interactions and lipid rafts in intact cells. Our data indicate that cholesterol depletion reduces association of APP into lipid rafts and disrupts APP-PS1 interaction. Taken together, our results suggest that mild membrane cholesterol reduction impacts the cleavage of APP upstream of ?-secretase and appears to be mediated by changes in APP trafficking and partitioning into lipid rafts.  Experimental Procedures Cell lines, plasmids and transfection protocol We used the following cell lines: naive Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, CHO cells stably overexpressing wild-type human PS1 and wild-type APP (PS70, a generous gift from Dr. Selkoe, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston), human neuroglioma cell line (H4) stably expressing the double Swedish APP mutation (a generous gift from Bruno Imbimbo, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma) or human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells stably expressing the double Swedish APP mutation. Biotin acceptor peptide (BAP)-APP construct was used for cell surface biotinylation. The construct contains a BAP on the N-terminus of APP695 and a hemagglutinin (HA) tag on the C-terminus. Cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37°C with 5% CO2 in a tissue culture incubator. For FRET (fluorescence resonance energy transfer)/FLIM (fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy) and confocal microscopy, we used PS70 cells, H4 cells stably expressing the double Swedish APP mutation or CHO cells transiently transfected with wild-type APP695, or wild-type PS1 (a generous gift from Carlos Saura, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Membrane cholesterol depletion Different doses of lovastatin (Calbiochem), or methyl-?-cyclodextrin (M?CDX, Sigma-Aldrich) were used for different time periods to induce membrane cholesterol depletion. Cell toxicity was analyzed for all drugs by measuring adenylate kinase levels using Toxi-light reagent (Cambrex). The ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT (1?M, Sigma) was used as a control. All conditions were supplemented with mevalonate (0.25 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) to support the isoprenoid pathway. Total cell cholesterol levels were measured using the Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kit (Invitrogen). We tested lovastatin at different concentrations and for different time periods. We found that treatment for 48 hours with either 20?M lovastatin with 0.25 mM mevalonate and delipidated fetal bovine serum (DLFBS) was able to induce mild but consistent (25-30%) cell membrane cholesterol reduction without signs of cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). We also examined the effects of methyl-?-cyclodextrin (M?CDX), which selectively extracts cholesterol from the plasma membrane in preference to other lipids. Consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min as treatment for 48 hours induced significant cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). Therefore, we used for all experiments 20?M lovastatin or 5mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min which induced a consistent cholesterol reduction. A? ELISA and Western blot For human A?1-40 ELISA we used 6E10 (against A?1-17, Chemicon) as a capture antibody and a rabbit polyclonal A?1-40 (Chemicon) as a detection antibody. After incubation for 3 hours, wells were washed and a horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated Donkey anti-rabbit (Jackson Laboratories) was added. Wells were washed with PBS, Quantablue reagent (Pierce) was added and samples were read at 320 nm using a Victor3 Wallac plate reader (Perkin Elmer, Massachusetts). To measure human A?1-42 and A?1-x we used sensitive ELISA kits (Wako, Japan and IBL, Germany, respectively). For the Western Blot analysis of Notch cleavage, CHO cells were transfected with the truncated Notch1 construct Notch?ECmyc (a generous gift from R. Kopan, Washington University, St Louis) and treated with lovastatin, DAPT or M?CDX for 48, 24 hours or 10 minutes, respectively. The cellular lysate was electrophoresed in 10-20% Tris-glycine gels and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The immunoblotting was performed with a mouse 9E10 anti-myc antibody (Chemicon). For the Western blot analysis of the APP C-terminal fragments (CTFs) we isolated cellular membranes, as described ( Steiner et al. 1998 ), from PS70 cells treated with statins or M?CDX. Membrane preparations were electrophoresed in 5-16% Tris-Tricine gels, transferred to 0.2 ?m nitrocellulose membranes, and detected by immunoblotting with a rabbit anti-APP C-terminal (Sigma) antibody. Incubation with primary antibodies was followed by detection with IR-fluorescent conjugated antibody (LI-COR Biosciences). The bands were quantitated using Odyssey software (LI-COR Biosciences), and the values normalized to APP full-length expression. Cell-surface APP biotinylation HEK cells were transfected with the BAP-APP-HA construct using Fugene 6 reagent (Roche) and the cells were treated with lovastatin, 5 or 10 mM M?CDX in serum-free medium for 60 min (48 hours for lovastatin) at 37°C. Cell surface was biotinylated in PBS with 0.3 ?M BirA and 10?M biotin-AMP for 40 min at 30 °C ( Chen et al. 2005 ). The remaining biotin was removed by washing 3 times with PBS. The cells were lysed in 70 ?l PBS containing 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS and protease inhibitors. Insoluble debris were removed by centrifugation (20000g for 30 min at 4°C). The lysate was analyzed for APP expression by Western Blotting. The membrane was probed with streptavidin(SA)-HRP for cell surface APP and normalized to HA-HRP (total APP). Cell-free AICD generation assay AICD was generated in vitro from membrane preparations of PS70 cells as described ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). Cells lysates were treated with vehicle, different concentrations of M?CDX or DAPT and incubated at 37 °C for 2 hours. As a negative control we incubated cells on ice. APP C-terminal fragments were detected as described above. CBF1 Luciferase Assay The CBF1-luciferase assay was performed as described previously ( Berezovska et al. 2000 ). Briefly, CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter plasmid (a generous gift from D. Hayward) and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for transfection efficiency. This assay detects activation of CBF1, a Notch1 downstream transcription factor, as a measure of Notch signaling. The treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX was begun 6 hours after transfection. Luciferase activity was measured 48 hours after treatment using a Victor3 Wallac plate reader (Perkin Elmer), and results were normalized to ?-galactosidase expression levels. Antibodies and immunocytochemistry procedures For the analysis of APP-PS1 interaction, PS70 cells were double immunostained with antibodies against PS1 loop (amino acids 275-367, Chemicon) and against the C-terminal fragment of APP (amino acids 643-695, Chemicon). Pairs of primary antibodies were labeled with Alexa 488 or cyanine 3 (Cy3)-conjugated secondary antibodies. For the detection of lipid rafts, living H4 cells were treated with M?CDX or a vehicle control, then immunostained with red-fluorescent Alexa 555 conjugate of cholera toxin subunit B (CT-B, Invitrogen) or fixed and immunostained with a Alexa 555-labeled flotillin antibody (BD Biosciences). For the detection of cell surface APP, cells were then immunostained without permeabilization with an APP antibody (Sigma-Aldrich). CT-B binds to the pentasaccharide chain of plasma membrane ganglioside GM1, which selectively partitions into and is one of the most widely used markers for lipid rafts ( Sandvig and van Deurs 2002 ). Confocal microscopy and Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy (FLIM) Confocal microscopy was performed using a Leica inverted fluorescent confocal microscope (Institut Ciencies Cardiovasculars de Catalunya, Leica TCD SP2-AOBS, Wetzlar, Germany). This microscope is equipped with a 405 diode pulsed laser, a PMC-100 detector (Leica, Germany) and a time-correlated single photon counting module (SPC730) to perform FRET/FLIM. The hardware/software package allows the measurement of fluorescence lifetimes on a pixel-by-pixel basis. Values were fitted to two exponential decay curves to represent a “non-FRETing” population with a longer lifetime ( t 2) and a “FRETing” population with a shorter lifetime ( t 1). FLIM has been described as a novel technique for the analysis of protein proximity ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ). The technique is based on the observation that fluorescence lifetimes of a donor fluorophore shorten in the presence of a FRET acceptor in close proximity (<10 nm). The decrease in lifetime is proportional to the distance between the fluorophores at R6. For APP-PS1 FRET/FLIM experiments cells were fixed and double-immunostained for APP and PS1 as described previously ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ). We also applied this technique to detect lipid rafts and partition of APP into rafts by double staining H4 cells with Alexa 555-CT-B conjugate or a flotillin antibody and an APP antibody (Sigma-Aldrich). As a positive control, cells were immunostained against flotillin and CT-B, labeled with Alexa 555 and Alexa 488 secondary antibodies respectively, or with equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B. All samples were compared to a negative control in which the donor fluorophore (Alexa 488) fluorescence lifetime was measured in the absence of the acceptor (no FRET ~2500 ps). As positive controls, we included two additional conditions. First, Alexa 488 lifetime was measured in the presence of a FRET acceptor (Cy3) in close proximity (Cy3-labeled antibody against Alexa488). Under these conditions we observed that Alexa 488 lifetime was shortened to ~1000 ps. Second, we performed photobleaching of the acceptor fluorophore and observed that the FRET signal was completely abolished ( Suppl. Fig. 2 ). Statistical analysis One-way ANOVA was performed to analyze differences in lifetime or A? levels followed by least significant difference post hoc analysis. Levene’s test was also performed to determine whether variances were equal.  Cell lines, plasmids and transfection protocol We used the following cell lines: naive Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, CHO cells stably overexpressing wild-type human PS1 and wild-type APP (PS70, a generous gift from Dr. Selkoe, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston), human neuroglioma cell line (H4) stably expressing the double Swedish APP mutation (a generous gift from Bruno Imbimbo, Chiesi Farmaceutici, Parma) or human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells stably expressing the double Swedish APP mutation. Biotin acceptor peptide (BAP)-APP construct was used for cell surface biotinylation. The construct contains a BAP on the N-terminus of APP695 and a hemagglutinin (HA) tag on the C-terminus. Cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37°C with 5% CO2 in a tissue culture incubator. For FRET (fluorescence resonance energy transfer)/FLIM (fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy) and confocal microscopy, we used PS70 cells, H4 cells stably expressing the double Swedish APP mutation or CHO cells transiently transfected with wild-type APP695, or wild-type PS1 (a generous gift from Carlos Saura, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Membrane cholesterol depletion Different doses of lovastatin (Calbiochem), or methyl-?-cyclodextrin (M?CDX, Sigma-Aldrich) were used for different time periods to induce membrane cholesterol depletion. Cell toxicity was analyzed for all drugs by measuring adenylate kinase levels using Toxi-light reagent (Cambrex). The ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT (1?M, Sigma) was used as a control. All conditions were supplemented with mevalonate (0.25 mM, Sigma-Aldrich) to support the isoprenoid pathway. Total cell cholesterol levels were measured using the Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kit (Invitrogen). We tested lovastatin at different concentrations and for different time periods. We found that treatment for 48 hours with either 20?M lovastatin with 0.25 mM mevalonate and delipidated fetal bovine serum (DLFBS) was able to induce mild but consistent (25-30%) cell membrane cholesterol reduction without signs of cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). We also examined the effects of methyl-?-cyclodextrin (M?CDX), which selectively extracts cholesterol from the plasma membrane in preference to other lipids. Consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min as treatment for 48 hours induced significant cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). Therefore, we used for all experiments 20?M lovastatin or 5mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min which induced a consistent cholesterol reduction.  A? ELISA and Western blot For human A?1-40 ELISA we used 6E10 (against A?1-17, Chemicon) as a capture antibody and a rabbit polyclonal A?1-40 (Chemicon) as a detection antibody. After incubation for 3 hours, wells were washed and a horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated Donkey anti-rabbit (Jackson Laboratories) was added. Wells were washed with PBS, Quantablue reagent (Pierce) was added and samples were read at 320 nm using a Victor3 Wallac plate reader (Perkin Elmer, Massachusetts). To measure human A?1-42 and A?1-x we used sensitive ELISA kits (Wako, Japan and IBL, Germany, respectively). For the Western Blot analysis of Notch cleavage, CHO cells were transfected with the truncated Notch1 construct Notch?ECmyc (a generous gift from R. Kopan, Washington University, St Louis) and treated with lovastatin, DAPT or M?CDX for 48, 24 hours or 10 minutes, respectively. The cellular lysate was electrophoresed in 10-20% Tris-glycine gels and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The immunoblotting was performed with a mouse 9E10 anti-myc antibody (Chemicon). For the Western blot analysis of the APP C-terminal fragments (CTFs) we isolated cellular membranes, as described ( Steiner et al. 1998 ), from PS70 cells treated with statins or M?CDX. Membrane preparations were electrophoresed in 5-16% Tris-Tricine gels, transferred to 0.2 ?m nitrocellulose membranes, and detected by immunoblotting with a rabbit anti-APP C-terminal (Sigma) antibody. Incubation with primary antibodies was followed by detection with IR-fluorescent conjugated antibody (LI-COR Biosciences). The bands were quantitated using Odyssey software (LI-COR Biosciences), and the values normalized to APP full-length expression.  Cell-surface APP biotinylation HEK cells were transfected with the BAP-APP-HA construct using Fugene 6 reagent (Roche) and the cells were treated with lovastatin, 5 or 10 mM M?CDX in serum-free medium for 60 min (48 hours for lovastatin) at 37°C. Cell surface was biotinylated in PBS with 0.3 ?M BirA and 10?M biotin-AMP for 40 min at 30 °C ( Chen et al. 2005 ). The remaining biotin was removed by washing 3 times with PBS. The cells were lysed in 70 ?l PBS containing 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS and protease inhibitors. Insoluble debris were removed by centrifugation (20000g for 30 min at 4°C). The lysate was analyzed for APP expression by Western Blotting. The membrane was probed with streptavidin(SA)-HRP for cell surface APP and normalized to HA-HRP (total APP).  Cell-free AICD generation assay AICD was generated in vitro from membrane preparations of PS70 cells as described ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). Cells lysates were treated with vehicle, different concentrations of M?CDX or DAPT and incubated at 37 °C for 2 hours. As a negative control we incubated cells on ice. APP C-terminal fragments were detected as described above.  CBF1 Luciferase Assay The CBF1-luciferase assay was performed as described previously ( Berezovska et al. 2000 ). Briefly, CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter plasmid (a generous gift from D. Hayward) and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for transfection efficiency. This assay detects activation of CBF1, a Notch1 downstream transcription factor, as a measure of Notch signaling. The treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX was begun 6 hours after transfection. Luciferase activity was measured 48 hours after treatment using a Victor3 Wallac plate reader (Perkin Elmer), and results were normalized to ?-galactosidase expression levels.  Antibodies and immunocytochemistry procedures For the analysis of APP-PS1 interaction, PS70 cells were double immunostained with antibodies against PS1 loop (amino acids 275-367, Chemicon) and against the C-terminal fragment of APP (amino acids 643-695, Chemicon). Pairs of primary antibodies were labeled with Alexa 488 or cyanine 3 (Cy3)-conjugated secondary antibodies. For the detection of lipid rafts, living H4 cells were treated with M?CDX or a vehicle control, then immunostained with red-fluorescent Alexa 555 conjugate of cholera toxin subunit B (CT-B, Invitrogen) or fixed and immunostained with a Alexa 555-labeled flotillin antibody (BD Biosciences). For the detection of cell surface APP, cells were then immunostained without permeabilization with an APP antibody (Sigma-Aldrich). CT-B binds to the pentasaccharide chain of plasma membrane ganglioside GM1, which selectively partitions into and is one of the most widely used markers for lipid rafts ( Sandvig and van Deurs 2002 ).  Confocal microscopy and Fluorescence Lifetime Imaging Microscopy (FLIM) Confocal microscopy was performed using a Leica inverted fluorescent confocal microscope (Institut Ciencies Cardiovasculars de Catalunya, Leica TCD SP2-AOBS, Wetzlar, Germany). This microscope is equipped with a 405 diode pulsed laser, a PMC-100 detector (Leica, Germany) and a time-correlated single photon counting module (SPC730) to perform FRET/FLIM. The hardware/software package allows the measurement of fluorescence lifetimes on a pixel-by-pixel basis. Values were fitted to two exponential decay curves to represent a “non-FRETing” population with a longer lifetime ( t 2) and a “FRETing” population with a shorter lifetime ( t 1). FLIM has been described as a novel technique for the analysis of protein proximity ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ). The technique is based on the observation that fluorescence lifetimes of a donor fluorophore shorten in the presence of a FRET acceptor in close proximity (<10 nm). The decrease in lifetime is proportional to the distance between the fluorophores at R6. For APP-PS1 FRET/FLIM experiments cells were fixed and double-immunostained for APP and PS1 as described previously ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ). We also applied this technique to detect lipid rafts and partition of APP into rafts by double staining H4 cells with Alexa 555-CT-B conjugate or a flotillin antibody and an APP antibody (Sigma-Aldrich). As a positive control, cells were immunostained against flotillin and CT-B, labeled with Alexa 555 and Alexa 488 secondary antibodies respectively, or with equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B. All samples were compared to a negative control in which the donor fluorophore (Alexa 488) fluorescence lifetime was measured in the absence of the acceptor (no FRET ~2500 ps). As positive controls, we included two additional conditions. First, Alexa 488 lifetime was measured in the presence of a FRET acceptor (Cy3) in close proximity (Cy3-labeled antibody against Alexa488). Under these conditions we observed that Alexa 488 lifetime was shortened to ~1000 ps. Second, we performed photobleaching of the acceptor fluorophore and observed that the FRET signal was completely abolished ( Suppl. Fig. 2 ).  Statistical analysis One-way ANOVA was performed to analyze differences in lifetime or A? levels followed by least significant difference post hoc analysis. Levene’s test was also performed to determine whether variances were equal.  RESULTS Mild membrane cholesterol depletion reduces A?<sub>40</sub> and A?<sub>42</sub>, and APP CTFs We developed a paradigm to induce mild cholesterol depletion by treating cells with lovastatin in the presence of low doses of mevalonate and DLFBS. Supplementation of statin-treated cells with 0.25 mM mevalonate is required to rescue the normal isoprenoid levels while blocking cholesterol biosynthesis ( Brown and Goldstein 1980 ; Goldstein and Brown 1990 ; Keller and Simons 1998 ; Simons et al. 1998 ; Fassbender et al. 2001 ; Kojro et al. 2001 ; Meske et al. 2003 ; Cole et al. 2005 ). We found that treatment of CHO or HEK cells with 20 ?M lovastatin in the presence of 3% DLFBS for 48 hours induced a consistent total cholesterol depletion (~30%) without signs of cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). Treatment with statins did not induce cholesterol reduction in the presence of non-delipidated FBS. We also measured the total cholesterol levels after treatment with M?CDX, which selectively extracts cholesterol from the plasma membrane in preference to other lipids. Consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5 mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min. Treatment with M?CDX for longer periods of time affected cell viability ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). We next investigated the effects of cholesterol depletion on APP processing. We treated APP/PS1 overexpressing CHO (PS70) or SweAPP overexpressing HEK cells for 48 hours in the presence or absence of lovastatin and DLFBS and levels of A?40 and A?42 were measured in the conditioned media by sandwich ELISA. After 48 hours of treatment both A?40 and A?42 levels in the conditioned media were significantly reduced compared to that in the vehicle control treated cells (~50 %, p<0.05, Fig. 1A ). The reduction was observed in both PS70 and HEK cells confirming that the effect was not cell-type specific. To ensure that this effect was due to a decrease in cellular cholesterol levels and not by any other pleiotropic action of statins, we treated cells with lovastatin in the presence of 3 % FBS. The addition of cholesterol-containing serum was sufficient to reverse the reduction in A? levels ( Fig. 1A ) indicating that the observed effects on APP processing were specifically due to cholesterol depletion. As a positive control, we treated cells for 24 hours with 1?M DAPT, a commonly used ?-secretase inhibitor, and found that it reduced both A?40 and A?42 levels by ~95% consistent with a complete inhibition of ?-secretase (p<0.001). We next examined whether cholesterol reduction would lead to changes in the levels of full-length APP or APP CTFs, the direct substrates of ?-secretase. We isolated cell membranes from PS70 cells treated with lovastatin/DLFBS or M?CDX, and the lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis. We found that cholesterol depletion did not alter total APP levels, but reduced the levels of both ?- and ?-CTF by ~30% compared to a vehicle control ( Fig. 1B ). Addition of serum to cells was able to restore the CTF levels confirming that the effect was cholesterol-dependent. As expected, DAPT led to a strong accumulation of APP CTFs. These data indicate that cholesterol reduction lowers A?, affects APP processing and APP CTF generation. Cholesterol depletion affects APP trafficking and reduces cell surface APP The reduction in APP CTFs observed after cholesterol reduction could reflect a possible effect on APP trafficking or an inhibition of ?- and ?-cleavages. To distinguish between these two possibilities we performed experiments to analyze APP trafficking by using a BAP-APP construct in HEK cells. We found that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX in cells transfected with BAP-APP led to a reduced cell surface APP without changes in total APP levels ( Fig. 1C ). Combination of lovastatin and M?CDX showed an additive effect. Overall, our results suggest that cholesterol depletion reduces APP CTFs by altering APP trafficking and reducing substrate availability. Cholesterol depletion does not impair AICD generation in a cell-free assay This assay measures in vitro generated AICD with results from a preexisting ?-CTF ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). We incubated cell membrane preparations with different concentrations of M?CDX for 2 hours at 37 °C and analyzed the levels of AICD by Western blot. As a control, membranes were incubated at 4 °C or with DAPT and minimal amounts of AICD are detected consistent with ?-secretase inhibition ( Fig. 1D ). Treatment of cell membranes with different concentrations of M?CDX, which was able to reduce total cholesterol in a dose-dependent manner up to 70%, had no effect on AICD generation. Because this assay measures de novo AICD from preexisting CTFs ( Sastre et al. 2001 ), we did not observe any effects on the levels of CTFs. We also measured in parallel the levels of total A? in this assay and results were normalized to levels of APP CTFs. We found that cholesterol reductions up to 70% did not reduce total A? ( Fig. 1E ). Cholesterol depletion does not impair Notch signaling or the S3 Notch cleavage We next examined whether cholesterol depletion altered the processing of other ?-secretase substrates. The ?-secretase cleavage of the Notch receptor was monitored by using a luciferase assay that reflects Notch signaling as previously described ( Hsieh et al. 1996 ; Lleo et al. 2003 ). CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter construct or an empty vector and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for the transfection efficiency. Cells were treated for 48 hours with lovastatin, M?CDX or DAPT, and CBF1 luciferase activity was detected in the lysates. The results were normalized to ?-galactosidase expression levels. There was no difference in the CBF1 luciferase activity after cholesterol depletion compared to that in vehicle treated control cells ( Fig. 2A ). As expected, a marked reduction in CBF1 activity was observed after treatment with DAPT (p<0.05). To confirm these results, we analyzed the levels of NICD, the ?-cleaved product of Notch, by Western blot. CHO cells were transfected with a constitutively active form of Notch (N?EC) which undergoes cleavage and generation of the NICD domain. N?EC-transfected cells were treated with lovastatin, DAPT, M?CDX or a vehicle control. After 48 hours the cells were harvested and lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis ( Fig. 2B upper panel). After quantification, we did not observe any differences in the generation of NICD after cholesterol depletion ( Fig. 2B lower panel). As expected, treatment with DAPT led to a marked reduction in the generation of NICD with accumulation of the N?EC fragment, consistent with inhibition of ?-secretase. Taken together, these results indicate that cholesterol depletion does not impair - either Notch signaling or ?-secretase dependent Notch S3 cleavage. Cholesterol removal decreases APP partition into lipid rafts assessed by FLIM Since lipid rafts are one of the main sites where APP amyloidogenic processing takes place ( Lee et al. 1998 ), we next explored whether cholesterol removal had any impact on raft-associated APP. We developed a novel FRET-based assay (FLIM) to measure association of APP into lipid rafts by staining cells flotillin or CT-B-Alexa555. This FRET assay is based on the principle that when the two fluorophores are in close proximity (<10 nm), the measured lifetime of the donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-APP) is shortened in proportion to the distance between the fluorophores. For these experiments we tested CHO, HEK or H4 cells and found that only the latter ones had sufficient lipid raft staining to perform FRET experiments. We observed that only a small percentage of APP colocalized with rafts on the cell surface ( Fig. 3 ). However, this small amount was enough to shorten Alexa488 lifetime by ~25 % in the presence of the acceptor probe (flotillin or Alexa555-CTB) indicating the presence of FRET ( Table 1 ). As a positive control, we stained cells with CT-B and flotillin or equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B and observed wide colocalization as well as a further 25% reduction in fluorescence lifetime ( Table 1 ). Therefore, this assay reflected the association of APP into lipid rafts and could be applied to measure changes under cholesterol reducing conditions. We observed that treatment with M?CDX increased Alexa488 lifetime (15%) compared to vehicle-treated cells ( Fig. 3 , Table 1 ). We interpret these data as a reduced partition of APP into lipid rafts. FLIM assay shows that cholesterol depletion leads to a reduced APP-PS1 interaction We postulated that the observed effects on APP processing and trafficking under mild cholesterol-lowering conditions might have altered ?-secretase-APP interactions. To confirm this possibility we used a FRET-based (FLIM) assay to detect APP CTFs-PS1 interactions in intact cells ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We measured the proximity of the loop region of PS1, which is adjacent to the putative catalytic site of ?-secretase, to the C-terminus of APP ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We checked that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX did not alter APP or PS1 cellular distribution in PS70 cells as assessed by confocal microscopy. Interestingly, PS1 partially colocalized with lipid rafts at the cell surface but colocalization was not affected by cholesterol depletion ( Suppl. Fig. 3 ). PS70 cells were treated with 20 ?M lovastatin for 48 hours or 5 mM M?CDX for 10 min. The donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-PS1) had a lifetime of ~2500 ps in the absence of a FRET acceptor. When the acceptor (Cy3-labeled APP epitope) is in close proximity to the donor, the lifetime is shortened by 40 % (~1600 ps). By contrast, treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX diminished this effect and increased Alexa 488 lifetime by 11.5% and 38.5% respectively compared to the baseline conditions ( Table 2 , Fig. 4 ). We interpret these data as reflecting a reduced interaction between APP CTFs and PS1 in cells with depleted cholesterol.  RESULTS Mild membrane cholesterol depletion reduces A?<sub>40</sub> and A?<sub>42</sub>, and APP CTFs We developed a paradigm to induce mild cholesterol depletion by treating cells with lovastatin in the presence of low doses of mevalonate and DLFBS. Supplementation of statin-treated cells with 0.25 mM mevalonate is required to rescue the normal isoprenoid levels while blocking cholesterol biosynthesis ( Brown and Goldstein 1980 ; Goldstein and Brown 1990 ; Keller and Simons 1998 ; Simons et al. 1998 ; Fassbender et al. 2001 ; Kojro et al. 2001 ; Meske et al. 2003 ; Cole et al. 2005 ). We found that treatment of CHO or HEK cells with 20 ?M lovastatin in the presence of 3% DLFBS for 48 hours induced a consistent total cholesterol depletion (~30%) without signs of cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). Treatment with statins did not induce cholesterol reduction in the presence of non-delipidated FBS. We also measured the total cholesterol levels after treatment with M?CDX, which selectively extracts cholesterol from the plasma membrane in preference to other lipids. Consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5 mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min. Treatment with M?CDX for longer periods of time affected cell viability ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). We next investigated the effects of cholesterol depletion on APP processing. We treated APP/PS1 overexpressing CHO (PS70) or SweAPP overexpressing HEK cells for 48 hours in the presence or absence of lovastatin and DLFBS and levels of A?40 and A?42 were measured in the conditioned media by sandwich ELISA. After 48 hours of treatment both A?40 and A?42 levels in the conditioned media were significantly reduced compared to that in the vehicle control treated cells (~50 %, p<0.05, Fig. 1A ). The reduction was observed in both PS70 and HEK cells confirming that the effect was not cell-type specific. To ensure that this effect was due to a decrease in cellular cholesterol levels and not by any other pleiotropic action of statins, we treated cells with lovastatin in the presence of 3 % FBS. The addition of cholesterol-containing serum was sufficient to reverse the reduction in A? levels ( Fig. 1A ) indicating that the observed effects on APP processing were specifically due to cholesterol depletion. As a positive control, we treated cells for 24 hours with 1?M DAPT, a commonly used ?-secretase inhibitor, and found that it reduced both A?40 and A?42 levels by ~95% consistent with a complete inhibition of ?-secretase (p<0.001). We next examined whether cholesterol reduction would lead to changes in the levels of full-length APP or APP CTFs, the direct substrates of ?-secretase. We isolated cell membranes from PS70 cells treated with lovastatin/DLFBS or M?CDX, and the lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis. We found that cholesterol depletion did not alter total APP levels, but reduced the levels of both ?- and ?-CTF by ~30% compared to a vehicle control ( Fig. 1B ). Addition of serum to cells was able to restore the CTF levels confirming that the effect was cholesterol-dependent. As expected, DAPT led to a strong accumulation of APP CTFs. These data indicate that cholesterol reduction lowers A?, affects APP processing and APP CTF generation. Cholesterol depletion affects APP trafficking and reduces cell surface APP The reduction in APP CTFs observed after cholesterol reduction could reflect a possible effect on APP trafficking or an inhibition of ?- and ?-cleavages. To distinguish between these two possibilities we performed experiments to analyze APP trafficking by using a BAP-APP construct in HEK cells. We found that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX in cells transfected with BAP-APP led to a reduced cell surface APP without changes in total APP levels ( Fig. 1C ). Combination of lovastatin and M?CDX showed an additive effect. Overall, our results suggest that cholesterol depletion reduces APP CTFs by altering APP trafficking and reducing substrate availability. Cholesterol depletion does not impair AICD generation in a cell-free assay This assay measures in vitro generated AICD with results from a preexisting ?-CTF ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). We incubated cell membrane preparations with different concentrations of M?CDX for 2 hours at 37 °C and analyzed the levels of AICD by Western blot. As a control, membranes were incubated at 4 °C or with DAPT and minimal amounts of AICD are detected consistent with ?-secretase inhibition ( Fig. 1D ). Treatment of cell membranes with different concentrations of M?CDX, which was able to reduce total cholesterol in a dose-dependent manner up to 70%, had no effect on AICD generation. Because this assay measures de novo AICD from preexisting CTFs ( Sastre et al. 2001 ), we did not observe any effects on the levels of CTFs. We also measured in parallel the levels of total A? in this assay and results were normalized to levels of APP CTFs. We found that cholesterol reductions up to 70% did not reduce total A? ( Fig. 1E ). Cholesterol depletion does not impair Notch signaling or the S3 Notch cleavage We next examined whether cholesterol depletion altered the processing of other ?-secretase substrates. The ?-secretase cleavage of the Notch receptor was monitored by using a luciferase assay that reflects Notch signaling as previously described ( Hsieh et al. 1996 ; Lleo et al. 2003 ). CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter construct or an empty vector and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for the transfection efficiency. Cells were treated for 48 hours with lovastatin, M?CDX or DAPT, and CBF1 luciferase activity was detected in the lysates. The results were normalized to ?-galactosidase expression levels. There was no difference in the CBF1 luciferase activity after cholesterol depletion compared to that in vehicle treated control cells ( Fig. 2A ). As expected, a marked reduction in CBF1 activity was observed after treatment with DAPT (p<0.05). To confirm these results, we analyzed the levels of NICD, the ?-cleaved product of Notch, by Western blot. CHO cells were transfected with a constitutively active form of Notch (N?EC) which undergoes cleavage and generation of the NICD domain. N?EC-transfected cells were treated with lovastatin, DAPT, M?CDX or a vehicle control. After 48 hours the cells were harvested and lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis ( Fig. 2B upper panel). After quantification, we did not observe any differences in the generation of NICD after cholesterol depletion ( Fig. 2B lower panel). As expected, treatment with DAPT led to a marked reduction in the generation of NICD with accumulation of the N?EC fragment, consistent with inhibition of ?-secretase. Taken together, these results indicate that cholesterol depletion does not impair - either Notch signaling or ?-secretase dependent Notch S3 cleavage. Cholesterol removal decreases APP partition into lipid rafts assessed by FLIM Since lipid rafts are one of the main sites where APP amyloidogenic processing takes place ( Lee et al. 1998 ), we next explored whether cholesterol removal had any impact on raft-associated APP. We developed a novel FRET-based assay (FLIM) to measure association of APP into lipid rafts by staining cells flotillin or CT-B-Alexa555. This FRET assay is based on the principle that when the two fluorophores are in close proximity (<10 nm), the measured lifetime of the donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-APP) is shortened in proportion to the distance between the fluorophores. For these experiments we tested CHO, HEK or H4 cells and found that only the latter ones had sufficient lipid raft staining to perform FRET experiments. We observed that only a small percentage of APP colocalized with rafts on the cell surface ( Fig. 3 ). However, this small amount was enough to shorten Alexa488 lifetime by ~25 % in the presence of the acceptor probe (flotillin or Alexa555-CTB) indicating the presence of FRET ( Table 1 ). As a positive control, we stained cells with CT-B and flotillin or equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B and observed wide colocalization as well as a further 25% reduction in fluorescence lifetime ( Table 1 ). Therefore, this assay reflected the association of APP into lipid rafts and could be applied to measure changes under cholesterol reducing conditions. We observed that treatment with M?CDX increased Alexa488 lifetime (15%) compared to vehicle-treated cells ( Fig. 3 , Table 1 ). We interpret these data as a reduced partition of APP into lipid rafts. FLIM assay shows that cholesterol depletion leads to a reduced APP-PS1 interaction We postulated that the observed effects on APP processing and trafficking under mild cholesterol-lowering conditions might have altered ?-secretase-APP interactions. To confirm this possibility we used a FRET-based (FLIM) assay to detect APP CTFs-PS1 interactions in intact cells ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We measured the proximity of the loop region of PS1, which is adjacent to the putative catalytic site of ?-secretase, to the C-terminus of APP ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We checked that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX did not alter APP or PS1 cellular distribution in PS70 cells as assessed by confocal microscopy. Interestingly, PS1 partially colocalized with lipid rafts at the cell surface but colocalization was not affected by cholesterol depletion ( Suppl. Fig. 3 ). PS70 cells were treated with 20 ?M lovastatin for 48 hours or 5 mM M?CDX for 10 min. The donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-PS1) had a lifetime of ~2500 ps in the absence of a FRET acceptor. When the acceptor (Cy3-labeled APP epitope) is in close proximity to the donor, the lifetime is shortened by 40 % (~1600 ps). By contrast, treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX diminished this effect and increased Alexa 488 lifetime by 11.5% and 38.5% respectively compared to the baseline conditions ( Table 2 , Fig. 4 ). We interpret these data as reflecting a reduced interaction between APP CTFs and PS1 in cells with depleted cholesterol.  Mild membrane cholesterol depletion reduces A?<sub>40</sub> and A?<sub>42</sub>, and APP CTFs We developed a paradigm to induce mild cholesterol depletion by treating cells with lovastatin in the presence of low doses of mevalonate and DLFBS. Supplementation of statin-treated cells with 0.25 mM mevalonate is required to rescue the normal isoprenoid levels while blocking cholesterol biosynthesis ( Brown and Goldstein 1980 ; Goldstein and Brown 1990 ; Keller and Simons 1998 ; Simons et al. 1998 ; Fassbender et al. 2001 ; Kojro et al. 2001 ; Meske et al. 2003 ; Cole et al. 2005 ). We found that treatment of CHO or HEK cells with 20 ?M lovastatin in the presence of 3% DLFBS for 48 hours induced a consistent total cholesterol depletion (~30%) without signs of cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). Treatment with statins did not induce cholesterol reduction in the presence of non-delipidated FBS. We also measured the total cholesterol levels after treatment with M?CDX, which selectively extracts cholesterol from the plasma membrane in preference to other lipids. Consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5 mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min. Treatment with M?CDX for longer periods of time affected cell viability ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). We next investigated the effects of cholesterol depletion on APP processing. We treated APP/PS1 overexpressing CHO (PS70) or SweAPP overexpressing HEK cells for 48 hours in the presence or absence of lovastatin and DLFBS and levels of A?40 and A?42 were measured in the conditioned media by sandwich ELISA. After 48 hours of treatment both A?40 and A?42 levels in the conditioned media were significantly reduced compared to that in the vehicle control treated cells (~50 %, p<0.05, Fig. 1A ). The reduction was observed in both PS70 and HEK cells confirming that the effect was not cell-type specific. To ensure that this effect was due to a decrease in cellular cholesterol levels and not by any other pleiotropic action of statins, we treated cells with lovastatin in the presence of 3 % FBS. The addition of cholesterol-containing serum was sufficient to reverse the reduction in A? levels ( Fig. 1A ) indicating that the observed effects on APP processing were specifically due to cholesterol depletion. As a positive control, we treated cells for 24 hours with 1?M DAPT, a commonly used ?-secretase inhibitor, and found that it reduced both A?40 and A?42 levels by ~95% consistent with a complete inhibition of ?-secretase (p<0.001). We next examined whether cholesterol reduction would lead to changes in the levels of full-length APP or APP CTFs, the direct substrates of ?-secretase. We isolated cell membranes from PS70 cells treated with lovastatin/DLFBS or M?CDX, and the lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis. We found that cholesterol depletion did not alter total APP levels, but reduced the levels of both ?- and ?-CTF by ~30% compared to a vehicle control ( Fig. 1B ). Addition of serum to cells was able to restore the CTF levels confirming that the effect was cholesterol-dependent. As expected, DAPT led to a strong accumulation of APP CTFs. These data indicate that cholesterol reduction lowers A?, affects APP processing and APP CTF generation.  Mild membrane cholesterol depletion reduces A?<sub>40</sub> and A?<sub>42</sub>, and APP CTFs We developed a paradigm to induce mild cholesterol depletion by treating cells with lovastatin in the presence of low doses of mevalonate and DLFBS. Supplementation of statin-treated cells with 0.25 mM mevalonate is required to rescue the normal isoprenoid levels while blocking cholesterol biosynthesis ( Brown and Goldstein 1980 ; Goldstein and Brown 1990 ; Keller and Simons 1998 ; Simons et al. 1998 ; Fassbender et al. 2001 ; Kojro et al. 2001 ; Meske et al. 2003 ; Cole et al. 2005 ). We found that treatment of CHO or HEK cells with 20 ?M lovastatin in the presence of 3% DLFBS for 48 hours induced a consistent total cholesterol depletion (~30%) without signs of cytotoxicity ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). Treatment with statins did not induce cholesterol reduction in the presence of non-delipidated FBS. We also measured the total cholesterol levels after treatment with M?CDX, which selectively extracts cholesterol from the plasma membrane in preference to other lipids. Consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5 mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min. Treatment with M?CDX for longer periods of time affected cell viability ( Suppl. Fig. 1 ). We next investigated the effects of cholesterol depletion on APP processing. We treated APP/PS1 overexpressing CHO (PS70) or SweAPP overexpressing HEK cells for 48 hours in the presence or absence of lovastatin and DLFBS and levels of A?40 and A?42 were measured in the conditioned media by sandwich ELISA. After 48 hours of treatment both A?40 and A?42 levels in the conditioned media were significantly reduced compared to that in the vehicle control treated cells (~50 %, p<0.05, Fig. 1A ). The reduction was observed in both PS70 and HEK cells confirming that the effect was not cell-type specific. To ensure that this effect was due to a decrease in cellular cholesterol levels and not by any other pleiotropic action of statins, we treated cells with lovastatin in the presence of 3 % FBS. The addition of cholesterol-containing serum was sufficient to reverse the reduction in A? levels ( Fig. 1A ) indicating that the observed effects on APP processing were specifically due to cholesterol depletion. As a positive control, we treated cells for 24 hours with 1?M DAPT, a commonly used ?-secretase inhibitor, and found that it reduced both A?40 and A?42 levels by ~95% consistent with a complete inhibition of ?-secretase (p<0.001). We next examined whether cholesterol reduction would lead to changes in the levels of full-length APP or APP CTFs, the direct substrates of ?-secretase. We isolated cell membranes from PS70 cells treated with lovastatin/DLFBS or M?CDX, and the lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis. We found that cholesterol depletion did not alter total APP levels, but reduced the levels of both ?- and ?-CTF by ~30% compared to a vehicle control ( Fig. 1B ). Addition of serum to cells was able to restore the CTF levels confirming that the effect was cholesterol-dependent. As expected, DAPT led to a strong accumulation of APP CTFs. These data indicate that cholesterol reduction lowers A?, affects APP processing and APP CTF generation.  Cholesterol depletion affects APP trafficking and reduces cell surface APP The reduction in APP CTFs observed after cholesterol reduction could reflect a possible effect on APP trafficking or an inhibition of ?- and ?-cleavages. To distinguish between these two possibilities we performed experiments to analyze APP trafficking by using a BAP-APP construct in HEK cells. We found that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX in cells transfected with BAP-APP led to a reduced cell surface APP without changes in total APP levels ( Fig. 1C ). Combination of lovastatin and M?CDX showed an additive effect. Overall, our results suggest that cholesterol depletion reduces APP CTFs by altering APP trafficking and reducing substrate availability.  Cholesterol depletion affects APP trafficking and reduces cell surface APP The reduction in APP CTFs observed after cholesterol reduction could reflect a possible effect on APP trafficking or an inhibition of ?- and ?-cleavages. To distinguish between these two possibilities we performed experiments to analyze APP trafficking by using a BAP-APP construct in HEK cells. We found that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX in cells transfected with BAP-APP led to a reduced cell surface APP without changes in total APP levels ( Fig. 1C ). Combination of lovastatin and M?CDX showed an additive effect. Overall, our results suggest that cholesterol depletion reduces APP CTFs by altering APP trafficking and reducing substrate availability.  Cholesterol depletion does not impair AICD generation in a cell-free assay This assay measures in vitro generated AICD with results from a preexisting ?-CTF ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). We incubated cell membrane preparations with different concentrations of M?CDX for 2 hours at 37 °C and analyzed the levels of AICD by Western blot. As a control, membranes were incubated at 4 °C or with DAPT and minimal amounts of AICD are detected consistent with ?-secretase inhibition ( Fig. 1D ). Treatment of cell membranes with different concentrations of M?CDX, which was able to reduce total cholesterol in a dose-dependent manner up to 70%, had no effect on AICD generation. Because this assay measures de novo AICD from preexisting CTFs ( Sastre et al. 2001 ), we did not observe any effects on the levels of CTFs. We also measured in parallel the levels of total A? in this assay and results were normalized to levels of APP CTFs. We found that cholesterol reductions up to 70% did not reduce total A? ( Fig. 1E ).  Cholesterol depletion does not impair AICD generation in a cell-free assay This assay measures in vitro generated AICD with results from a preexisting ?-CTF ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). We incubated cell membrane preparations with different concentrations of M?CDX for 2 hours at 37 °C and analyzed the levels of AICD by Western blot. As a control, membranes were incubated at 4 °C or with DAPT and minimal amounts of AICD are detected consistent with ?-secretase inhibition ( Fig. 1D ). Treatment of cell membranes with different concentrations of M?CDX, which was able to reduce total cholesterol in a dose-dependent manner up to 70%, had no effect on AICD generation. Because this assay measures de novo AICD from preexisting CTFs ( Sastre et al. 2001 ), we did not observe any effects on the levels of CTFs. We also measured in parallel the levels of total A? in this assay and results were normalized to levels of APP CTFs. We found that cholesterol reductions up to 70% did not reduce total A? ( Fig. 1E ).  Cholesterol depletion does not impair Notch signaling or the S3 Notch cleavage We next examined whether cholesterol depletion altered the processing of other ?-secretase substrates. The ?-secretase cleavage of the Notch receptor was monitored by using a luciferase assay that reflects Notch signaling as previously described ( Hsieh et al. 1996 ; Lleo et al. 2003 ). CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter construct or an empty vector and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for the transfection efficiency. Cells were treated for 48 hours with lovastatin, M?CDX or DAPT, and CBF1 luciferase activity was detected in the lysates. The results were normalized to ?-galactosidase expression levels. There was no difference in the CBF1 luciferase activity after cholesterol depletion compared to that in vehicle treated control cells ( Fig. 2A ). As expected, a marked reduction in CBF1 activity was observed after treatment with DAPT (p<0.05). To confirm these results, we analyzed the levels of NICD, the ?-cleaved product of Notch, by Western blot. CHO cells were transfected with a constitutively active form of Notch (N?EC) which undergoes cleavage and generation of the NICD domain. N?EC-transfected cells were treated with lovastatin, DAPT, M?CDX or a vehicle control. After 48 hours the cells were harvested and lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis ( Fig. 2B upper panel). After quantification, we did not observe any differences in the generation of NICD after cholesterol depletion ( Fig. 2B lower panel). As expected, treatment with DAPT led to a marked reduction in the generation of NICD with accumulation of the N?EC fragment, consistent with inhibition of ?-secretase. Taken together, these results indicate that cholesterol depletion does not impair - either Notch signaling or ?-secretase dependent Notch S3 cleavage.  Cholesterol depletion does not impair Notch signaling or the S3 Notch cleavage We next examined whether cholesterol depletion altered the processing of other ?-secretase substrates. The ?-secretase cleavage of the Notch receptor was monitored by using a luciferase assay that reflects Notch signaling as previously described ( Hsieh et al. 1996 ; Lleo et al. 2003 ). CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter construct or an empty vector and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for the transfection efficiency. Cells were treated for 48 hours with lovastatin, M?CDX or DAPT, and CBF1 luciferase activity was detected in the lysates. The results were normalized to ?-galactosidase expression levels. There was no difference in the CBF1 luciferase activity after cholesterol depletion compared to that in vehicle treated control cells ( Fig. 2A ). As expected, a marked reduction in CBF1 activity was observed after treatment with DAPT (p<0.05). To confirm these results, we analyzed the levels of NICD, the ?-cleaved product of Notch, by Western blot. CHO cells were transfected with a constitutively active form of Notch (N?EC) which undergoes cleavage and generation of the NICD domain. N?EC-transfected cells were treated with lovastatin, DAPT, M?CDX or a vehicle control. After 48 hours the cells were harvested and lysates were subjected to Western blot analysis ( Fig. 2B upper panel). After quantification, we did not observe any differences in the generation of NICD after cholesterol depletion ( Fig. 2B lower panel). As expected, treatment with DAPT led to a marked reduction in the generation of NICD with accumulation of the N?EC fragment, consistent with inhibition of ?-secretase. Taken together, these results indicate that cholesterol depletion does not impair - either Notch signaling or ?-secretase dependent Notch S3 cleavage.  Cholesterol removal decreases APP partition into lipid rafts assessed by FLIM Since lipid rafts are one of the main sites where APP amyloidogenic processing takes place ( Lee et al. 1998 ), we next explored whether cholesterol removal had any impact on raft-associated APP. We developed a novel FRET-based assay (FLIM) to measure association of APP into lipid rafts by staining cells flotillin or CT-B-Alexa555. This FRET assay is based on the principle that when the two fluorophores are in close proximity (<10 nm), the measured lifetime of the donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-APP) is shortened in proportion to the distance between the fluorophores. For these experiments we tested CHO, HEK or H4 cells and found that only the latter ones had sufficient lipid raft staining to perform FRET experiments. We observed that only a small percentage of APP colocalized with rafts on the cell surface ( Fig. 3 ). However, this small amount was enough to shorten Alexa488 lifetime by ~25 % in the presence of the acceptor probe (flotillin or Alexa555-CTB) indicating the presence of FRET ( Table 1 ). As a positive control, we stained cells with CT-B and flotillin or equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B and observed wide colocalization as well as a further 25% reduction in fluorescence lifetime ( Table 1 ). Therefore, this assay reflected the association of APP into lipid rafts and could be applied to measure changes under cholesterol reducing conditions. We observed that treatment with M?CDX increased Alexa488 lifetime (15%) compared to vehicle-treated cells ( Fig. 3 , Table 1 ). We interpret these data as a reduced partition of APP into lipid rafts.  Cholesterol removal decreases APP partition into lipid rafts assessed by FLIM Since lipid rafts are one of the main sites where APP amyloidogenic processing takes place ( Lee et al. 1998 ), we next explored whether cholesterol removal had any impact on raft-associated APP. We developed a novel FRET-based assay (FLIM) to measure association of APP into lipid rafts by staining cells flotillin or CT-B-Alexa555. This FRET assay is based on the principle that when the two fluorophores are in close proximity (<10 nm), the measured lifetime of the donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-APP) is shortened in proportion to the distance between the fluorophores. For these experiments we tested CHO, HEK or H4 cells and found that only the latter ones had sufficient lipid raft staining to perform FRET experiments. We observed that only a small percentage of APP colocalized with rafts on the cell surface ( Fig. 3 ). However, this small amount was enough to shorten Alexa488 lifetime by ~25 % in the presence of the acceptor probe (flotillin or Alexa555-CTB) indicating the presence of FRET ( Table 1 ). As a positive control, we stained cells with CT-B and flotillin or equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B and observed wide colocalization as well as a further 25% reduction in fluorescence lifetime ( Table 1 ). Therefore, this assay reflected the association of APP into lipid rafts and could be applied to measure changes under cholesterol reducing conditions. We observed that treatment with M?CDX increased Alexa488 lifetime (15%) compared to vehicle-treated cells ( Fig. 3 , Table 1 ). We interpret these data as a reduced partition of APP into lipid rafts.  FLIM assay shows that cholesterol depletion leads to a reduced APP-PS1 interaction We postulated that the observed effects on APP processing and trafficking under mild cholesterol-lowering conditions might have altered ?-secretase-APP interactions. To confirm this possibility we used a FRET-based (FLIM) assay to detect APP CTFs-PS1 interactions in intact cells ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We measured the proximity of the loop region of PS1, which is adjacent to the putative catalytic site of ?-secretase, to the C-terminus of APP ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We checked that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX did not alter APP or PS1 cellular distribution in PS70 cells as assessed by confocal microscopy. Interestingly, PS1 partially colocalized with lipid rafts at the cell surface but colocalization was not affected by cholesterol depletion ( Suppl. Fig. 3 ). PS70 cells were treated with 20 ?M lovastatin for 48 hours or 5 mM M?CDX for 10 min. The donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-PS1) had a lifetime of ~2500 ps in the absence of a FRET acceptor. When the acceptor (Cy3-labeled APP epitope) is in close proximity to the donor, the lifetime is shortened by 40 % (~1600 ps). By contrast, treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX diminished this effect and increased Alexa 488 lifetime by 11.5% and 38.5% respectively compared to the baseline conditions ( Table 2 , Fig. 4 ). We interpret these data as reflecting a reduced interaction between APP CTFs and PS1 in cells with depleted cholesterol.  FLIM assay shows that cholesterol depletion leads to a reduced APP-PS1 interaction We postulated that the observed effects on APP processing and trafficking under mild cholesterol-lowering conditions might have altered ?-secretase-APP interactions. To confirm this possibility we used a FRET-based (FLIM) assay to detect APP CTFs-PS1 interactions in intact cells ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We measured the proximity of the loop region of PS1, which is adjacent to the putative catalytic site of ?-secretase, to the C-terminus of APP ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ; Berezovska et al. 2005 ). We checked that treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX did not alter APP or PS1 cellular distribution in PS70 cells as assessed by confocal microscopy. Interestingly, PS1 partially colocalized with lipid rafts at the cell surface but colocalization was not affected by cholesterol depletion ( Suppl. Fig. 3 ). PS70 cells were treated with 20 ?M lovastatin for 48 hours or 5 mM M?CDX for 10 min. The donor fluorophore (Alexa 488-PS1) had a lifetime of ~2500 ps in the absence of a FRET acceptor. When the acceptor (Cy3-labeled APP epitope) is in close proximity to the donor, the lifetime is shortened by 40 % (~1600 ps). By contrast, treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX diminished this effect and increased Alexa 488 lifetime by 11.5% and 38.5% respectively compared to the baseline conditions ( Table 2 , Fig. 4 ). We interpret these data as reflecting a reduced interaction between APP CTFs and PS1 in cells with depleted cholesterol.  DISCUSSION The main focus of this study was to determine whether mild membrane cholesterol depletion affects APP processing and the mechanism by which this occurs. This is a relevant question because cholesterol-lowering agents are being investigated as a possible treatment for AD. While strong reduction of the cholesterol levels has been shown to reduce A? production ( Simons et al. 1998 ; Fassbender et al. 2001 ; Kojro et al. 2001 ; Refolo et al. 2001 ; Ehehalt et al. 2003 ; Xiong et al. 2008 ), the effect of mild cholesterol depletion on A? and the mechanism by which this occurs is controversial. Here we find that treatment of different cell lines with lovastatin reduced A?40 and A?42 in a cholesterol-dependent manner. The reduction of A? was observed in cells supplemented with mevalonate, and was reversed by addition of cholesterol-containing serum ( Cole et al. 2005 ; Cordle and Landreth 2005 ; Ostrowski et al. 2007 ). This indicates that the observed effects are directly related to cholesterol depletion and not to any other pleiotriopic effect of statins. Although statins have also been shown to lower A? by inhibiting protein isoprenylation ( Ostrowski et al. 2007 ), our data suggest that statins can also display the same effect by reducing membrane cholesterol. We next investigated whether ?-secretase is sensitive to membrane cholesterol reduction. Experiments to address this issue have yielded conflicting results so far. Some authors have shown that ?-secretase depends on rafts but is not cholesterol-dependent ( Wada et al. 2003 ), while others have found that indeed the enzyme can be modulated by cholesterol ( Wahrle et al. 2002 ; Xiong et al. 2008 ). Our data support the notion that the neither the ?-cleavage (that generates AICD) not the overall ?-secretase cleavage are sensitive to mild cholesterol depletion. Mild cholesterol reduction did not impair the generation of AICD or the cleavage of the truncated form of Notch, N?EC, which is the direct substrate of ?-secretase. We cannot exclude that mild cholesterol depletion had an effect of specific ?-secretase cleavages, since we did not measure all A? species. High cholesterol reductions are difficult to assess in cell culture models because cholesterol depletion may affect cell viability. However, in a cell-free assay of ?-secretase ( Sastre et al. 2001 ) moderate reductions (<70%) in cholesterol content were not able to reduce total A? production. A recent report ( Ostrowski et al. 2007 ) describes a direct and potent influence of cholesterol on ?-secretase activity. However, the authors used a purified mammalian ?-secretase system that allows drastic manipulations of the lipid environment that are not achievable in living cells and therefore their results are not directly comparable to ours. We also found that cholesterol depletion reduced both APP ?- and ?-CTF generation, indicating a possible effect on APP trafficking or an inhibition of ?- and ?-cleavages. To distinguish between these 2 possibilities we performed experiments to study APP trafficking by using a BAP-APP construct. Our results indicate that cholesterol depletion alters APP trafficking and reduces cell surface APP. Although M?CDX is known to interfere with endocytosis, the same effects were also observed in cells treated with lovastatin alone suggesting that the effects are due to cholesterol depletion. Furthermore, the fact that mild cholesterol depletion lowers A? in cell culture models but not in cell-free assays supports the notion that the effect takes place upstream of ?-secretase cleavage. Overall, our results suggest that the reduction in APP CTFs could be due to reduced substrate availability. Our work also indicates that neither the ?-secretase-dependent cleavage of Notch nor Notch signaling is affected by cholesterol depletion. This is supported by other studies that show that Notch CTFs are predominantly found in non-raft membrane domains while APP CTFs reside in lipid rafts ( Vetrivel et al. 2005 ). This has implications for cholesterol-lowering strategies in AD, since these compounds may target A? production without interfering with Notch function. Several lines of evidence suggest lipid rafts as the principal sites in cellular membranes where A? is generated ( Lee et al. 1998 ; Cordy et al. 2003 ; Ehehalt et al. 2003 ; Wada et al. 2003 ; Vetrivel et al. 2005 ; Hur et al. 2008 ). Lipid rafts are highly dynamic sphingolipid- and cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains with important roles in cellular signaling and trafficking ( Allen et al. 2007 ). Biochemically, rafts are characterized by their insolubility in non-ionic detergents such as Triton X-100 ( Brown and Rose 1992 ). By this method, some proteins relevant to A? production, such as APP, BACE and PS1, have been shown to be present in rafts prompting the hypothesis that amyloidogenic processing of APP take places in rafts ( Parkin et al. 1999 ; Ehehalt et al. 2002 ; Cordy et al. 2003 ). However, the use of detergents to solubilize cell membranes in these studies has the potential to introduce significant artifacts ( Munro 2003 ). To avoid this limitation, here we used FLIM, a FRET-based technique, to assess lipid rafts in intact cells. Compared to conventional FRET experiments, FLIM has the advantage that it does not depend on the fluorophore concentration, is not destructive, and is not sensitive to miss-excitation phenomenon. We used a FLIM assay to detect FRET between Alexa488-APP (donor) and Alexa555-CTB or Alexa555-flotillin (acceptor), which are known rafts markers ( Sandvig and van Deurs 2002 ). We found that cholesterol depletion did result in increased fluorescence lifetime, suggesting that APP is less associated to rafts under these conditions. These results combined with our biochemical data showing reduced trafficking of APP to the cell surface, and reduced APP CTFs-PS1 interaction assessed by FLIM under cholesterol-lowering conditions, would suggest that less APP CTF is available for ?-secretase, therefore decreasing both A?40 and A?42. In summary, we report that mild cholesterol depletion impairs APP processing but without affecting Notch cleavage or the APP ?- or ?-secretase cleavage. The effects of cholesterol reduction are observed upstream of ?-secretase by altering APP trafficking, reducing APP CTF generation and raft-associated APP.  DISCUSSION The main focus of this study was to determine whether mild membrane cholesterol depletion affects APP processing and the mechanism by which this occurs. This is a relevant question because cholesterol-lowering agents are being investigated as a possible treatment for AD. While strong reduction of the cholesterol levels has been shown to reduce A? production ( Simons et al. 1998 ; Fassbender et al. 2001 ; Kojro et al. 2001 ; Refolo et al. 2001 ; Ehehalt et al. 2003 ; Xiong et al. 2008 ), the effect of mild cholesterol depletion on A? and the mechanism by which this occurs is controversial. Here we find that treatment of different cell lines with lovastatin reduced A?40 and A?42 in a cholesterol-dependent manner. The reduction of A? was observed in cells supplemented with mevalonate, and was reversed by addition of cholesterol-containing serum ( Cole et al. 2005 ; Cordle and Landreth 2005 ; Ostrowski et al. 2007 ). This indicates that the observed effects are directly related to cholesterol depletion and not to any other pleiotriopic effect of statins. Although statins have also been shown to lower A? by inhibiting protein isoprenylation ( Ostrowski et al. 2007 ), our data suggest that statins can also display the same effect by reducing membrane cholesterol. We next investigated whether ?-secretase is sensitive to membrane cholesterol reduction. Experiments to address this issue have yielded conflicting results so far. Some authors have shown that ?-secretase depends on rafts but is not cholesterol-dependent ( Wada et al. 2003 ), while others have found that indeed the enzyme can be modulated by cholesterol ( Wahrle et al. 2002 ; Xiong et al. 2008 ). Our data support the notion that the neither the ?-cleavage (that generates AICD) not the overall ?-secretase cleavage are sensitive to mild cholesterol depletion. Mild cholesterol reduction did not impair the generation of AICD or the cleavage of the truncated form of Notch, N?EC, which is the direct substrate of ?-secretase. We cannot exclude that mild cholesterol depletion had an effect of specific ?-secretase cleavages, since we did not measure all A? species. High cholesterol reductions are difficult to assess in cell culture models because cholesterol depletion may affect cell viability. However, in a cell-free assay of ?-secretase ( Sastre et al. 2001 ) moderate reductions (<70%) in cholesterol content were not able to reduce total A? production. A recent report ( Ostrowski et al. 2007 ) describes a direct and potent influence of cholesterol on ?-secretase activity. However, the authors used a purified mammalian ?-secretase system that allows drastic manipulations of the lipid environment that are not achievable in living cells and therefore their results are not directly comparable to ours. We also found that cholesterol depletion reduced both APP ?- and ?-CTF generation, indicating a possible effect on APP trafficking or an inhibition of ?- and ?-cleavages. To distinguish between these 2 possibilities we performed experiments to study APP trafficking by using a BAP-APP construct. Our results indicate that cholesterol depletion alters APP trafficking and reduces cell surface APP. Although M?CDX is known to interfere with endocytosis, the same effects were also observed in cells treated with lovastatin alone suggesting that the effects are due to cholesterol depletion. Furthermore, the fact that mild cholesterol depletion lowers A? in cell culture models but not in cell-free assays supports the notion that the effect takes place upstream of ?-secretase cleavage. Overall, our results suggest that the reduction in APP CTFs could be due to reduced substrate availability. Our work also indicates that neither the ?-secretase-dependent cleavage of Notch nor Notch signaling is affected by cholesterol depletion. This is supported by other studies that show that Notch CTFs are predominantly found in non-raft membrane domains while APP CTFs reside in lipid rafts ( Vetrivel et al. 2005 ). This has implications for cholesterol-lowering strategies in AD, since these compounds may target A? production without interfering with Notch function. Several lines of evidence suggest lipid rafts as the principal sites in cellular membranes where A? is generated ( Lee et al. 1998 ; Cordy et al. 2003 ; Ehehalt et al. 2003 ; Wada et al. 2003 ; Vetrivel et al. 2005 ; Hur et al. 2008 ). Lipid rafts are highly dynamic sphingolipid- and cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains with important roles in cellular signaling and trafficking ( Allen et al. 2007 ). Biochemically, rafts are characterized by their insolubility in non-ionic detergents such as Triton X-100 ( Brown and Rose 1992 ). By this method, some proteins relevant to A? production, such as APP, BACE and PS1, have been shown to be present in rafts prompting the hypothesis that amyloidogenic processing of APP take places in rafts ( Parkin et al. 1999 ; Ehehalt et al. 2002 ; Cordy et al. 2003 ). However, the use of detergents to solubilize cell membranes in these studies has the potential to introduce significant artifacts ( Munro 2003 ). To avoid this limitation, here we used FLIM, a FRET-based technique, to assess lipid rafts in intact cells. Compared to conventional FRET experiments, FLIM has the advantage that it does not depend on the fluorophore concentration, is not destructive, and is not sensitive to miss-excitation phenomenon. We used a FLIM assay to detect FRET between Alexa488-APP (donor) and Alexa555-CTB or Alexa555-flotillin (acceptor), which are known rafts markers ( Sandvig and van Deurs 2002 ). We found that cholesterol depletion did result in increased fluorescence lifetime, suggesting that APP is less associated to rafts under these conditions. These results combined with our biochemical data showing reduced trafficking of APP to the cell surface, and reduced APP CTFs-PS1 interaction assessed by FLIM under cholesterol-lowering conditions, would suggest that less APP CTF is available for ?-secretase, therefore decreasing both A?40 and A?42. In summary, we report that mild cholesterol depletion impairs APP processing but without affecting Notch cleavage or the APP ?- or ?-secretase cleavage. The effects of cholesterol reduction are observed upstream of ?-secretase by altering APP trafficking, reducing APP CTF generation and raft-associated APP.  Supplementary Material Supp Fig 01 Fig.S1 Membrane cholesterol reduction. We treated cells with different concentrations of lovastatin or M?CDX for different time periods. We found that treatment for 48 hours with 20?M lovastatin, 0.25 mM mevalonate and delipidated fetal bovine serum (DLFBS) was able to induce mild but consistent (~30%) cell membrane cholesterol reduction without signs of cytotoxicity. In the case of M?CDX, consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5 or 10 mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min as treatment for 48 hours induced significant cytotoxicity. * One way ANOVA, p< 0.05. Supp Fig 02 Fig.S2 FRET-based assay (FLIM) detects APP-PS1 interactions in intact cells. PS70 cells were immunostained with PS1-loop and APP-C terminal antibodies labeled with Alexa488- and Cy3-donor and acceptor fluorophores, respectively. As described, these two domains remain in close proximity mainly near the cell surface, represented as red pixels in the pseudocolored image ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ). Photobleaching of the FRET acceptor in part of the cell (square) leads to an almost complete loss of the FRET signal, reflected as blue pixels in the pseudocolored lifetime image. Supp Fig 03 Fig.S3 Cholesterol depletion does not impair PS1 subcellular distribution. H4 cells were stained with a PS1 antibody and Alexa555-CT-B. As shown, endogenous PS1 partially colocalized with lipid rafts at the cell surface. Colocalization was not affected by mild cholesterol depletion.  Supplementary Material Supp Fig 01 Fig.S1 Membrane cholesterol reduction. We treated cells with different concentrations of lovastatin or M?CDX for different time periods. We found that treatment for 48 hours with 20?M lovastatin, 0.25 mM mevalonate and delipidated fetal bovine serum (DLFBS) was able to induce mild but consistent (~30%) cell membrane cholesterol reduction without signs of cytotoxicity. In the case of M?CDX, consistent cholesterol reductions were only obtained after treating cells with 5 or 10 mM M?CDX for 10 or 60 min as treatment for 48 hours induced significant cytotoxicity. * One way ANOVA, p< 0.05. Supp Fig 02 Fig.S2 FRET-based assay (FLIM) detects APP-PS1 interactions in intact cells. PS70 cells were immunostained with PS1-loop and APP-C terminal antibodies labeled with Alexa488- and Cy3-donor and acceptor fluorophores, respectively. As described, these two domains remain in close proximity mainly near the cell surface, represented as red pixels in the pseudocolored image ( Berezovska et al. 2003 ; Lleo et al. 2004 ). Photobleaching of the FRET acceptor in part of the cell (square) leads to an almost complete loss of the FRET signal, reflected as blue pixels in the pseudocolored lifetime image. Supp Fig 03 Fig.S3 Cholesterol depletion does not impair PS1 subcellular distribution. H4 cells were stained with a PS1 antibody and Alexa555-CT-B. As shown, endogenous PS1 partially colocalized with lipid rafts at the cell surface. Colocalization was not affected by mild cholesterol depletion.  Figures and Tables Fig.1 Cholesterol depletion reduces A?, APP CTFs and cell surface APP without affecting AICD generation. A) PS70 or HEK cells were treated with 20 ?M lovastatin in the presence or absence of DLFBS for 48 hours and A? levels were measured by sandwich ELISA. Treatment with lovastatin led to a reduction of A?40 and A?42 that is prevented by the presence of cholesterol-containing serum. B) PS70 cells were treated with lovastatin or M?CDX in the presence or absence of DLFBS for 48 hours and membrane preparations were obtained as described ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). Levels of full-length APP and APP CTFs were measured by Western blot. Cholesterol depletion reduced both ?- and ?-CTFs that can be recovered by addition of cholesterol-containing serum. Quantification from four independent experiments is shown below. C) HEK cells were transfected with BAP-APP construct and treated with vehicle, lovastatin, 5 or 10 mM M?CDX in FBS or DLFBS. Cell surface APP was biotinylated and the cell lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis for APP expression. Treatment with lovastatin or/and M?CDX reduced cell surface APP without altering total APP expression. D) Cell-free AICD generation assay. PS70 cells were treated with different concentrations of M?CDX and membrane preparations were incubated at 37 °C for 2 hours. Extent of cholesterol reduction is indicated below. APP CTFs and AICD were measured by Western blot. No changes in AICD generation were observed after cholesterol depletion. Incubation at 4 °C or with DAPT inhibited the production of AICD. Average data from three independent experiments are shown below. E) A?1-x levels were measured in the same cell-free assay and results were normalized to levels of APP CTFs. Only a slight decrease was observed at the highest M?CDX concentration. Incubation at 4°C and more markedly treatment with DAPT reduced A? generation. Data represent the average of two independent experiments. Fig. 2 Cholesterol depletion does not impair Notch signaling or S3 cleavage. A) CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter construct or and empty vector and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for transfection efficiency. Cells were treated with M?CDX, lovastatin, or DAPT and CBF1 luciferase activity was detected in the lysates as a measure of Notch signaling. We did not observed differences in CBF1 luciferase activity after cholesterol depletion compared to a vehicle control. B) CHO cells transfected with N?EC were treated with lovastatin, M?CDX, DAPT or a vehicle control. After 48 hours the cells were harvested and the lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis. After quantification, we did not observe any significant differences in the production of NICD after cholesterol depletion. As a control, cells were treated with DAPT that led to a marked reduction in the generation of NICD with accumulation of the N?EC fragment consistent with ?-secretase inhibition. Average data from three independent experiments are shown. Fig. 3 A novel FRET/FLIM assay to measure lipid raft-associated APP in intact cells. We developed a novel FRET-based assay to detect lipid rafts and APP in intact cells by immunostaining H4 neuroglioma cells with Alexa488-labelled APP and flotillin -Alexa555 antibodies. The Alexa488 (donor) fluorescence lifetime under these conditions was measured on a pixel-by-pixel basis in intact cells, and t m values are shown in a pseudocolored image. We observed that although only small percentage of APP colocalized with rafts, donor lifetime was significantly shortened after co-immunostaining with Alexa555-flotillin probe indicating the presence of FRET. Treatment with M?CDX increased fluorescence lifetime, which is reflected by a shift towards the blue color. As a positive control, cells were immunostained with equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B. As expected, we observed wide colocalization and donor lifetime was significantly shortened, which is reflected by the presence of bright red pixels near the cell surface. Fig. 4 Cholesterol depletion leads to a reduced APP-PS1 interaction. PS70 cells stably expressing PS1 and APP were treated with lovastatin or M?CDX to induce a membrane cholesterol reduction. After treatment, cells were fixed, and immunostained for PS1-loop and APP-C terminus with alexa488- and Cy3-labelled antibodies respectively. t 1 values are shown in a pseudocolored image. The red pixels represent closest proximity between PS1 and APP. Treatment with lovastatin and more markedly M?CDX increased Alexa488 lifetime, which is reflected by a shift towards the blue color. Table 1 Cholesterol depletion reduces association of APP into lipid rafts We treated H4 cells with M?CDX to induce a membrane cholesterol reduction. After treatment, cells were fixed and immunostained with an alexa488-labelled APP and alexa555-flotillin (FRET acceptor) antibodies. The donor fluorophore lifetime (alexa488) was measured under different treatment conditions, and values were compared to vehicle-treated cells. In the absence of acceptor (Alexa555) Alexa488 lifetime is ~2500 psec, but in its presence is shortened by ~25% to ~1800 psec. The increased Alexa488 lifetime in cells treated with M?CDX indicates a reduced FRET signal after cholesterol depletion. Cells stained with equimolar concentrations of CT-B labeled with Alexa488 and Alexa555 were used as a positive control. Results were confirmed in three independent experiments. A confirmatory approach using Alexa555-CTB as a FRET acceptor showed similar results (data not shown). Condition No a Donor lifetime b Probability c Vehicle 12 100 ± 4 - M?CDX 11 114 ± 3 p=0.03 Positive control 15 78 ± 4 p<0.01 a Number of cells analyzed b Expressed as a percentage of vehicle. Mean ± S.E. c Compared to vehicle control. Table 2 Cholesterol depletion leads to a change in APP-PS1 interaction as assessed by FLIM PS70 cells stably expressing wtPS1 and wtAPP were treated with lovastatin or M?CDX to deplete membrane cholesterol. After the treatment, cells were fixed, and immunostained for PS1 and APP with alexa488- and Cy3-labelled antibodies respectively. The donor Alexa488 fluorescence lifetime was measured under different conditions, and the values were compared to vehicle-treated cells. Increased Alexa488 lifetime after treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX indicates a reduced APP-PS1 interaction. Condition No a Donor lifetime b Probability c Vehicle 24 100 ± 14 - Lovastatin 23 111 ± 15 p=0.03 M?CDX 6 138 ± 14 p<0.01 a Number of cells analyzed b Expressed as a percentage of vehicle. Mean ± S.E. c Compared to vehicle control.  Figures and Tables Fig.1 Cholesterol depletion reduces A?, APP CTFs and cell surface APP without affecting AICD generation. A) PS70 or HEK cells were treated with 20 ?M lovastatin in the presence or absence of DLFBS for 48 hours and A? levels were measured by sandwich ELISA. Treatment with lovastatin led to a reduction of A?40 and A?42 that is prevented by the presence of cholesterol-containing serum. B) PS70 cells were treated with lovastatin or M?CDX in the presence or absence of DLFBS for 48 hours and membrane preparations were obtained as described ( Sastre et al. 2001 ). Levels of full-length APP and APP CTFs were measured by Western blot. Cholesterol depletion reduced both ?- and ?-CTFs that can be recovered by addition of cholesterol-containing serum. Quantification from four independent experiments is shown below. C) HEK cells were transfected with BAP-APP construct and treated with vehicle, lovastatin, 5 or 10 mM M?CDX in FBS or DLFBS. Cell surface APP was biotinylated and the cell lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis for APP expression. Treatment with lovastatin or/and M?CDX reduced cell surface APP without altering total APP expression. D) Cell-free AICD generation assay. PS70 cells were treated with different concentrations of M?CDX and membrane preparations were incubated at 37 °C for 2 hours. Extent of cholesterol reduction is indicated below. APP CTFs and AICD were measured by Western blot. No changes in AICD generation were observed after cholesterol depletion. Incubation at 4 °C or with DAPT inhibited the production of AICD. Average data from three independent experiments are shown below. E) A?1-x levels were measured in the same cell-free assay and results were normalized to levels of APP CTFs. Only a slight decrease was observed at the highest M?CDX concentration. Incubation at 4°C and more markedly treatment with DAPT reduced A? generation. Data represent the average of two independent experiments. Fig. 2 Cholesterol depletion does not impair Notch signaling or S3 cleavage. A) CHO cells were transfected with a CBF1 luciferase reporter construct or and empty vector and ?-galactosidase as an internal control for transfection efficiency. Cells were treated with M?CDX, lovastatin, or DAPT and CBF1 luciferase activity was detected in the lysates as a measure of Notch signaling. We did not observed differences in CBF1 luciferase activity after cholesterol depletion compared to a vehicle control. B) CHO cells transfected with N?EC were treated with lovastatin, M?CDX, DAPT or a vehicle control. After 48 hours the cells were harvested and the lysate was subjected to Western blot analysis. After quantification, we did not observe any significant differences in the production of NICD after cholesterol depletion. As a control, cells were treated with DAPT that led to a marked reduction in the generation of NICD with accumulation of the N?EC fragment consistent with ?-secretase inhibition. Average data from three independent experiments are shown. Fig. 3 A novel FRET/FLIM assay to measure lipid raft-associated APP in intact cells. We developed a novel FRET-based assay to detect lipid rafts and APP in intact cells by immunostaining H4 neuroglioma cells with Alexa488-labelled APP and flotillin -Alexa555 antibodies. The Alexa488 (donor) fluorescence lifetime under these conditions was measured on a pixel-by-pixel basis in intact cells, and t m values are shown in a pseudocolored image. We observed that although only small percentage of APP colocalized with rafts, donor lifetime was significantly shortened after co-immunostaining with Alexa555-flotillin probe indicating the presence of FRET. Treatment with M?CDX increased fluorescence lifetime, which is reflected by a shift towards the blue color. As a positive control, cells were immunostained with equimolar concentrations of Alexa488-CT-B and Alexa555-CT-B. As expected, we observed wide colocalization and donor lifetime was significantly shortened, which is reflected by the presence of bright red pixels near the cell surface. Fig. 4 Cholesterol depletion leads to a reduced APP-PS1 interaction. PS70 cells stably expressing PS1 and APP were treated with lovastatin or M?CDX to induce a membrane cholesterol reduction. After treatment, cells were fixed, and immunostained for PS1-loop and APP-C terminus with alexa488- and Cy3-labelled antibodies respectively. t 1 values are shown in a pseudocolored image. The red pixels represent closest proximity between PS1 and APP. Treatment with lovastatin and more markedly M?CDX increased Alexa488 lifetime, which is reflected by a shift towards the blue color. Table 1 Cholesterol depletion reduces association of APP into lipid rafts We treated H4 cells with M?CDX to induce a membrane cholesterol reduction. After treatment, cells were fixed and immunostained with an alexa488-labelled APP and alexa555-flotillin (FRET acceptor) antibodies. The donor fluorophore lifetime (alexa488) was measured under different treatment conditions, and values were compared to vehicle-treated cells. In the absence of acceptor (Alexa555) Alexa488 lifetime is ~2500 psec, but in its presence is shortened by ~25% to ~1800 psec. The increased Alexa488 lifetime in cells treated with M?CDX indicates a reduced FRET signal after cholesterol depletion. Cells stained with equimolar concentrations of CT-B labeled with Alexa488 and Alexa555 were used as a positive control. Results were confirmed in three independent experiments. A confirmatory approach using Alexa555-CTB as a FRET acceptor showed similar results (data not shown). Condition No a Donor lifetime b Probability c Vehicle 12 100 ± 4 - M?CDX 11 114 ± 3 p=0.03 Positive control 15 78 ± 4 p<0.01 a Number of cells analyzed b Expressed as a percentage of vehicle. Mean ± S.E. c Compared to vehicle control. Table 2 Cholesterol depletion leads to a change in APP-PS1 interaction as assessed by FLIM PS70 cells stably expressing wtPS1 and wtAPP were treated with lovastatin or M?CDX to deplete membrane cholesterol. After the treatment, cells were fixed, and immunostained for PS1 and APP with alexa488- and Cy3-labelled antibodies respectively. The donor Alexa488 fluorescence lifetime was measured under different conditions, and the values were compared to vehicle-treated cells. Increased Alexa488 lifetime after treatment with lovastatin or M?CDX indicates a reduced APP-PS1 interaction. Condition No a Donor lifetime b Probability c Vehicle 24 100 ± 14 - Lovastatin 23 111 ± 15 p=0.03 M?CDX 6 138 ± 14 p<0.01 a Number of cells analyzed b Expressed as a percentage of vehicle. Mean ± S.E. c Compared to vehicle control. 