Human Exposure to Selected Animal Neurocarcinogens: A Biomarker-Based Assessment and Implications for Brain Tumor Epidemiology This review is based on the proceedings from the Second Lebow Conference held in Chicago in 2007. The conference concentrated on developing a framework for innovative studies in the epidemiology of environmental exposures, focusing specifically on the potential relationship with brain tumors. Researchers with different perspectives, including toxicology, pharmacokinetics, and epidemiological exposure assessment, exchanged information and ideas on the use of biomarkers of exposure in molecular epidemiology studies and summarized the current knowledge on methods and approaches for biomarker-based exposure assessment. This report presents the state of science regarding biomarker-based exposure assessment of the 4 most common neurocarcinogens: acrylamide, 1,3-butadiene, N-nitroso compounds, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Importantly, these chemicals are also carcinogenic in other organs; therefore, this discussion is useful for environmental epidemiologists studying all cancer types.  Conclusions In brain tumor epidemiology, as in other rare cancers, case-control studies are largely the only choice of study design. Currently, epidemiology has not provided a definitive answer for whether occupational and/or environmental exposure to neurocarcinogens increases the risk of brain tumor development. Previous studies suffer from various deficiencies: in occupational cohort studies, brain tumors were not studied as a specific outcome due to their rarity; moreover, the RR estimates from some occupational studies must be interpreted with caution due to potential conflicts of interest ( Huff,.2007 ). However, the most common deficiency in occupational case-control studies is inadequate exposure assessment. Exposures to environmental carcinogens may be assessed by questionnaire, or by using existing records, such as job title or documents describing concentrations of certain chemicals in the air and/or water at a workplace and/or in certain geographical regions. However, because questionnaires are imprecise exposure assessment tools, the power to detect small increases in the risk of brain tumors associated with a chemical exposure is limited. For example, a food frequency questionnaire as a tool for assessment of dietary AA exposure is unlikely to include all sources of AA exposure; furthermore, even the foods included could have very different levels of AA depending on the manufacturer, source, and the method of preparation. Thus, development of biomarkers is important for further studies in human populations and for pharmacokinetic studies in animals from which human effects may be extrapolated. Biomarkers of exposure or effect have important advantages over exposure assessment conducted via a questionnaire. These are objective measures that are not liable to be influenced by inaccuracy of recall and, more importantly, to recall bias arising from differences in reporting of suspected harmful exposures by cases and controls. However, most biomarkers reflect recent exposures. Theoretically, the optimal biomarker measurements involve the levels in the tissues of the target organ of interest. Depending on the cell turnover rates, the levels of such biomarker may be more indicative of long-term exposure. Needless to say that measurements of biomarkers in brain tissues are not applicable to a large-scale epidemiological study, although small validating studies can be conducted using autopsy tissues. Also, the systemic levels of biomarkers measured in circulation or in urine may or may not correlate well with the levels of that same biomarker in the target organ, particularly, if the organ site of interest has different levels of key metabolic and/or DNA repair enzymes expressed. As shown in Table 1 , several animal neurocarcinogens can be assessed in humans by using biomarkers from easily accessible biological specimens, such as blood or urine. Urinary biomarkers usually have a very short half-life (hours to days). DNA and Hb adducts, on the other hand, represent an integrated index of exposure over the previous 3–5 months. If the source of the exposure is a lifestyle activity (e.g., driving, smoking, living in urban areas, hobbies) or diet, then it is likely that such exposure represents a steady-state level and would remain fairly constant over a number of years. However, before introducing any biomarker to epidemiological studies, this assumption needs to be tested by comparing questionnaire data with the levels of the DNA and/or Hb adducts. Epidemiological studies should include both the questionnaire and biomarker assessment. The major role of the biomarkers would be internal validation of the questionnaire-based data (correlation between reported data and biomarker measurements). Such validation should be performed using controls, because in patients diagnosed with cancer, the disease itself, treatment, and/or changes in life-style of may influence the levels of the biomarkers in biological fluids. This validation will result in calculation of attenuation coefficient and as such could be applied to the data analysis of the association between the exposure data and case-control status. With the accumulation of such data, one can begin to postulate the role of animal neurocarcinogens in induction of brain tumors in humans and delineate and prioritize those chemicals for which one needs to obtain a more in-depth evaluation in regard to neurocarcinogenicity and biological exposure information. Finally, it is of note that although the objective of the Second Lebow Conference was to further the field of brain tumor epidemiology, the discussed chemicals are carcinogenic in other organs, and this discussion can be applied to other cancer types. 