New tools for functional genomic analysis For the past decade, the development of genomic technology has revolutionized modern biological research and drug discovery. Functional genomic analyses enable biologists to perform analysis of genetic events on a global scale and they have been widely used in gene discovery, biomarker determination, disease classification, and drug target identification. In this article, we provide an overview of the current and emerging tools involved in genomic studies, including expression arrays, microRNA arrays, array CGH, ChIP-on-chip, methylation arrays, mutation analysis, genome wide-association studies, proteomic analysis, integrated functional genomic analysis and related bioinformatic and biostatistical analyses. Using human liver cancer as an example, we provide further information of how these genomic approaches can be applied in cancer research.  Conclusion In summary, in the next decade, with these tools for genomic analyses being widely used in biomedical research, one can foresee the emerging of large amounts of data tangling different biological questions. Functional genomic analyses will likely have multiple implications for drug discovery and development. For example, integrated functional genomic studies will likely identify driver mutations or genes which tumor cells depend on for growth and metastasis. These genes can be used as targets for drug development, and it will lead to drugs for specific genetic events which are likely to be more efficient and less toxic for cancer treatment. Genomic analyses will also identify genetic signatures, such as gene expression profiles or specific mutation status, which can be used to predict drug responsiveness. These biomarkers will clearly increase the power and efficiency of clinical trials by selecting the appropriate patient populations and may lead to successful clinical drug development. Altogether, the application of genomic analysis to drug development will facilitate drug discovery and the development process in a more efficient manner.  Figures Figure 1 Schematic illustration of new tools for functional genomic analysis Figure 2 Functional genomic approach in liver cancer studies using gene expression profiling. Liver tissues and liver cancer tissues were collected with patient consent. The purified nucleic acid samples would be labeled with fluorescent dyes and hybridized to the arrays. The fluorescent signal intensities would be further analyzed by biostatistic and bioinformatic methods [ 4 ]. The clinical implication for functional genomics includes expression finger printing to delineate the clonality relationship of the multinodular tumors [ 8 ], identify novel biomarkers for prognostication [ 9 ] and therapeutic development [ 10 ]. 