Phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor CYLD by the breast cancer oncogene IKK? promotes cell transformation Summary The non-canonical IKK family member IKK? is essential for regulating anti-viral signaling pathways and is a recently-discovered breast cancer oncoprotein. Although several IKK? targets have been described, direct IKK? substrates necessary for regulating cell transformation have not been identified. Here, we performed a screen for putative IKK? substrates using an unbiased proteomic and bioinformatic approach. Using a positional scanning peptide library assay we determined the optimal phosphorylation motif for IKK? and used bioinformatic approaches to predict IKK? substrates. Of these potential substrates, serine 418 of the tumor suppressor CYLD was identified as a likely site of IKK? phosphorylation. We confirmed that CYLD is directly phosphorylated by IKK?, and that IKK? phosphorylates serine 418 in vivo . Phosphorylation of CYLD at serine 418 decreases its deubiquitinase activity and is necessary for IKK?-driven transformation. Together, these observations define IKK? and CYLD as an oncogene-tumor suppressor network that participates in tumorigenesis.  Introduction Abundant evidence supports the view that chronic inflammation contributes to cancer initiation ( Basseres and Baldwin, 2006 ; Karin and Greten, 2005 ; Perkins, 2007 ). Subversion of many key regulatory steps involved in immune responses occurs in both hematopoietic and epithelial cancers. For example, a large number of inflammatory mediators act as oncogenes, (IKK?, IKK?), tumor suppressors (CYLD), or pro-survival genes (p65, BCL-3) in specific cell types ( Basseres and Baldwin, 2006 ; Karin and Greten, 2005 ; Perkins, 2007 ). One pathway that plays a key role in inflammation and cancer is the NF-?B pathway. Canonical, NF-?B-driven, inflammation is initiated following cellular recognition of pathogens or proinflammatory cytokines. These proinflammatory stimuli activate divergent signaling pathways, all of which ultimately converge to activate the I?B kinase (IKK) complex ( Hayden and Ghosh, 2004 ). The core IKK complex consists of the serine/threonine kinases IKK? and IKK?, as well as a regulatory subunit, NEMO. Upon activation by a diverse set of stimuli, this kinase complex phosphorylates the NF-?B inhibitory protein I?B?, which facilitates ubiquitination of I?B? and subsequent proteasomal degradation ( Hayden and Ghosh, 2004 ). Degradation of I?B? permits nuclear translocation of activated NF-?B and the transcriptional activation of pro-inflammatory target genes. However, in addition to this canonical mechanism of NF-?B activation, several alternative signaling pathways also converge to activate NF-?B ( Hacker and Karin, 2006 ; Hiscott, 2007 ; Kawai and Akira, 2007 ). Understanding these non-canonical regulatory mechanisms will provide insights into the interplay between inflammation and cancer. IKK? (I?B kinase epsilon) is one such non-canonical IKK family member that plays a critical role in the regulation of interferon signaling pathways. Both specialized membrane-bound Toll-like receptors and intracellular receptors which recognize viral nucleic acids such as dsRNA activate this serine/threonine kinase ( Hacker and Karin, 2006 ; Hiscott, 2007 ; Pichlmair and Reis e Sousa, 2007 ; Thompson and Locarnini, 2007 ). Activated IKK? (and the related kinase TBK1) then phosphorylates interferon response factors 3 and 7 (IRF3 and IRF7), allowing their nuclear translocation and the transcriptional upregulation of genes involved in the type I interferon response ( Fitzgerald et al., 2003 ; Hemmi et al., 2004 ; McWhirter et al., 2004 ; Sharma et al., 2003 ). IKK? also phosphorylates STAT1 following activation by IFN? ( Tenoever et al., 2007 ). The transcription factor NF-?B is also activated by IKK?, although the mechanism by which IKK? regulates the canonical NF-?B pathway is not well-understood ( Peters et al., 2000 ; Shimada et al., 1999 ). We and others have identified IKK? as a breast cancer oncogene amplified and overexpressed in over 30% of breast carcinomas and breast cancer cell lines ( Adli and Baldwin, 2006 ; Boehm et al., 2007 ; Eddy et al., 2005 ). Forced expression of IKK? substitutes for AKT and cooperates with MEK signaling to transform immortal human cells and overexpression of IKK? alone is sufficient to drive transformation of NIH-3T3 cells. In addition, suppression of IKK? expression in breast cancer cell lines that harbor increased copy number leads to cell death ( Boehm et al., 2007 ). While tumorigenicity induced by either IKK? or AKT requires NF-?B activation ( Boehm et al., 2007 ), the specific substrates of IKK? that are involved in cell transformation remain undefined. Familial cylindromatosis is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by the formation of benign skin tumors, primarily on the head and neck ( van Balkom and Hennekam, 1994 ). This disease results from inheritance of a gene encoding a truncation mutant of the tumor suppressor CYLD, followed by loss of heterozygosity ( Bignell et al., 2000 ). Decreased CYLD expression has also been identified in both hepatocellular and colon cancer cell lines and tumors ( Hellerbrand et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, deletion of the CYLD locus has recently been shown to be associated with NF-?B activation in multiple myeloma cell lines and patient tissues ( Annunziata et al., 2007 ; Keats et al., 2007 ). CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) that removes Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains and acts as a negative regulator of NF-?B signaling ( Brummelkamp et al., 2003 ; Kovalenko et al., 2003 ; Trompouki et al., 2003 ). CYLD deubiquitinates several NF-?B regulators, including TRAF2, TRAF6, and NEMO ( Brummelkamp et al., 2003 ; Kovalenko et al., 2003 ; Trompouki et al., 2003 ) as well as BCL3, a member of the NF-?B family of transcription factors ( Massoumi et al., 2006 ). Following ubiquitination, BCL-3 translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus where it heterodimerizes with the NF-?B subunits p50 or p52 and activates the transcription of cyclin D, a key regulator of the G1 restriction point ( Westerheide et al., 2001 ). Similar to what is observed in kindreds afflicted with familial cylindromatosis, CYLD-/- mice develop benign skin tumors following exposure to UV light or TPA ( Massoumi et al., 2006 ). Other studies have shown that CYLD-/-mice also develop multi-organ hyperinflammation and have increased susceptibility to inflammation-induced tumors ( Reiley et al., 2007 ; Zhang et al., 2006 ). Little is known, however, about how CYLD activity is regulated. Using a recently developed peptide library approach we determined the optimal motif for phosphorylation by IKK? and then incorporated this information into a bioinformatic search for likely IKK? protein substrates ( Hutti et al., 2004 ; Turk et al., 2006 ). Many of the predicted substrates are known components of inflammatory and/or oncogenic signaling pathways, including the tumor suppressor CYLD. We show here that CYLD is a substrate of IKK? and that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? contributes to cell transformation.  Experimental Procedures Antibodies, Plasmids, and Reagents Anti-Myc (9E10), anti-CYLD, anti-RIP2, and anti-GFP were obtained from Santa Cruz Technology. Anti-Myc (rabbit) and anti-GST were from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-Flag (M2) and anti-HA were from Covance. Anti-IKK? and anti-actin were from Sigma. Lentiviral shRNA constructs targeting murine CYLD and GFP were obtained from the RNAi Platform of the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT. IKK?-Tide, IKK?-Y5A, and IKK?-L8A were created and HPLC purified under contract by the Tufts University Core Facility. The I?B? (IKK substrate) peptide was from Upstate. Myc-CYLD and Myc-TRAF2 were created by PCR cloning into the BamHI site of the 3XMyc (pEBB) vector. GST-IKK? was created by PCR cloning into the BamHI and NotI sites of the pEBG vector. Myc-CYLD S418A, Myc-CYLD S547A, Myc-CYLD S772A, and GST-IKK? K38A were created using a modification of the QuickChange Site-directed mutagenesis protocol (Stratagene). pBabe-CYLD WT and mutants were created by subcloning into the BamHI site of the pBabe vector. Flag-IKK?, Myc NEMO, OMNI-RIP2, HA-ubiquitin, HA-Ub K63 only, and I?B? S32,36A were described previously ( Abbott et al., 2004 ; Boehm et al., 2007 ). Cell Culture, Transfection, Immunoprecipitations, and Western Blotting HEK-293T and MCF-7 cells were obtained from ATCC and grown in DMEM containing 10% FBS. NIH-3T3 cells were obtained from ATCC and grown in DMEM containing 10% bovine calf serum. Transfection was performed by polyethylenimine. For preparation of recombinant GST-IKK? and GST-IKK? K38A, and for preparation of all immunoprecipitates used in kinase assays and Western blots, cells were lysed in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 ?g/mL leupeptin, 1 ?g/mL pepstatin, and 10 nM Calyculin A. For preparation of Myc-CYLD for LC/MS/MS, immunoprecipitates were washed in the above lysis buffer containing 0.25% deoxycholic acid and 1M NaCl. <italic>In vitro</italic> kinase assays Kinase buffer contained 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 12 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 100 ?M ATP, and 10 ?Ci ?-32P-ATP/reaction. Reactions were incubated at 30°C for 1h. The positional scanning peptide library assay was performed as described previously ( Hutti et al., 2004 ; Turk et al., 2006 ). Identification of <italic>in vivo</italic> Phosphorylation Sites by Mass Spectrometry Coomassie stained gel bands containing CYLD were excised and subjected to in-gel digestion and reversed-phase microcapillary LC/MS/MS using a LTQ 2D linear ion trap (Thermo Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition and positive ion mode at a flow rate of 275nL/min using a 10 cm C18 microcapillary column. The column was equilibrated and peptides were loaded using 0.1% acetic acid/0.9% acetonitrile/99% water then eluted with a gradient from 5% buffer B (acetonitrile) to 38% B, followed by 95% B for washing. MS/MS spectra were searched against the reversed SwissProt protein database using Sequest (Proteomics Browser Software, Thermo Scientific) with differential modifications for Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation (+79.97) and Met oxidation (+15.99). Phosphorylation sites were identified if top ranking sequences matched to CYLD with the following Sequest scoring thresholds: 2+ ions, Xcorr ? 2.0, Sf ? 0.4, P ? 0; 3+ ions, Xcorr ? 2.75, Sf ? 0.5, P ? 0 against the forward database. Passing MS/MS spectra were manually inspected to be sure that b- and y- fragment ions aligned with the assigned protein database sequence. The exact sites of phosphorylation were aided using GraphMod software (PBS). For phosphorylation sites in regions exhibiting low amino acid coverage, targeted ion MS/MS (TIMM) was performed by setting the ion trap to perform MS/MS on expected m/z values for predicted peptides. Ser418 (FH pS LPFSLTK) was not observed from a data dependent acquisition, but was detected via database searching from a TIMM experiment targeting the doubly charged ion at m/z 628.81. NF-?B reporter assays MCF-7 cells MCF-7 cells were transfected with an NF-?B-luciferase reporter (Clontech) and Renilla luciferase (to standardize transfection efficiency). Assays were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Promega). NIH-3T3 cells NF-?B activity was measured using the Dual-Glo Luciferase assay (Promega). IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells stably expressing WT or mutant CYLD were transiently transfected with pTRH1-NF-?B-Luciferase reporter and pRL-SV40-Renilla. Additional ectopic WT and mutant CYLD was also introduced in these experiments using the expression constructs MYC-CYLD, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A. <italic>In vitro</italic> cell transformation assays Growth of NIH-3T3 cells in soft agar was determined by plating 5 × 104 cells in triplicate in 0.4% Noble agar and DMEM containing 10% bovine calf serum. Colonies greater than 100 ?m in diameter were counted microscopically 21 days after plating. Tumorigenicity assay 2 × 106 cells were subcutaneously injected into immunodeficient mice (Balb/c Nude, Charles River Laboratories) anesthetized with isofluorane. Two mice were used per group, and three injection sites were made per mouse. Tumors were measured at 21 days post-injection. IKK? phospho-substrate antibody Rabbits were immunized with a phosphopeptide library with fixed residues corresponding to the IKK? phosphorylation motif and antibodies were purified as has been described previously ( Doppler et al., 2005 ).  Antibodies, Plasmids, and Reagents Anti-Myc (9E10), anti-CYLD, anti-RIP2, and anti-GFP were obtained from Santa Cruz Technology. Anti-Myc (rabbit) and anti-GST were from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-Flag (M2) and anti-HA were from Covance. Anti-IKK? and anti-actin were from Sigma. Lentiviral shRNA constructs targeting murine CYLD and GFP were obtained from the RNAi Platform of the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT. IKK?-Tide, IKK?-Y5A, and IKK?-L8A were created and HPLC purified under contract by the Tufts University Core Facility. The I?B? (IKK substrate) peptide was from Upstate. Myc-CYLD and Myc-TRAF2 were created by PCR cloning into the BamHI site of the 3XMyc (pEBB) vector. GST-IKK? was created by PCR cloning into the BamHI and NotI sites of the pEBG vector. Myc-CYLD S418A, Myc-CYLD S547A, Myc-CYLD S772A, and GST-IKK? K38A were created using a modification of the QuickChange Site-directed mutagenesis protocol (Stratagene). pBabe-CYLD WT and mutants were created by subcloning into the BamHI site of the pBabe vector. Flag-IKK?, Myc NEMO, OMNI-RIP2, HA-ubiquitin, HA-Ub K63 only, and I?B? S32,36A were described previously ( Abbott et al., 2004 ; Boehm et al., 2007 ).  Cell Culture, Transfection, Immunoprecipitations, and Western Blotting HEK-293T and MCF-7 cells were obtained from ATCC and grown in DMEM containing 10% FBS. NIH-3T3 cells were obtained from ATCC and grown in DMEM containing 10% bovine calf serum. Transfection was performed by polyethylenimine. For preparation of recombinant GST-IKK? and GST-IKK? K38A, and for preparation of all immunoprecipitates used in kinase assays and Western blots, cells were lysed in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 ?g/mL leupeptin, 1 ?g/mL pepstatin, and 10 nM Calyculin A. For preparation of Myc-CYLD for LC/MS/MS, immunoprecipitates were washed in the above lysis buffer containing 0.25% deoxycholic acid and 1M NaCl.  <italic>In vitro</italic> kinase assays Kinase buffer contained 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 12 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ?-glycerophosphate, 100 ?M ATP, and 10 ?Ci ?-32P-ATP/reaction. Reactions were incubated at 30°C for 1h. The positional scanning peptide library assay was performed as described previously ( Hutti et al., 2004 ; Turk et al., 2006 ).  Identification of <italic>in vivo</italic> Phosphorylation Sites by Mass Spectrometry Coomassie stained gel bands containing CYLD were excised and subjected to in-gel digestion and reversed-phase microcapillary LC/MS/MS using a LTQ 2D linear ion trap (Thermo Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition and positive ion mode at a flow rate of 275nL/min using a 10 cm C18 microcapillary column. The column was equilibrated and peptides were loaded using 0.1% acetic acid/0.9% acetonitrile/99% water then eluted with a gradient from 5% buffer B (acetonitrile) to 38% B, followed by 95% B for washing. MS/MS spectra were searched against the reversed SwissProt protein database using Sequest (Proteomics Browser Software, Thermo Scientific) with differential modifications for Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation (+79.97) and Met oxidation (+15.99). Phosphorylation sites were identified if top ranking sequences matched to CYLD with the following Sequest scoring thresholds: 2+ ions, Xcorr ? 2.0, Sf ? 0.4, P ? 0; 3+ ions, Xcorr ? 2.75, Sf ? 0.5, P ? 0 against the forward database. Passing MS/MS spectra were manually inspected to be sure that b- and y- fragment ions aligned with the assigned protein database sequence. The exact sites of phosphorylation were aided using GraphMod software (PBS). For phosphorylation sites in regions exhibiting low amino acid coverage, targeted ion MS/MS (TIMM) was performed by setting the ion trap to perform MS/MS on expected m/z values for predicted peptides. Ser418 (FH pS LPFSLTK) was not observed from a data dependent acquisition, but was detected via database searching from a TIMM experiment targeting the doubly charged ion at m/z 628.81.  NF-?B reporter assays MCF-7 cells MCF-7 cells were transfected with an NF-?B-luciferase reporter (Clontech) and Renilla luciferase (to standardize transfection efficiency). Assays were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Promega). NIH-3T3 cells NF-?B activity was measured using the Dual-Glo Luciferase assay (Promega). IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells stably expressing WT or mutant CYLD were transiently transfected with pTRH1-NF-?B-Luciferase reporter and pRL-SV40-Renilla. Additional ectopic WT and mutant CYLD was also introduced in these experiments using the expression constructs MYC-CYLD, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A.  MCF-7 cells MCF-7 cells were transfected with an NF-?B-luciferase reporter (Clontech) and Renilla luciferase (to standardize transfection efficiency). Assays were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Promega).  NIH-3T3 cells NF-?B activity was measured using the Dual-Glo Luciferase assay (Promega). IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells stably expressing WT or mutant CYLD were transiently transfected with pTRH1-NF-?B-Luciferase reporter and pRL-SV40-Renilla. Additional ectopic WT and mutant CYLD was also introduced in these experiments using the expression constructs MYC-CYLD, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A.  <italic>In vitro</italic> cell transformation assays Growth of NIH-3T3 cells in soft agar was determined by plating 5 × 104 cells in triplicate in 0.4% Noble agar and DMEM containing 10% bovine calf serum. Colonies greater than 100 ?m in diameter were counted microscopically 21 days after plating.  Tumorigenicity assay 2 × 106 cells were subcutaneously injected into immunodeficient mice (Balb/c Nude, Charles River Laboratories) anesthetized with isofluorane. Two mice were used per group, and three injection sites were made per mouse. Tumors were measured at 21 days post-injection.  IKK? phospho-substrate antibody Rabbits were immunized with a phosphopeptide library with fixed residues corresponding to the IKK? phosphorylation motif and antibodies were purified as has been described previously ( Doppler et al., 2005 ).  Supplementary Material 01  Figures and Table Figure 1 Identification of the optimal IKK? phosphorylation motif (A) NIH-3T3 cells were stably transduced with Flag-IKK?, kinase-dead Flag-IKK? K38A, or GFP control via lentiviral infection. Immunoblot analysis shows similar IKK? expression. F-IKK? = Flag-IKK?. (B) Flag-IKK? or Flag-IKK? K38A-expressing NIH-3T3 cells generated in (A) were assayed for anchorage-independent growth. Colony formation was examined after 21 days. Expression of wild-type IKK?, but not IKK? K38A, induces anchorage-independent growth. Error bars depict standard deviation (SD) for 3 independent experiments. (C-D) Recombinant IKK? or K38A was used to phosphorylate 198 peptide libraries in individual kinase assays. The general sequence for these libraries is Y-A-X-X-X-Z-X-S/T-X-X-X-X-A-G-K-K-biotin (Z = fixed amino acid, X = equimolar mixture of amino acids excluding Ser, Thr, and Cys). WT IKK? (C) gave a strong, consistent motif. No motif could be identified using IKK? K38A (D). (E) Individual peptides were phosphorylated with recombinant IKK?. Phosphorylation is shown as a percentage of the rate of phosphorylation of IKK?-Tide, the optimal peptide substrate for IKK? as determined in (C). Alteration of critical amino acids to alanine decreased peptide phosphorylation. A peptide corresponding to the sequence surrounding Ser32 and Ser36 of I?B? was not efficiently phosphorylated by IKK?. Error bars depict SD. (F) Primary and secondary selections determined from IKK? phosphorylation motif Figure 2 CYLD co-immunoprecipitates with and is phosphorylated by IKK? (A) Myc-CYLD was cotransfected with GST-IKK? WT or K38A into HEK-293T cells. Myc-CYLD was immunoprecipitated and immune complexes were blotted with an IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. CYLD was recognized by the phospho-substrate antibody when cotransfected with WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A. (B) Myc-CYLD was transfected into HEK-293T cells alone or with GST-IKK?. CYLD was immunoprecipitated with an anti-Myc antibody. Immune complexes were divided into two samples and treated with calf-intestinal phosphatase (CIP) or water (as a control) for 45 min at 37 °C. The IKK? phospho-substrate antibody no longer recognized CIP-treated CYLD. (C) Recombinant GST-IKK? or IKK? K38A was purified from HEK-293T cells. Myc-CYLD was transfected separately into HEK-293T cells and immunoprecipitated. CYLD immune complexes were incubated in the presence of ?-32P-ATP with IKK? WT or K38A. Autoradiograph analysis showed phosphorylation of CYLD by WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A. (D-E) Myc-CYLD was cotransfected into HEK-293T cells with GST-IKK? WT or GST-IKK? K38A. (D) Lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with an anti-Myc antibody and immune complexes were blotted with an anti-GST antibody. (E) Lysates were subjected to precipitation with glutathione-conjugated Sepharose beads and precipitates were blotted with an anti-Myc antibody. CYLD interacts with both WT and kinase-dead IKK?. Figure 3 CYLD is phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418 (A) Myc-CYLD was cotransfected into HEK-293T cells with GST-IKK?. Myc-CYLD was immunoprecipitated and the immune complex was subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie staining ( Figure S2 ). The band corresponding to CYLD was excised from the gel, and digested with trypsin and chymotrypsin. Phosphorylation sites were mapped by microcapillary LC/MS/MS, resulting in 85% coverage of the CYLD amino acid sequence. A phosphopeptide consistent with phosphorylation at Ser418 was identified. (B) Ser418 of CYLD and surrounding residues are evolutionarily conserved. (C) Site-directed mutants were created in which CYLD residues corresponding to the IKK? phosphorylation motif were changed to an alanine. These mutants were cotransfected into HEK-293T cells with GST-IKK?. Lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with an anti-Myc antibody and immune complexes were blotted with an anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. CYLD S418A was no longer recognized by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. (D) Myc-CYLD WT or Myc-CYLD S418A was cotransfected into HEK-293T cells with GST-IKK?. Lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation with an IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Immune complexes were blotted with an anti-Myc antibody. WT CYLD was immunoprecipitated by the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody, but CYLD S418A was not. (E) Endogenous CYLD was immunoprecipitated from IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells generated in Figure 1A . Immune complexes were blotted with an IKK?-phospho-substrate antibody. CYLD isolated from cells expressing WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A, was recognized by the phospho-substrate antibody. Figure 4 Suppression of CYLD protein expression is sufficient to induce transformation (A) Two distinct shRNA constructs targeting murine CYLD (shCYLD1 and shCYLD2) were transduced into NIH-3T3 cells via lentiviral infection. Two shRNAs targeting GFP (shGFP1 and shGFP49) were used as controls. Both shCYLD1 and shCYLD2 induce substantial knockdown of endogenous CYLD. (B-C) Anchorage-independent growth of NIH-3T3 cells was assessed following suppression of endogenous CYLD with shCYLD1 or shCYLD2 for 21 days. (B) Colony number and (C) Colony formation (at 10× magnification) were examined. Error bars depict SD for 3 independent experiments. Figure 5 CYLD phosphorylation at serine 418 is important for IKK?-mediated transformation (A) IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells were stably transduced with WT-CYLD, CYLD S418A, CYLD S772A, or vector control. Immunoblot analysis shows similar CYLD and IKK? expression in IKK?-transformed cells. F-IKK? = Flag-IKK?. (B) Cells generated in (A) were assayed for anchorage-independent growth. Colony formation was examined after 21 days. Expression of CYLD S418A suppresses IKK?-induced anchorage-independent growth. (C) IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells expressing WT CYLD, CYLD S418A, CYLD S772A, or GFP control were subcutaneously introduced into immunodeficient mice. Relative tumor volume was assessed at 21 days post injection. Expression of CYLD S418A results in a statistically-significant decrease in tumor growth. Asterisks indicate statistical significance (p? 0.05). Figure 6 Phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 decreases CYLD activity (A) HEK-293T cells were transfected with HA-Ub K63, Myc-TRAF2, GFP-CYLD WT or S418A, and GST-IKK?. Cells were stimulated with 10 ng/mL TNF? for 10 minutes prior to lysis. TRAF2 was immunoprecipitated using an anti-Myc antibody, and immune complexes were blotted with an anti-HA antibody. IKK? expression decreased CYLD activity (as measured by TRAF2 ubiquitination) when expressed with WT CYLD. The activity of CYLD S418A was not affected by the presence of IKK?. (B) HEK-293T cells were transfected with HA-Ubiquitin, Myc-NEMO, OMNI-RIP2, GFP-CYLD WT or S418A, and GST-IKK?. NEMO was immunoprecipitated with an anti-Myc antibody and immune complexes were blotted with an anti-HA antibody. IKK? expression decreased CYLD activity (as measured by NEMO ubiquitination) when expressed with WT CYLD. The activity of CYLD S418A was not affected by the presence of IKK?. (C) MCF-7 cells were transfected with an NF-?B-luciferase reporter gene, CMV- Renilla luciferase (to standardize transfection efficiency), and TRAF2 alone or in combination with a subsaturating amount of Myc-CYLD WT, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A. An NF-?B–luciferase reporter assay was performed 24 h posttransfection. TRAF2 increased NF-?B reporter activation 14.9 fold. CYLD S418A inhibited the NF-?B response induced by TRAF2 more efficiently than WT CYLD or CYLD S772A. Error bars depict SD for four separate experiments. Asterisks indicate statistical significance (p<0.05). Equivalent expression of TRAF2 and CYLD is shown in Figure S4 . (D) IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells stably expressing WT or mutant CYLD were transiently transfected with pTRH1-NF-?B-Luciferase reporter construct and pRL-SV40-Renilla. Additional ectopic WT and mutant CYLD was also introduced as described in the Experimental Procedures. Luciferase activity was assessed 2 days post transfection. Error bars represent SD for 4 independent experiments. (E) Anchorage-independent growth of NIH-3T3 cells was assessed following suppression of endogenous CYLD with shCYLD1 and simultaneous expression of an NF-?B “superrepressor” (I?B? S32,36A) for 21 days. Error bars depict SD for 3 independent experiments. Table 1 Candidate IKK? substrates identified by Scansite A Scansite matrix based on IKK? specificity values in Table S1 was generated. Scansite was then used to search the SwissProt database for sites which correspond to the IKK? phosphorylation motif. Included sites scored in the top 0.05% of sites searched. Symbol Name Site Sequence CYLD_HUMAN Deubiquitinating enzyme CYLD 418 ENRFH S LPFSL NED4_HUMAN E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase Nedd-4 784 SEYYN S LRWIL MM21_HUMAN Matrix metalloproteinase-21 precursor (MMP-21) 517 SYAYN S IFFFK MYCN_HUMAN N-myc proto-oncogene protein 23 DLEFD S LQPCF ICE8_HUMAN Caspase-8 precursor 26 SLKFL S LDYIP GNRP_HUMAN Guanine nucleotide releasing protein (Ras-specific nucleotide exchange factor CDC25) 667 DLRFL S IDFLN TLR4_HUMAN Toll-like receptor 4 precursor 100 DGAYQ S LSHLS ZN20_HUMAN Zinc finger protein 20 (Zinc finger protein KOX13) 297 FISFS S IQYHK SGK3_HUMAN Serine/threonine-protein kinase Sgk3 421 HPFFE S LSWAD MTA3_HUMAN Metastasis associated protein MTA3 133 DTFFY S LVYDP DZP3_HUMAN Ubiquitin ligase protein DZIP3 179 CENFM S LVYFG RS24_HUMAN 40S ribosomal protein S24 78 GMIYD S LDYAK UP2L_HUMAN Ubiquitin associated protein 2-like 910 GYSYT S LPYYT PTNL_HUMAN Protein-tyrosine phosphatase D1 65 EVTYF S LWYYN RUS1_HUMAN RUN and SH3 domain containing protein 1 (Nesca) 624 DAGLL S LLYLP ZB24_HUMAN Zinc finger and BTB domain containing protein 24 (Zinc finger protein 450) 63 SSEYF S MMFAE I12B_HUMAN Interleukin-12 beta chain precursor (IL-12B) 270 PHSYF S LTFCV GABJ_HUMAN GRB2-associated binding protein 2 488 AHHFD S LGYPS UB4A_HUMAN Ubiquitin conjugation factor E4 A 627 PDGYS S LAYVP NAL7_HUMAN NACHT-, LRR- and PYD-containing protein 11 618 ASQMK S LVYWR BAR1_HUMAN BRCA1-associated RING domain protein 1 (BARD-1) 541 DESMK S LLLLP KG88_HUMAN Protein KIAA1688 384 PERFL S LEYSP PPE2_HUMAN Serine/threonine protein phosphatase with EF-hands-2 (PPEF-2) 50 WSIFQ S IEYAG PMS1_HUMAN PMS1 protein homolog 1 (DNA mismatch repair protein PMS1) 251 DHSFT S LSTPE GP39_HUMAN Putative G protein-coupled receptor GPR39 93 PMEFY S IIWNP CDK1_HUMAN Cyclin-dependent kinase 2-associated protein 1 (DOC-1) 46 DYGPP S LGYTQ  Results Determination of IKK? substrate specificity IKK? has recently been identified as a breast cancer oncogene. However, the mechanism by which IKK? contributes to cell transformation is not known. Since IKK? is a serine/threonine kinase, we sought to determine whether the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its oncogenic activity. Wild-type IKK? or kinase-dead IKK? K38A was introduced into NIH-3T3 cells ( Figure 1A ). We found that cells expressing WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A, exhibited robust anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 1B ). These results confirm that the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its activity as an oncogene. While several IKK? substrates involved in interferon signaling pathways have been identified, direct substrates required for the oncogenic functions of IKK? have not been reported. To address this question, we utilized proteomic and bioinformatic approaches to perform an unbiased screen for likely IKK? substrates. Specifically, we used a positional scanning peptide library assay recently developed in this laboratory to identify the optimal phosphorylation motif for IKK? ( Hutti et al., 2004 ; Turk et al., 2006 ). This assay employs 198 biotinylated peptide libraries. Each library has a 1:1 mixture of serine and threonine fixed at the central position, and has one additional position fixed to one of the 20 naturally-occurring amino acids. All other positions contain a degenerate mixture of amino acids (excluding serine, threonine, and cysteine). Phosphothreonine and Phosphotyrosine were included at the fixed positions in order to facilitate the identification of kinases which have a requirement for priming phosphorylation events. Using recombinant GST-IKK? purified from HEK-293T cells, we performed kinase assays simultaneously on all 198 peptide libraries in solution using ?-32P-ATP. Biotinylated peptides were captured with a streptavidin-coated membrane and the relative preference for each amino acid at each position was determined by the relative level of radiolabel incorporation into the corresponding peptides. We found that IKK? exhibits strong sequence selectivity at multiple positions surrounding the phosphorylation site. IKK? strongly prefers substrates with a hydrophobic residue at the +1 position relative to the phosphorylation site ( Figures 1C and 1F ). This kinase also exhibits strong sequence selectivity for aromatic residues at the -2 position, and for bulky hydrophobic residues at the +3 position ( Figures 1C and 1F ). Kinase-dead IKK? K38A does not exhibit selectivity at these positions, confirming that peptides were not being phosphorylated by a contaminating kinase ( Figure 1D ). To validate this motif, we generated a consensus peptide substrate, IKK?-Tide, and measured the phosphorylation of peptides bearing individual alanine substitutions. By comparing these results to those obtained using the consensus sequence we confirmed that substitution of amino acids at the +1 or -2 positions resulted in a decrease in the efficiency of peptide phosphorylation ( Figure 1E ). This motif has similarities to the sequence surrounding the autophosphorylation site in the activation loop of IKK? (DEKFVS172VYGTE) due to the aromatic residue at -2 and aliphatic at +1, although this site is predicted to be suboptimal due to the lack of an aromatic residue at +3 ( Peters et al., 2000 ). IKK? has been shown to phosphorylate one of the essential serines on I?B? in vitro , but in vivo phosphorylation of I?B? by this kinase has not been described ( Peters et al., 2000 ). Therefore, the role of IKK? in I?B? phosphorylation and degradation remains unclear. To examine this question, we performed kinase assays using a peptide substrate corresponding to the sequence surrounding Ser32 and Ser36 of I?B?. This peptide contains two potential phosphorylation sites, but neither site is within a sequence context that matches the optimal motif for IKK?. We found that this peptide was a poor in vitro substrate for IKK? when compared with the optimal peptide determined from the peptide library screen ( Figure 1E ). In contrast, when recombinant GST-IKK? was used to phosphorylate the same set of peptides, the I?B? peptide was phosphorylated by IKK? much more efficiently than IKK?-Tide ( Figure S1 ). These observations suggest that I?B? is unlikely to be an important physiological substrate of IKK?. We recently demonstrated that, like IKK?, IKK? prefers aromatic residues at the -2 position and hydrophobic residues at the +1 position ( Hutti et al., 2007 ). However, the phosphorylation motifs for these kinases differ at the -4, -5, and +3 positions. Taken together, these observations demonstrate that while the substrate specificities of IKK? and the related kinase IKK? have overlapping characteristics, the optimal substrate peptides for these kinases differ in substantial ways and therefore can be predicted to have different (though possibly overlapping) in vivo substrates. Prediction of IKK? substrates Spot intensities from the peptide library screen were then quantified ( Table S1 ) and converted into a matrix which could be used with the bioinformatic search engine Scansite. Scansite ( http://scansite.mit.edu ) allows proteome-wide searches for sites which best match the data provided by the input matrix ( Obenauer et al., 2003 ; Yaffe et al., 2001 ). Table 1 shows top-scoring candidate IKK? substrates obtained following the Scansite analysis, all of which scored in the top 0.05% of sites in the SwissProt database. Interestingly, a large number of predicted IKK? substrates are known to be involved in inflammatory and/or oncogenic signaling pathways. Of these potential substrates, the deubiquitinating enzyme CYLD was of particular interest, as it has been shown to have roles as both an inflammatory mediator and tumor suppressor, functions that could be downstream of IKK? ( Bignell et al., 2000 ). Our bioinformatic analysis predicted that CYLD is likely to be phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418. CYLD is phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418 To further facilitate the identification of novel IKK? substrates we raised antibodies against a collection of phosphopeptides biased towards the optimal IKK? phosphorylation motif We verified that these antibodies recognize known IKK? substrates in a kinase-dependent manner (data not shown). These antibodies were then used to determine whether CYLD is phosphorylated at a site matching the IKK? phosphorylation motif HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-epitope tagged CYLD (Myc-CYLD) and either GST-IKK? WT or kinase-dead IKK? K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and immunoblotted with the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure 2A shows that the phospho-substrate antibody blotted CYLD which had been transfected with WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A. CYLD treated with calf-intestinal phosphatase (CIP) following cotransfection with IKK? was no longer recognized by the phospho-substrate antibody, confirming that the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody specifically recognizes phosphorylated CYLD ( Figure 2B ). In order to determine whether IKK? can directly phosphorylate CYLD, an in vitro kinase assay was performed. Wild-type GST-IKK? or GST-IKK? K38A was purified from HEK-293T cells. Myc-CYLD was separately transfected into HEK-293T cells and immunoprecipitated. When the CYLD immunoprecipitate was incubated in an in vitro kinase assay with WT IKK?, strong phosphorylation of CYLD was observed ( Figure 2C ). This phosphorylation was not observed in the presence of IKK? K38A. To determine whether IKK? and CYLD physically interact, Myc-CYLD was cotransfected into HEK-293T cells expressing GST- IKK? WT or K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and these immune complexes were blotted with an anti-GST antibody to identify IKK?. In CYLD immune complexes we identified both WT and kinase-dead IKK? ( Figure 2D ). Moreover, when we performed the reciprocal experiment we found that Myc-CYLD was also observed in the IKK? precipitates ( Figure 2E ). While CYLD Ser418 was predicted by Scansite to be the optimal site for IKK? phosphorylation (ENRFHS418LPFSL), two additional serines within the CYLD sequence were potential, though less optimal, IKK? phosphorylation sites (DSRFAS547LQPVS and KKIFPS772LELNI). Therefore, we used mass spectrometry to determine which residue(s) of CYLD is phosphorylated in vivo . Myc-CYLD and GST-IKK? were cotransfected into HEK-293T cells. CYLD was immunoprecipitated, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and Coomassie stained ( Figure S2 ). The band corresponding to Myc-CYLD was excised, digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin, and subjected to microcapillary LC/MS/MS. A phosphopeptide consistent with phosphorylation at Ser418 was identified. This analysis confirmed that CYLD is phosphorylated at Ser418, the same site predicted by our bioinformatic analysis ( Figure 3A ). Ser418 is evolutionarily conserved in all sequenced mammals, as well as Gallus gallus and Xenopus tropicalis ( Figure 3B ). In addition, the -2F, +1L, and +3F relative to Ser418 (which correspond to the IKK? phosphorylation motif) are also conserved, providing further evidence for the evolutionary importance of this phosphorylation site. To further verify that Ser418 is the critical site phosphorylated by IKK?, we created Myc-epitope tagged mutants of CYLD at Ser418 (S418A), Ser547 (S547A), and Ser772 (S772A). We introduced wild-type CYLD or each of these mutants into HEK-293T cells alone or with GST-IKK? and isolated CYLD immune complexes. Mutation of either Ser547 or Ser772 did not affect recognition of CYLD by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3C ). However, Myc-CYLD S418A was no longer recognized by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody when cotransfected with IKK? ( Figure 3C ). In addition, when we introduced Myc-CYLD or Myc-CYLD S418A with IKK? into HEK-293T cells and performed an immunoprecipitation using the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody, we found that wild-type Myc-CYLD, but not Myc-CYLD S418A, was efficiently immunoprecipitated by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3D ). Finally, endogenous CYLD was immunoprecipitated from IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells utilized in Figure 1 . Immunoblotting with the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody revealed that CYLD is indeed phosphorylated in cells transformed by IKK?, but not in cells expressing IKK? K38A ( Figure 3E ). Together, these data confirm that CYLD Ser418 is phosphorylated in vivo in the presence of IKK?. It has been reported that Ser418 of CYLD is a substrate of the canonical IKK family members, IKK? and IKK? ( Reiley et al., 2005 ). Therefore, in order to determine which IKK family member(s) can most efficiently phosphorylate CYLD, we cotransfected Myc-CYLD with individual IKK family members fused to GST. CYLD was immunoprecipitated using an anti-Myc antibody and blotted using the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure S4 shows that CYLD was efficiently phosphorylated in cells transfected with IKK?. In contrast, CYLD is phosphorylated inefficiently in cells transfected with IKK? and IKK?, even when greater than 5× more kinase is present ( Figure S3 ). While it is therefore possible for any of these IKK family members to phosphorylate Ser418 of CYLD, CYLD is a much better substrate for IKK? than for IKK? or IKK?. Our analysis of IKK? and IKK? peptide substrate specificities also demonstrated that these kinases should be expected to have largely different, though possibly overlapping, substrate pools ( Figures 1E and S1 ). IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at S418 facilitates transformation Since CYLD is a known tumor suppressor and IKK? is a newly-discovered oncoprotein ( Bignell et al., 2000 ; Boehm et al., 2007 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ), we hypothesized that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? might play a role in the regulation of IKK?-mediated cell transformation. In Figure 1 we show that forced expression of IKK? induces a tumorigenic phenotype in NIH-3T3 cells. To determine whether suppression of CYLD also induced cell transformation in this experimental model, we suppressed murine CYLD using two distinct short hairpin RNAs (shRNA), each of which strongly suppresses endogenous levels of CYLD ( Figure 4A ). Suppression of CYLD induced substantial anchorage-independent growth of NIH-3T3 cells when compared to control NIH-3T3 cells ( Figures 4B and 4C ). To determine whether CYLD phosphorylation is required for IKK?-mediated transformation, we generated IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells that stably express wild-type CYLD, CYLD S418A, or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5A ). We found that Flag-epitope tagged IKK?-expressing cells exhibited robust anchorage-independent growth that was 4-fold above that observed in control NIH-3T3 cells or cells expressing WT CYLD or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5B ). In contrast, in tumorigenic cells expressing Flag-epitope-tagged IKK?, co-expression of CYLD S418A suppressed anchorage-independent growth ( Figure 5B ). A similar result was observed in vivo when we evaluated the contribution of CYLD phosphorylation to IKK?-induced tumorigenicity. Introduction of IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells into immunodeficient animals yielded tumor formation at a high penetrance ( Figure 5C , data not shown). While expression of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A failed to significantly alter tumorigenicity, expression of CYLD S418A led to statistically-significantly smaller tumors (p<0.05) ( Figure 5C ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? at serine 418 is necessary for IKK? to fully induce transformation. Phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 decreases CYLD activity CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme which removes Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from a large number of inflammatory mediators including TRAF2, TRAF6, and NEMO, as well as the pro-proliferation transcription factor BCL-3 ( Brummelkamp et al., 2003 ; Kovalenko et al., 2003 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ; Trompouki et al., 2003 ). Removal of ubiquitin chains by CYLD inactivates these substrates, inhibiting inflammatory signaling and cell cycle progression. Cell transformation induced by loss of CYLD is hypothesized to occur following the accumulation of a variety of ubiquitinated species, which leads to both increased cell proliferation and the increased transcription of NF-?B-regulated anti-apoptotic factors. Therefore, we sought to determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on ubiquitination of known CYLD substrates. TRAF2 is a critical NF-?B mediator ubiquitinated via Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains following stimulation with TNF?, and CYLD removes these ubiquitin chains to prevent uncontrolled TNF?-induced inflammation. To determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on TRAF2 ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were transfected with Myc-epitope tagged TRAF2 in combination with GFP-WT CYLD or CYLD S418A and GST-IKK?. In order to examine only changes in Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains, cells were also transfected with an HA-tagged ubiquitin variant which has all lysines mutated to arginine except for Lys63 (HA-Ub-K63). Cells were stimulated with TNF? for 10 minutes prior to lysis and CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was assessed by immunoprecipitation. As expected, CYLD efficiently removed Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). Interestingly, CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was blocked in the presence of IKK?. In constrast, cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? did not block deubiquitination of TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). These data demonstrate that phosphorylated CYLD exhibits less deubiquitinating activity than unphosphorylated CYLD. Thus, IKK? regulates the deubiquitination of TRAF2 by phosphorylating CYLD. The IKK regulatory subunit NEMO undergoes Lys63-specific ubiquitination at Lys285 when coexpressed with RIP2, resulting in increased NF-?B activity ( Abbott et al., 2004 ; Abbott et al., 2007 ). CYLD efficiently removes these RIP2-induced ubiquitin chains from NEMO ( Abbott et al., 2004 ). To determine whether phosphorylation of CYLD affects RIP2-induced NEMO ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-NEMO, OMNI-RIP2, HA-Ubiquitin, GFP-CYLD, and GST-IKK?. As expected, cotransfection of RIP2 with NEMO increased NEMO ubiquitination, and this ubiquitination was suppressed by CYLD ( Figure 6B ). However, cotransfection of IKK? with CYLD resulted in the stabilization of NEMO ubiquitination, suggesting that phosphorylation of CYLD decreases its deubiquitinase activity. As in Figure 6A , cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? failed to stabilize NEMO ubiquitination ( Figure 6B ). Together, these observations demonstrate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 inhibits CYLD deubiquitinase activity. We next sought to determine what effect this phosphorylation exerts on NF-?B activity. We have shown previously that the gene encoding IKK?, IKBKE , is amplified and overexpressed in MCF-7 cells ( Boehm et al., 2007 ). These cells were transiently transfected with Myc-TRAF2 alone or in combination with Myc-CYLD, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A and we performed a NF-?B-luciferase reporter assay. In cells expressing TRAF2 alone, we found substantial (14.9 fold) activation of the NF-?B reporter ( Figure 6C , data not shown). Cotransfection with a sub-saturating amount of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A resulted in an approximately 50% decrease in TRAF2-induced NF-?B activation. However, co-transfection with CYLD S418A resulted in a statistically significantly larger decrease in NF-?B reporter activity (p<0.05) ( Figure 6C ). These results demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 suppresses CYLD activity, resulting in increased NF-?B transcriptional activation. As further validation, we assessed whether CYLD phosphorylation modulates NF-?B activity in the context of transformation. NF-?B luciferase reporter activity was measured in IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing WT or mutant CYLD (S418A and S772A). IKK?-transformed cells exhibited strong NF-?B activation in comparison to control cells, and introduction of WT CYLD and S772A failed to induce a substantial change in NF-?B activity. As observed in MCF-7 cells, however, CYLD S418A more strongly inhibited IKK?-induced NF-?B activation. These findings indicate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at serine 418 plays a role in the observed activation of NF-?B. As the decrease in NF-?B activation observed in the presence of CYLD S418A was not as robust as the decrease in transformation that was observed in Figure 5 , it is likely that NF-?B is not the only pathway affected by phosphorylation of CYLD. However, these findings suggest that the regulation of CYLD phosphorylation by IKK? contributes to the NF-?B activity necessary for IKK?-mediated cell transformation. To further confirm that cell transformation mediated by CYLD suppression is NF-?B dependent, we utilized the NIH-3T3 cells expressing shRNAs targeting murine CYLD which were described in Figure 4 . When a non-phosphorylatable I?B? mutant (I?B? S32,36A), which acts as an NF-?B “superrepressor,” was stably expressed in these cells, we found a dramatic reduction in anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 6E ). Thus, suppression of CYLD induces NF-?B-dependent cell transformation similar to that induced by overexpression of IKK?.  Results Determination of IKK? substrate specificity IKK? has recently been identified as a breast cancer oncogene. However, the mechanism by which IKK? contributes to cell transformation is not known. Since IKK? is a serine/threonine kinase, we sought to determine whether the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its oncogenic activity. Wild-type IKK? or kinase-dead IKK? K38A was introduced into NIH-3T3 cells ( Figure 1A ). We found that cells expressing WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A, exhibited robust anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 1B ). These results confirm that the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its activity as an oncogene. While several IKK? substrates involved in interferon signaling pathways have been identified, direct substrates required for the oncogenic functions of IKK? have not been reported. To address this question, we utilized proteomic and bioinformatic approaches to perform an unbiased screen for likely IKK? substrates. Specifically, we used a positional scanning peptide library assay recently developed in this laboratory to identify the optimal phosphorylation motif for IKK? ( Hutti et al., 2004 ; Turk et al., 2006 ). This assay employs 198 biotinylated peptide libraries. Each library has a 1:1 mixture of serine and threonine fixed at the central position, and has one additional position fixed to one of the 20 naturally-occurring amino acids. All other positions contain a degenerate mixture of amino acids (excluding serine, threonine, and cysteine). Phosphothreonine and Phosphotyrosine were included at the fixed positions in order to facilitate the identification of kinases which have a requirement for priming phosphorylation events. Using recombinant GST-IKK? purified from HEK-293T cells, we performed kinase assays simultaneously on all 198 peptide libraries in solution using ?-32P-ATP. Biotinylated peptides were captured with a streptavidin-coated membrane and the relative preference for each amino acid at each position was determined by the relative level of radiolabel incorporation into the corresponding peptides. We found that IKK? exhibits strong sequence selectivity at multiple positions surrounding the phosphorylation site. IKK? strongly prefers substrates with a hydrophobic residue at the +1 position relative to the phosphorylation site ( Figures 1C and 1F ). This kinase also exhibits strong sequence selectivity for aromatic residues at the -2 position, and for bulky hydrophobic residues at the +3 position ( Figures 1C and 1F ). Kinase-dead IKK? K38A does not exhibit selectivity at these positions, confirming that peptides were not being phosphorylated by a contaminating kinase ( Figure 1D ). To validate this motif, we generated a consensus peptide substrate, IKK?-Tide, and measured the phosphorylation of peptides bearing individual alanine substitutions. By comparing these results to those obtained using the consensus sequence we confirmed that substitution of amino acids at the +1 or -2 positions resulted in a decrease in the efficiency of peptide phosphorylation ( Figure 1E ). This motif has similarities to the sequence surrounding the autophosphorylation site in the activation loop of IKK? (DEKFVS172VYGTE) due to the aromatic residue at -2 and aliphatic at +1, although this site is predicted to be suboptimal due to the lack of an aromatic residue at +3 ( Peters et al., 2000 ). IKK? has been shown to phosphorylate one of the essential serines on I?B? in vitro , but in vivo phosphorylation of I?B? by this kinase has not been described ( Peters et al., 2000 ). Therefore, the role of IKK? in I?B? phosphorylation and degradation remains unclear. To examine this question, we performed kinase assays using a peptide substrate corresponding to the sequence surrounding Ser32 and Ser36 of I?B?. This peptide contains two potential phosphorylation sites, but neither site is within a sequence context that matches the optimal motif for IKK?. We found that this peptide was a poor in vitro substrate for IKK? when compared with the optimal peptide determined from the peptide library screen ( Figure 1E ). In contrast, when recombinant GST-IKK? was used to phosphorylate the same set of peptides, the I?B? peptide was phosphorylated by IKK? much more efficiently than IKK?-Tide ( Figure S1 ). These observations suggest that I?B? is unlikely to be an important physiological substrate of IKK?. We recently demonstrated that, like IKK?, IKK? prefers aromatic residues at the -2 position and hydrophobic residues at the +1 position ( Hutti et al., 2007 ). However, the phosphorylation motifs for these kinases differ at the -4, -5, and +3 positions. Taken together, these observations demonstrate that while the substrate specificities of IKK? and the related kinase IKK? have overlapping characteristics, the optimal substrate peptides for these kinases differ in substantial ways and therefore can be predicted to have different (though possibly overlapping) in vivo substrates. Prediction of IKK? substrates Spot intensities from the peptide library screen were then quantified ( Table S1 ) and converted into a matrix which could be used with the bioinformatic search engine Scansite. Scansite ( http://scansite.mit.edu ) allows proteome-wide searches for sites which best match the data provided by the input matrix ( Obenauer et al., 2003 ; Yaffe et al., 2001 ). Table 1 shows top-scoring candidate IKK? substrates obtained following the Scansite analysis, all of which scored in the top 0.05% of sites in the SwissProt database. Interestingly, a large number of predicted IKK? substrates are known to be involved in inflammatory and/or oncogenic signaling pathways. Of these potential substrates, the deubiquitinating enzyme CYLD was of particular interest, as it has been shown to have roles as both an inflammatory mediator and tumor suppressor, functions that could be downstream of IKK? ( Bignell et al., 2000 ). Our bioinformatic analysis predicted that CYLD is likely to be phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418. CYLD is phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418 To further facilitate the identification of novel IKK? substrates we raised antibodies against a collection of phosphopeptides biased towards the optimal IKK? phosphorylation motif We verified that these antibodies recognize known IKK? substrates in a kinase-dependent manner (data not shown). These antibodies were then used to determine whether CYLD is phosphorylated at a site matching the IKK? phosphorylation motif HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-epitope tagged CYLD (Myc-CYLD) and either GST-IKK? WT or kinase-dead IKK? K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and immunoblotted with the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure 2A shows that the phospho-substrate antibody blotted CYLD which had been transfected with WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A. CYLD treated with calf-intestinal phosphatase (CIP) following cotransfection with IKK? was no longer recognized by the phospho-substrate antibody, confirming that the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody specifically recognizes phosphorylated CYLD ( Figure 2B ). In order to determine whether IKK? can directly phosphorylate CYLD, an in vitro kinase assay was performed. Wild-type GST-IKK? or GST-IKK? K38A was purified from HEK-293T cells. Myc-CYLD was separately transfected into HEK-293T cells and immunoprecipitated. When the CYLD immunoprecipitate was incubated in an in vitro kinase assay with WT IKK?, strong phosphorylation of CYLD was observed ( Figure 2C ). This phosphorylation was not observed in the presence of IKK? K38A. To determine whether IKK? and CYLD physically interact, Myc-CYLD was cotransfected into HEK-293T cells expressing GST- IKK? WT or K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and these immune complexes were blotted with an anti-GST antibody to identify IKK?. In CYLD immune complexes we identified both WT and kinase-dead IKK? ( Figure 2D ). Moreover, when we performed the reciprocal experiment we found that Myc-CYLD was also observed in the IKK? precipitates ( Figure 2E ). While CYLD Ser418 was predicted by Scansite to be the optimal site for IKK? phosphorylation (ENRFHS418LPFSL), two additional serines within the CYLD sequence were potential, though less optimal, IKK? phosphorylation sites (DSRFAS547LQPVS and KKIFPS772LELNI). Therefore, we used mass spectrometry to determine which residue(s) of CYLD is phosphorylated in vivo . Myc-CYLD and GST-IKK? were cotransfected into HEK-293T cells. CYLD was immunoprecipitated, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and Coomassie stained ( Figure S2 ). The band corresponding to Myc-CYLD was excised, digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin, and subjected to microcapillary LC/MS/MS. A phosphopeptide consistent with phosphorylation at Ser418 was identified. This analysis confirmed that CYLD is phosphorylated at Ser418, the same site predicted by our bioinformatic analysis ( Figure 3A ). Ser418 is evolutionarily conserved in all sequenced mammals, as well as Gallus gallus and Xenopus tropicalis ( Figure 3B ). In addition, the -2F, +1L, and +3F relative to Ser418 (which correspond to the IKK? phosphorylation motif) are also conserved, providing further evidence for the evolutionary importance of this phosphorylation site. To further verify that Ser418 is the critical site phosphorylated by IKK?, we created Myc-epitope tagged mutants of CYLD at Ser418 (S418A), Ser547 (S547A), and Ser772 (S772A). We introduced wild-type CYLD or each of these mutants into HEK-293T cells alone or with GST-IKK? and isolated CYLD immune complexes. Mutation of either Ser547 or Ser772 did not affect recognition of CYLD by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3C ). However, Myc-CYLD S418A was no longer recognized by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody when cotransfected with IKK? ( Figure 3C ). In addition, when we introduced Myc-CYLD or Myc-CYLD S418A with IKK? into HEK-293T cells and performed an immunoprecipitation using the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody, we found that wild-type Myc-CYLD, but not Myc-CYLD S418A, was efficiently immunoprecipitated by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3D ). Finally, endogenous CYLD was immunoprecipitated from IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells utilized in Figure 1 . Immunoblotting with the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody revealed that CYLD is indeed phosphorylated in cells transformed by IKK?, but not in cells expressing IKK? K38A ( Figure 3E ). Together, these data confirm that CYLD Ser418 is phosphorylated in vivo in the presence of IKK?. It has been reported that Ser418 of CYLD is a substrate of the canonical IKK family members, IKK? and IKK? ( Reiley et al., 2005 ). Therefore, in order to determine which IKK family member(s) can most efficiently phosphorylate CYLD, we cotransfected Myc-CYLD with individual IKK family members fused to GST. CYLD was immunoprecipitated using an anti-Myc antibody and blotted using the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure S4 shows that CYLD was efficiently phosphorylated in cells transfected with IKK?. In contrast, CYLD is phosphorylated inefficiently in cells transfected with IKK? and IKK?, even when greater than 5× more kinase is present ( Figure S3 ). While it is therefore possible for any of these IKK family members to phosphorylate Ser418 of CYLD, CYLD is a much better substrate for IKK? than for IKK? or IKK?. Our analysis of IKK? and IKK? peptide substrate specificities also demonstrated that these kinases should be expected to have largely different, though possibly overlapping, substrate pools ( Figures 1E and S1 ). IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at S418 facilitates transformation Since CYLD is a known tumor suppressor and IKK? is a newly-discovered oncoprotein ( Bignell et al., 2000 ; Boehm et al., 2007 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ), we hypothesized that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? might play a role in the regulation of IKK?-mediated cell transformation. In Figure 1 we show that forced expression of IKK? induces a tumorigenic phenotype in NIH-3T3 cells. To determine whether suppression of CYLD also induced cell transformation in this experimental model, we suppressed murine CYLD using two distinct short hairpin RNAs (shRNA), each of which strongly suppresses endogenous levels of CYLD ( Figure 4A ). Suppression of CYLD induced substantial anchorage-independent growth of NIH-3T3 cells when compared to control NIH-3T3 cells ( Figures 4B and 4C ). To determine whether CYLD phosphorylation is required for IKK?-mediated transformation, we generated IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells that stably express wild-type CYLD, CYLD S418A, or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5A ). We found that Flag-epitope tagged IKK?-expressing cells exhibited robust anchorage-independent growth that was 4-fold above that observed in control NIH-3T3 cells or cells expressing WT CYLD or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5B ). In contrast, in tumorigenic cells expressing Flag-epitope-tagged IKK?, co-expression of CYLD S418A suppressed anchorage-independent growth ( Figure 5B ). A similar result was observed in vivo when we evaluated the contribution of CYLD phosphorylation to IKK?-induced tumorigenicity. Introduction of IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells into immunodeficient animals yielded tumor formation at a high penetrance ( Figure 5C , data not shown). While expression of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A failed to significantly alter tumorigenicity, expression of CYLD S418A led to statistically-significantly smaller tumors (p<0.05) ( Figure 5C ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? at serine 418 is necessary for IKK? to fully induce transformation. Phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 decreases CYLD activity CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme which removes Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from a large number of inflammatory mediators including TRAF2, TRAF6, and NEMO, as well as the pro-proliferation transcription factor BCL-3 ( Brummelkamp et al., 2003 ; Kovalenko et al., 2003 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ; Trompouki et al., 2003 ). Removal of ubiquitin chains by CYLD inactivates these substrates, inhibiting inflammatory signaling and cell cycle progression. Cell transformation induced by loss of CYLD is hypothesized to occur following the accumulation of a variety of ubiquitinated species, which leads to both increased cell proliferation and the increased transcription of NF-?B-regulated anti-apoptotic factors. Therefore, we sought to determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on ubiquitination of known CYLD substrates. TRAF2 is a critical NF-?B mediator ubiquitinated via Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains following stimulation with TNF?, and CYLD removes these ubiquitin chains to prevent uncontrolled TNF?-induced inflammation. To determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on TRAF2 ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were transfected with Myc-epitope tagged TRAF2 in combination with GFP-WT CYLD or CYLD S418A and GST-IKK?. In order to examine only changes in Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains, cells were also transfected with an HA-tagged ubiquitin variant which has all lysines mutated to arginine except for Lys63 (HA-Ub-K63). Cells were stimulated with TNF? for 10 minutes prior to lysis and CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was assessed by immunoprecipitation. As expected, CYLD efficiently removed Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). Interestingly, CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was blocked in the presence of IKK?. In constrast, cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? did not block deubiquitination of TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). These data demonstrate that phosphorylated CYLD exhibits less deubiquitinating activity than unphosphorylated CYLD. Thus, IKK? regulates the deubiquitination of TRAF2 by phosphorylating CYLD. The IKK regulatory subunit NEMO undergoes Lys63-specific ubiquitination at Lys285 when coexpressed with RIP2, resulting in increased NF-?B activity ( Abbott et al., 2004 ; Abbott et al., 2007 ). CYLD efficiently removes these RIP2-induced ubiquitin chains from NEMO ( Abbott et al., 2004 ). To determine whether phosphorylation of CYLD affects RIP2-induced NEMO ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-NEMO, OMNI-RIP2, HA-Ubiquitin, GFP-CYLD, and GST-IKK?. As expected, cotransfection of RIP2 with NEMO increased NEMO ubiquitination, and this ubiquitination was suppressed by CYLD ( Figure 6B ). However, cotransfection of IKK? with CYLD resulted in the stabilization of NEMO ubiquitination, suggesting that phosphorylation of CYLD decreases its deubiquitinase activity. As in Figure 6A , cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? failed to stabilize NEMO ubiquitination ( Figure 6B ). Together, these observations demonstrate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 inhibits CYLD deubiquitinase activity. We next sought to determine what effect this phosphorylation exerts on NF-?B activity. We have shown previously that the gene encoding IKK?, IKBKE , is amplified and overexpressed in MCF-7 cells ( Boehm et al., 2007 ). These cells were transiently transfected with Myc-TRAF2 alone or in combination with Myc-CYLD, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A and we performed a NF-?B-luciferase reporter assay. In cells expressing TRAF2 alone, we found substantial (14.9 fold) activation of the NF-?B reporter ( Figure 6C , data not shown). Cotransfection with a sub-saturating amount of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A resulted in an approximately 50% decrease in TRAF2-induced NF-?B activation. However, co-transfection with CYLD S418A resulted in a statistically significantly larger decrease in NF-?B reporter activity (p<0.05) ( Figure 6C ). These results demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 suppresses CYLD activity, resulting in increased NF-?B transcriptional activation. As further validation, we assessed whether CYLD phosphorylation modulates NF-?B activity in the context of transformation. NF-?B luciferase reporter activity was measured in IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing WT or mutant CYLD (S418A and S772A). IKK?-transformed cells exhibited strong NF-?B activation in comparison to control cells, and introduction of WT CYLD and S772A failed to induce a substantial change in NF-?B activity. As observed in MCF-7 cells, however, CYLD S418A more strongly inhibited IKK?-induced NF-?B activation. These findings indicate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at serine 418 plays a role in the observed activation of NF-?B. As the decrease in NF-?B activation observed in the presence of CYLD S418A was not as robust as the decrease in transformation that was observed in Figure 5 , it is likely that NF-?B is not the only pathway affected by phosphorylation of CYLD. However, these findings suggest that the regulation of CYLD phosphorylation by IKK? contributes to the NF-?B activity necessary for IKK?-mediated cell transformation. To further confirm that cell transformation mediated by CYLD suppression is NF-?B dependent, we utilized the NIH-3T3 cells expressing shRNAs targeting murine CYLD which were described in Figure 4 . When a non-phosphorylatable I?B? mutant (I?B? S32,36A), which acts as an NF-?B “superrepressor,” was stably expressed in these cells, we found a dramatic reduction in anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 6E ). Thus, suppression of CYLD induces NF-?B-dependent cell transformation similar to that induced by overexpression of IKK?.  Determination of IKK? substrate specificity IKK? has recently been identified as a breast cancer oncogene. However, the mechanism by which IKK? contributes to cell transformation is not known. Since IKK? is a serine/threonine kinase, we sought to determine whether the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its oncogenic activity. Wild-type IKK? or kinase-dead IKK? K38A was introduced into NIH-3T3 cells ( Figure 1A ). We found that cells expressing WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A, exhibited robust anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 1B ). These results confirm that the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its activity as an oncogene. While several IKK? substrates involved in interferon signaling pathways have been identified, direct substrates required for the oncogenic functions of IKK? have not been reported. To address this question, we utilized proteomic and bioinformatic approaches to perform an unbiased screen for likely IKK? substrates. Specifically, we used a positional scanning peptide library assay recently developed in this laboratory to identify the optimal phosphorylation motif for IKK? ( Hutti et al., 2004 ; Turk et al., 2006 ). This assay employs 198 biotinylated peptide libraries. Each library has a 1:1 mixture of serine and threonine fixed at the central position, and has one additional position fixed to one of the 20 naturally-occurring amino acids. All other positions contain a degenerate mixture of amino acids (excluding serine, threonine, and cysteine). Phosphothreonine and Phosphotyrosine were included at the fixed positions in order to facilitate the identification of kinases which have a requirement for priming phosphorylation events. Using recombinant GST-IKK? purified from HEK-293T cells, we performed kinase assays simultaneously on all 198 peptide libraries in solution using ?-32P-ATP. Biotinylated peptides were captured with a streptavidin-coated membrane and the relative preference for each amino acid at each position was determined by the relative level of radiolabel incorporation into the corresponding peptides. We found that IKK? exhibits strong sequence selectivity at multiple positions surrounding the phosphorylation site. IKK? strongly prefers substrates with a hydrophobic residue at the +1 position relative to the phosphorylation site ( Figures 1C and 1F ). This kinase also exhibits strong sequence selectivity for aromatic residues at the -2 position, and for bulky hydrophobic residues at the +3 position ( Figures 1C and 1F ). Kinase-dead IKK? K38A does not exhibit selectivity at these positions, confirming that peptides were not being phosphorylated by a contaminating kinase ( Figure 1D ). To validate this motif, we generated a consensus peptide substrate, IKK?-Tide, and measured the phosphorylation of peptides bearing individual alanine substitutions. By comparing these results to those obtained using the consensus sequence we confirmed that substitution of amino acids at the +1 or -2 positions resulted in a decrease in the efficiency of peptide phosphorylation ( Figure 1E ). This motif has similarities to the sequence surrounding the autophosphorylation site in the activation loop of IKK? (DEKFVS172VYGTE) due to the aromatic residue at -2 and aliphatic at +1, although this site is predicted to be suboptimal due to the lack of an aromatic residue at +3 ( Peters et al., 2000 ). IKK? has been shown to phosphorylate one of the essential serines on I?B? in vitro , but in vivo phosphorylation of I?B? by this kinase has not been described ( Peters et al., 2000 ). Therefore, the role of IKK? in I?B? phosphorylation and degradation remains unclear. To examine this question, we performed kinase assays using a peptide substrate corresponding to the sequence surrounding Ser32 and Ser36 of I?B?. This peptide contains two potential phosphorylation sites, but neither site is within a sequence context that matches the optimal motif for IKK?. We found that this peptide was a poor in vitro substrate for IKK? when compared with the optimal peptide determined from the peptide library screen ( Figure 1E ). In contrast, when recombinant GST-IKK? was used to phosphorylate the same set of peptides, the I?B? peptide was phosphorylated by IKK? much more efficiently than IKK?-Tide ( Figure S1 ). These observations suggest that I?B? is unlikely to be an important physiological substrate of IKK?. We recently demonstrated that, like IKK?, IKK? prefers aromatic residues at the -2 position and hydrophobic residues at the +1 position ( Hutti et al., 2007 ). However, the phosphorylation motifs for these kinases differ at the -4, -5, and +3 positions. Taken together, these observations demonstrate that while the substrate specificities of IKK? and the related kinase IKK? have overlapping characteristics, the optimal substrate peptides for these kinases differ in substantial ways and therefore can be predicted to have different (though possibly overlapping) in vivo substrates.  Determination of IKK? substrate specificity IKK? has recently been identified as a breast cancer oncogene. However, the mechanism by which IKK? contributes to cell transformation is not known. Since IKK? is a serine/threonine kinase, we sought to determine whether the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its oncogenic activity. Wild-type IKK? or kinase-dead IKK? K38A was introduced into NIH-3T3 cells ( Figure 1A ). We found that cells expressing WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A, exhibited robust anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 1B ). These results confirm that the kinase activity of IKK? is necessary for its activity as an oncogene. While several IKK? substrates involved in interferon signaling pathways have been identified, direct substrates required for the oncogenic functions of IKK? have not been reported. To address this question, we utilized proteomic and bioinformatic approaches to perform an unbiased screen for likely IKK? substrates. Specifically, we used a positional scanning peptide library assay recently developed in this laboratory to identify the optimal phosphorylation motif for IKK? ( Hutti et al., 2004 ; Turk et al., 2006 ). This assay employs 198 biotinylated peptide libraries. Each library has a 1:1 mixture of serine and threonine fixed at the central position, and has one additional position fixed to one of the 20 naturally-occurring amino acids. All other positions contain a degenerate mixture of amino acids (excluding serine, threonine, and cysteine). Phosphothreonine and Phosphotyrosine were included at the fixed positions in order to facilitate the identification of kinases which have a requirement for priming phosphorylation events. Using recombinant GST-IKK? purified from HEK-293T cells, we performed kinase assays simultaneously on all 198 peptide libraries in solution using ?-32P-ATP. Biotinylated peptides were captured with a streptavidin-coated membrane and the relative preference for each amino acid at each position was determined by the relative level of radiolabel incorporation into the corresponding peptides. We found that IKK? exhibits strong sequence selectivity at multiple positions surrounding the phosphorylation site. IKK? strongly prefers substrates with a hydrophobic residue at the +1 position relative to the phosphorylation site ( Figures 1C and 1F ). This kinase also exhibits strong sequence selectivity for aromatic residues at the -2 position, and for bulky hydrophobic residues at the +3 position ( Figures 1C and 1F ). Kinase-dead IKK? K38A does not exhibit selectivity at these positions, confirming that peptides were not being phosphorylated by a contaminating kinase ( Figure 1D ). To validate this motif, we generated a consensus peptide substrate, IKK?-Tide, and measured the phosphorylation of peptides bearing individual alanine substitutions. By comparing these results to those obtained using the consensus sequence we confirmed that substitution of amino acids at the +1 or -2 positions resulted in a decrease in the efficiency of peptide phosphorylation ( Figure 1E ). This motif has similarities to the sequence surrounding the autophosphorylation site in the activation loop of IKK? (DEKFVS172VYGTE) due to the aromatic residue at -2 and aliphatic at +1, although this site is predicted to be suboptimal due to the lack of an aromatic residue at +3 ( Peters et al., 2000 ). IKK? has been shown to phosphorylate one of the essential serines on I?B? in vitro , but in vivo phosphorylation of I?B? by this kinase has not been described ( Peters et al., 2000 ). Therefore, the role of IKK? in I?B? phosphorylation and degradation remains unclear. To examine this question, we performed kinase assays using a peptide substrate corresponding to the sequence surrounding Ser32 and Ser36 of I?B?. This peptide contains two potential phosphorylation sites, but neither site is within a sequence context that matches the optimal motif for IKK?. We found that this peptide was a poor in vitro substrate for IKK? when compared with the optimal peptide determined from the peptide library screen ( Figure 1E ). In contrast, when recombinant GST-IKK? was used to phosphorylate the same set of peptides, the I?B? peptide was phosphorylated by IKK? much more efficiently than IKK?-Tide ( Figure S1 ). These observations suggest that I?B? is unlikely to be an important physiological substrate of IKK?. We recently demonstrated that, like IKK?, IKK? prefers aromatic residues at the -2 position and hydrophobic residues at the +1 position ( Hutti et al., 2007 ). However, the phosphorylation motifs for these kinases differ at the -4, -5, and +3 positions. Taken together, these observations demonstrate that while the substrate specificities of IKK? and the related kinase IKK? have overlapping characteristics, the optimal substrate peptides for these kinases differ in substantial ways and therefore can be predicted to have different (though possibly overlapping) in vivo substrates.  Prediction of IKK? substrates Spot intensities from the peptide library screen were then quantified ( Table S1 ) and converted into a matrix which could be used with the bioinformatic search engine Scansite. Scansite ( http://scansite.mit.edu ) allows proteome-wide searches for sites which best match the data provided by the input matrix ( Obenauer et al., 2003 ; Yaffe et al., 2001 ). Table 1 shows top-scoring candidate IKK? substrates obtained following the Scansite analysis, all of which scored in the top 0.05% of sites in the SwissProt database. Interestingly, a large number of predicted IKK? substrates are known to be involved in inflammatory and/or oncogenic signaling pathways. Of these potential substrates, the deubiquitinating enzyme CYLD was of particular interest, as it has been shown to have roles as both an inflammatory mediator and tumor suppressor, functions that could be downstream of IKK? ( Bignell et al., 2000 ). Our bioinformatic analysis predicted that CYLD is likely to be phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418.  Prediction of IKK? substrates Spot intensities from the peptide library screen were then quantified ( Table S1 ) and converted into a matrix which could be used with the bioinformatic search engine Scansite. Scansite ( http://scansite.mit.edu ) allows proteome-wide searches for sites which best match the data provided by the input matrix ( Obenauer et al., 2003 ; Yaffe et al., 2001 ). Table 1 shows top-scoring candidate IKK? substrates obtained following the Scansite analysis, all of which scored in the top 0.05% of sites in the SwissProt database. Interestingly, a large number of predicted IKK? substrates are known to be involved in inflammatory and/or oncogenic signaling pathways. Of these potential substrates, the deubiquitinating enzyme CYLD was of particular interest, as it has been shown to have roles as both an inflammatory mediator and tumor suppressor, functions that could be downstream of IKK? ( Bignell et al., 2000 ). Our bioinformatic analysis predicted that CYLD is likely to be phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418.  CYLD is phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418 To further facilitate the identification of novel IKK? substrates we raised antibodies against a collection of phosphopeptides biased towards the optimal IKK? phosphorylation motif We verified that these antibodies recognize known IKK? substrates in a kinase-dependent manner (data not shown). These antibodies were then used to determine whether CYLD is phosphorylated at a site matching the IKK? phosphorylation motif HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-epitope tagged CYLD (Myc-CYLD) and either GST-IKK? WT or kinase-dead IKK? K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and immunoblotted with the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure 2A shows that the phospho-substrate antibody blotted CYLD which had been transfected with WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A. CYLD treated with calf-intestinal phosphatase (CIP) following cotransfection with IKK? was no longer recognized by the phospho-substrate antibody, confirming that the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody specifically recognizes phosphorylated CYLD ( Figure 2B ). In order to determine whether IKK? can directly phosphorylate CYLD, an in vitro kinase assay was performed. Wild-type GST-IKK? or GST-IKK? K38A was purified from HEK-293T cells. Myc-CYLD was separately transfected into HEK-293T cells and immunoprecipitated. When the CYLD immunoprecipitate was incubated in an in vitro kinase assay with WT IKK?, strong phosphorylation of CYLD was observed ( Figure 2C ). This phosphorylation was not observed in the presence of IKK? K38A. To determine whether IKK? and CYLD physically interact, Myc-CYLD was cotransfected into HEK-293T cells expressing GST- IKK? WT or K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and these immune complexes were blotted with an anti-GST antibody to identify IKK?. In CYLD immune complexes we identified both WT and kinase-dead IKK? ( Figure 2D ). Moreover, when we performed the reciprocal experiment we found that Myc-CYLD was also observed in the IKK? precipitates ( Figure 2E ). While CYLD Ser418 was predicted by Scansite to be the optimal site for IKK? phosphorylation (ENRFHS418LPFSL), two additional serines within the CYLD sequence were potential, though less optimal, IKK? phosphorylation sites (DSRFAS547LQPVS and KKIFPS772LELNI). Therefore, we used mass spectrometry to determine which residue(s) of CYLD is phosphorylated in vivo . Myc-CYLD and GST-IKK? were cotransfected into HEK-293T cells. CYLD was immunoprecipitated, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and Coomassie stained ( Figure S2 ). The band corresponding to Myc-CYLD was excised, digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin, and subjected to microcapillary LC/MS/MS. A phosphopeptide consistent with phosphorylation at Ser418 was identified. This analysis confirmed that CYLD is phosphorylated at Ser418, the same site predicted by our bioinformatic analysis ( Figure 3A ). Ser418 is evolutionarily conserved in all sequenced mammals, as well as Gallus gallus and Xenopus tropicalis ( Figure 3B ). In addition, the -2F, +1L, and +3F relative to Ser418 (which correspond to the IKK? phosphorylation motif) are also conserved, providing further evidence for the evolutionary importance of this phosphorylation site. To further verify that Ser418 is the critical site phosphorylated by IKK?, we created Myc-epitope tagged mutants of CYLD at Ser418 (S418A), Ser547 (S547A), and Ser772 (S772A). We introduced wild-type CYLD or each of these mutants into HEK-293T cells alone or with GST-IKK? and isolated CYLD immune complexes. Mutation of either Ser547 or Ser772 did not affect recognition of CYLD by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3C ). However, Myc-CYLD S418A was no longer recognized by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody when cotransfected with IKK? ( Figure 3C ). In addition, when we introduced Myc-CYLD or Myc-CYLD S418A with IKK? into HEK-293T cells and performed an immunoprecipitation using the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody, we found that wild-type Myc-CYLD, but not Myc-CYLD S418A, was efficiently immunoprecipitated by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3D ). Finally, endogenous CYLD was immunoprecipitated from IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells utilized in Figure 1 . Immunoblotting with the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody revealed that CYLD is indeed phosphorylated in cells transformed by IKK?, but not in cells expressing IKK? K38A ( Figure 3E ). Together, these data confirm that CYLD Ser418 is phosphorylated in vivo in the presence of IKK?. It has been reported that Ser418 of CYLD is a substrate of the canonical IKK family members, IKK? and IKK? ( Reiley et al., 2005 ). Therefore, in order to determine which IKK family member(s) can most efficiently phosphorylate CYLD, we cotransfected Myc-CYLD with individual IKK family members fused to GST. CYLD was immunoprecipitated using an anti-Myc antibody and blotted using the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure S4 shows that CYLD was efficiently phosphorylated in cells transfected with IKK?. In contrast, CYLD is phosphorylated inefficiently in cells transfected with IKK? and IKK?, even when greater than 5× more kinase is present ( Figure S3 ). While it is therefore possible for any of these IKK family members to phosphorylate Ser418 of CYLD, CYLD is a much better substrate for IKK? than for IKK? or IKK?. Our analysis of IKK? and IKK? peptide substrate specificities also demonstrated that these kinases should be expected to have largely different, though possibly overlapping, substrate pools ( Figures 1E and S1 ).  CYLD is phosphorylated by IKK? at Ser418 To further facilitate the identification of novel IKK? substrates we raised antibodies against a collection of phosphopeptides biased towards the optimal IKK? phosphorylation motif We verified that these antibodies recognize known IKK? substrates in a kinase-dependent manner (data not shown). These antibodies were then used to determine whether CYLD is phosphorylated at a site matching the IKK? phosphorylation motif HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-epitope tagged CYLD (Myc-CYLD) and either GST-IKK? WT or kinase-dead IKK? K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and immunoblotted with the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure 2A shows that the phospho-substrate antibody blotted CYLD which had been transfected with WT IKK?, but not IKK? K38A. CYLD treated with calf-intestinal phosphatase (CIP) following cotransfection with IKK? was no longer recognized by the phospho-substrate antibody, confirming that the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody specifically recognizes phosphorylated CYLD ( Figure 2B ). In order to determine whether IKK? can directly phosphorylate CYLD, an in vitro kinase assay was performed. Wild-type GST-IKK? or GST-IKK? K38A was purified from HEK-293T cells. Myc-CYLD was separately transfected into HEK-293T cells and immunoprecipitated. When the CYLD immunoprecipitate was incubated in an in vitro kinase assay with WT IKK?, strong phosphorylation of CYLD was observed ( Figure 2C ). This phosphorylation was not observed in the presence of IKK? K38A. To determine whether IKK? and CYLD physically interact, Myc-CYLD was cotransfected into HEK-293T cells expressing GST- IKK? WT or K38A. CYLD was immunoprecipitated via its Myc tag and these immune complexes were blotted with an anti-GST antibody to identify IKK?. In CYLD immune complexes we identified both WT and kinase-dead IKK? ( Figure 2D ). Moreover, when we performed the reciprocal experiment we found that Myc-CYLD was also observed in the IKK? precipitates ( Figure 2E ). While CYLD Ser418 was predicted by Scansite to be the optimal site for IKK? phosphorylation (ENRFHS418LPFSL), two additional serines within the CYLD sequence were potential, though less optimal, IKK? phosphorylation sites (DSRFAS547LQPVS and KKIFPS772LELNI). Therefore, we used mass spectrometry to determine which residue(s) of CYLD is phosphorylated in vivo . Myc-CYLD and GST-IKK? were cotransfected into HEK-293T cells. CYLD was immunoprecipitated, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and Coomassie stained ( Figure S2 ). The band corresponding to Myc-CYLD was excised, digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin, and subjected to microcapillary LC/MS/MS. A phosphopeptide consistent with phosphorylation at Ser418 was identified. This analysis confirmed that CYLD is phosphorylated at Ser418, the same site predicted by our bioinformatic analysis ( Figure 3A ). Ser418 is evolutionarily conserved in all sequenced mammals, as well as Gallus gallus and Xenopus tropicalis ( Figure 3B ). In addition, the -2F, +1L, and +3F relative to Ser418 (which correspond to the IKK? phosphorylation motif) are also conserved, providing further evidence for the evolutionary importance of this phosphorylation site. To further verify that Ser418 is the critical site phosphorylated by IKK?, we created Myc-epitope tagged mutants of CYLD at Ser418 (S418A), Ser547 (S547A), and Ser772 (S772A). We introduced wild-type CYLD or each of these mutants into HEK-293T cells alone or with GST-IKK? and isolated CYLD immune complexes. Mutation of either Ser547 or Ser772 did not affect recognition of CYLD by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3C ). However, Myc-CYLD S418A was no longer recognized by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody when cotransfected with IKK? ( Figure 3C ). In addition, when we introduced Myc-CYLD or Myc-CYLD S418A with IKK? into HEK-293T cells and performed an immunoprecipitation using the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody, we found that wild-type Myc-CYLD, but not Myc-CYLD S418A, was efficiently immunoprecipitated by the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody ( Figure 3D ). Finally, endogenous CYLD was immunoprecipitated from IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells utilized in Figure 1 . Immunoblotting with the IKK? phospho-substrate antibody revealed that CYLD is indeed phosphorylated in cells transformed by IKK?, but not in cells expressing IKK? K38A ( Figure 3E ). Together, these data confirm that CYLD Ser418 is phosphorylated in vivo in the presence of IKK?. It has been reported that Ser418 of CYLD is a substrate of the canonical IKK family members, IKK? and IKK? ( Reiley et al., 2005 ). Therefore, in order to determine which IKK family member(s) can most efficiently phosphorylate CYLD, we cotransfected Myc-CYLD with individual IKK family members fused to GST. CYLD was immunoprecipitated using an anti-Myc antibody and blotted using the anti-IKK? phospho-substrate antibody. Figure S4 shows that CYLD was efficiently phosphorylated in cells transfected with IKK?. In contrast, CYLD is phosphorylated inefficiently in cells transfected with IKK? and IKK?, even when greater than 5× more kinase is present ( Figure S3 ). While it is therefore possible for any of these IKK family members to phosphorylate Ser418 of CYLD, CYLD is a much better substrate for IKK? than for IKK? or IKK?. Our analysis of IKK? and IKK? peptide substrate specificities also demonstrated that these kinases should be expected to have largely different, though possibly overlapping, substrate pools ( Figures 1E and S1 ).  IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at S418 facilitates transformation Since CYLD is a known tumor suppressor and IKK? is a newly-discovered oncoprotein ( Bignell et al., 2000 ; Boehm et al., 2007 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ), we hypothesized that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? might play a role in the regulation of IKK?-mediated cell transformation. In Figure 1 we show that forced expression of IKK? induces a tumorigenic phenotype in NIH-3T3 cells. To determine whether suppression of CYLD also induced cell transformation in this experimental model, we suppressed murine CYLD using two distinct short hairpin RNAs (shRNA), each of which strongly suppresses endogenous levels of CYLD ( Figure 4A ). Suppression of CYLD induced substantial anchorage-independent growth of NIH-3T3 cells when compared to control NIH-3T3 cells ( Figures 4B and 4C ). To determine whether CYLD phosphorylation is required for IKK?-mediated transformation, we generated IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells that stably express wild-type CYLD, CYLD S418A, or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5A ). We found that Flag-epitope tagged IKK?-expressing cells exhibited robust anchorage-independent growth that was 4-fold above that observed in control NIH-3T3 cells or cells expressing WT CYLD or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5B ). In contrast, in tumorigenic cells expressing Flag-epitope-tagged IKK?, co-expression of CYLD S418A suppressed anchorage-independent growth ( Figure 5B ). A similar result was observed in vivo when we evaluated the contribution of CYLD phosphorylation to IKK?-induced tumorigenicity. Introduction of IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells into immunodeficient animals yielded tumor formation at a high penetrance ( Figure 5C , data not shown). While expression of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A failed to significantly alter tumorigenicity, expression of CYLD S418A led to statistically-significantly smaller tumors (p<0.05) ( Figure 5C ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? at serine 418 is necessary for IKK? to fully induce transformation.  IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at S418 facilitates transformation Since CYLD is a known tumor suppressor and IKK? is a newly-discovered oncoprotein ( Bignell et al., 2000 ; Boehm et al., 2007 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ), we hypothesized that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? might play a role in the regulation of IKK?-mediated cell transformation. In Figure 1 we show that forced expression of IKK? induces a tumorigenic phenotype in NIH-3T3 cells. To determine whether suppression of CYLD also induced cell transformation in this experimental model, we suppressed murine CYLD using two distinct short hairpin RNAs (shRNA), each of which strongly suppresses endogenous levels of CYLD ( Figure 4A ). Suppression of CYLD induced substantial anchorage-independent growth of NIH-3T3 cells when compared to control NIH-3T3 cells ( Figures 4B and 4C ). To determine whether CYLD phosphorylation is required for IKK?-mediated transformation, we generated IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells that stably express wild-type CYLD, CYLD S418A, or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5A ). We found that Flag-epitope tagged IKK?-expressing cells exhibited robust anchorage-independent growth that was 4-fold above that observed in control NIH-3T3 cells or cells expressing WT CYLD or CYLD S772A ( Figure 5B ). In contrast, in tumorigenic cells expressing Flag-epitope-tagged IKK?, co-expression of CYLD S418A suppressed anchorage-independent growth ( Figure 5B ). A similar result was observed in vivo when we evaluated the contribution of CYLD phosphorylation to IKK?-induced tumorigenicity. Introduction of IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells into immunodeficient animals yielded tumor formation at a high penetrance ( Figure 5C , data not shown). While expression of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A failed to significantly alter tumorigenicity, expression of CYLD S418A led to statistically-significantly smaller tumors (p<0.05) ( Figure 5C ). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK? at serine 418 is necessary for IKK? to fully induce transformation.  Phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 decreases CYLD activity CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme which removes Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from a large number of inflammatory mediators including TRAF2, TRAF6, and NEMO, as well as the pro-proliferation transcription factor BCL-3 ( Brummelkamp et al., 2003 ; Kovalenko et al., 2003 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ; Trompouki et al., 2003 ). Removal of ubiquitin chains by CYLD inactivates these substrates, inhibiting inflammatory signaling and cell cycle progression. Cell transformation induced by loss of CYLD is hypothesized to occur following the accumulation of a variety of ubiquitinated species, which leads to both increased cell proliferation and the increased transcription of NF-?B-regulated anti-apoptotic factors. Therefore, we sought to determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on ubiquitination of known CYLD substrates. TRAF2 is a critical NF-?B mediator ubiquitinated via Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains following stimulation with TNF?, and CYLD removes these ubiquitin chains to prevent uncontrolled TNF?-induced inflammation. To determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on TRAF2 ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were transfected with Myc-epitope tagged TRAF2 in combination with GFP-WT CYLD or CYLD S418A and GST-IKK?. In order to examine only changes in Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains, cells were also transfected with an HA-tagged ubiquitin variant which has all lysines mutated to arginine except for Lys63 (HA-Ub-K63). Cells were stimulated with TNF? for 10 minutes prior to lysis and CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was assessed by immunoprecipitation. As expected, CYLD efficiently removed Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). Interestingly, CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was blocked in the presence of IKK?. In constrast, cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? did not block deubiquitination of TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). These data demonstrate that phosphorylated CYLD exhibits less deubiquitinating activity than unphosphorylated CYLD. Thus, IKK? regulates the deubiquitination of TRAF2 by phosphorylating CYLD. The IKK regulatory subunit NEMO undergoes Lys63-specific ubiquitination at Lys285 when coexpressed with RIP2, resulting in increased NF-?B activity ( Abbott et al., 2004 ; Abbott et al., 2007 ). CYLD efficiently removes these RIP2-induced ubiquitin chains from NEMO ( Abbott et al., 2004 ). To determine whether phosphorylation of CYLD affects RIP2-induced NEMO ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-NEMO, OMNI-RIP2, HA-Ubiquitin, GFP-CYLD, and GST-IKK?. As expected, cotransfection of RIP2 with NEMO increased NEMO ubiquitination, and this ubiquitination was suppressed by CYLD ( Figure 6B ). However, cotransfection of IKK? with CYLD resulted in the stabilization of NEMO ubiquitination, suggesting that phosphorylation of CYLD decreases its deubiquitinase activity. As in Figure 6A , cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? failed to stabilize NEMO ubiquitination ( Figure 6B ). Together, these observations demonstrate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 inhibits CYLD deubiquitinase activity. We next sought to determine what effect this phosphorylation exerts on NF-?B activity. We have shown previously that the gene encoding IKK?, IKBKE , is amplified and overexpressed in MCF-7 cells ( Boehm et al., 2007 ). These cells were transiently transfected with Myc-TRAF2 alone or in combination with Myc-CYLD, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A and we performed a NF-?B-luciferase reporter assay. In cells expressing TRAF2 alone, we found substantial (14.9 fold) activation of the NF-?B reporter ( Figure 6C , data not shown). Cotransfection with a sub-saturating amount of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A resulted in an approximately 50% decrease in TRAF2-induced NF-?B activation. However, co-transfection with CYLD S418A resulted in a statistically significantly larger decrease in NF-?B reporter activity (p<0.05) ( Figure 6C ). These results demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 suppresses CYLD activity, resulting in increased NF-?B transcriptional activation. As further validation, we assessed whether CYLD phosphorylation modulates NF-?B activity in the context of transformation. NF-?B luciferase reporter activity was measured in IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing WT or mutant CYLD (S418A and S772A). IKK?-transformed cells exhibited strong NF-?B activation in comparison to control cells, and introduction of WT CYLD and S772A failed to induce a substantial change in NF-?B activity. As observed in MCF-7 cells, however, CYLD S418A more strongly inhibited IKK?-induced NF-?B activation. These findings indicate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at serine 418 plays a role in the observed activation of NF-?B. As the decrease in NF-?B activation observed in the presence of CYLD S418A was not as robust as the decrease in transformation that was observed in Figure 5 , it is likely that NF-?B is not the only pathway affected by phosphorylation of CYLD. However, these findings suggest that the regulation of CYLD phosphorylation by IKK? contributes to the NF-?B activity necessary for IKK?-mediated cell transformation. To further confirm that cell transformation mediated by CYLD suppression is NF-?B dependent, we utilized the NIH-3T3 cells expressing shRNAs targeting murine CYLD which were described in Figure 4 . When a non-phosphorylatable I?B? mutant (I?B? S32,36A), which acts as an NF-?B “superrepressor,” was stably expressed in these cells, we found a dramatic reduction in anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 6E ). Thus, suppression of CYLD induces NF-?B-dependent cell transformation similar to that induced by overexpression of IKK?.  Phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 decreases CYLD activity CYLD is a deubiquitinating enzyme which removes Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from a large number of inflammatory mediators including TRAF2, TRAF6, and NEMO, as well as the pro-proliferation transcription factor BCL-3 ( Brummelkamp et al., 2003 ; Kovalenko et al., 2003 ; Massoumi et al., 2006 ; Trompouki et al., 2003 ). Removal of ubiquitin chains by CYLD inactivates these substrates, inhibiting inflammatory signaling and cell cycle progression. Cell transformation induced by loss of CYLD is hypothesized to occur following the accumulation of a variety of ubiquitinated species, which leads to both increased cell proliferation and the increased transcription of NF-?B-regulated anti-apoptotic factors. Therefore, we sought to determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on ubiquitination of known CYLD substrates. TRAF2 is a critical NF-?B mediator ubiquitinated via Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains following stimulation with TNF?, and CYLD removes these ubiquitin chains to prevent uncontrolled TNF?-induced inflammation. To determine the effect of CYLD phosphorylation on TRAF2 ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were transfected with Myc-epitope tagged TRAF2 in combination with GFP-WT CYLD or CYLD S418A and GST-IKK?. In order to examine only changes in Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains, cells were also transfected with an HA-tagged ubiquitin variant which has all lysines mutated to arginine except for Lys63 (HA-Ub-K63). Cells were stimulated with TNF? for 10 minutes prior to lysis and CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was assessed by immunoprecipitation. As expected, CYLD efficiently removed Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains from TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). Interestingly, CYLD-mediated deubiquitination of TRAF2 was blocked in the presence of IKK?. In constrast, cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? did not block deubiquitination of TRAF2 ( Figure 6A ). These data demonstrate that phosphorylated CYLD exhibits less deubiquitinating activity than unphosphorylated CYLD. Thus, IKK? regulates the deubiquitination of TRAF2 by phosphorylating CYLD. The IKK regulatory subunit NEMO undergoes Lys63-specific ubiquitination at Lys285 when coexpressed with RIP2, resulting in increased NF-?B activity ( Abbott et al., 2004 ; Abbott et al., 2007 ). CYLD efficiently removes these RIP2-induced ubiquitin chains from NEMO ( Abbott et al., 2004 ). To determine whether phosphorylation of CYLD affects RIP2-induced NEMO ubiquitination, HEK-293T cells were cotransfected with Myc-NEMO, OMNI-RIP2, HA-Ubiquitin, GFP-CYLD, and GST-IKK?. As expected, cotransfection of RIP2 with NEMO increased NEMO ubiquitination, and this ubiquitination was suppressed by CYLD ( Figure 6B ). However, cotransfection of IKK? with CYLD resulted in the stabilization of NEMO ubiquitination, suggesting that phosphorylation of CYLD decreases its deubiquitinase activity. As in Figure 6A , cotransfection of CYLD S418A with IKK? failed to stabilize NEMO ubiquitination ( Figure 6B ). Together, these observations demonstrate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 inhibits CYLD deubiquitinase activity. We next sought to determine what effect this phosphorylation exerts on NF-?B activity. We have shown previously that the gene encoding IKK?, IKBKE , is amplified and overexpressed in MCF-7 cells ( Boehm et al., 2007 ). These cells were transiently transfected with Myc-TRAF2 alone or in combination with Myc-CYLD, Myc-CYLD S418A, or Myc-CYLD S772A and we performed a NF-?B-luciferase reporter assay. In cells expressing TRAF2 alone, we found substantial (14.9 fold) activation of the NF-?B reporter ( Figure 6C , data not shown). Cotransfection with a sub-saturating amount of WT CYLD or CYLD S772A resulted in an approximately 50% decrease in TRAF2-induced NF-?B activation. However, co-transfection with CYLD S418A resulted in a statistically significantly larger decrease in NF-?B reporter activity (p<0.05) ( Figure 6C ). These results demonstrate that phosphorylation of CYLD at Ser418 suppresses CYLD activity, resulting in increased NF-?B transcriptional activation. As further validation, we assessed whether CYLD phosphorylation modulates NF-?B activity in the context of transformation. NF-?B luciferase reporter activity was measured in IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing WT or mutant CYLD (S418A and S772A). IKK?-transformed cells exhibited strong NF-?B activation in comparison to control cells, and introduction of WT CYLD and S772A failed to induce a substantial change in NF-?B activity. As observed in MCF-7 cells, however, CYLD S418A more strongly inhibited IKK?-induced NF-?B activation. These findings indicate that IKK?-mediated phosphorylation of CYLD at serine 418 plays a role in the observed activation of NF-?B. As the decrease in NF-?B activation observed in the presence of CYLD S418A was not as robust as the decrease in transformation that was observed in Figure 5 , it is likely that NF-?B is not the only pathway affected by phosphorylation of CYLD. However, these findings suggest that the regulation of CYLD phosphorylation by IKK? contributes to the NF-?B activity necessary for IKK?-mediated cell transformation. To further confirm that cell transformation mediated by CYLD suppression is NF-?B dependent, we utilized the NIH-3T3 cells expressing shRNAs targeting murine CYLD which were described in Figure 4 . When a non-phosphorylatable I?B? mutant (I?B? S32,36A), which acts as an NF-?B “superrepressor,” was stably expressed in these cells, we found a dramatic reduction in anchorage-independent colony growth ( Figure 6E ). Thus, suppression of CYLD induces NF-?B-dependent cell transformation similar to that induced by overexpression of IKK?.  Discussion IKK? plays a central role in regulating innate immunity and also acts as an oncogene in a significant fraction of breast cancers. To gain a deeper understanding of the role(s) of IKK? in these biological processes, we used an unbiased proteomic and bioinformatic approach, which allowed us to identify the optimal substrate phosphorylation motif for IKK?. Based on these findings, a proteome-wide search for sites that correspond to the IKK? phosphorylation motif then led to the identification of a large number of putative IKK? substrates. Of the candidate IKK? substrates identified, many have known roles in inflammatory and/or oncogenic signaling pathways ( Table 1 ). In particular, serine 418 of the deubiquitinase and tumor suppressor CYLD emerged as a very likely site of IKK? phosphorylation. Here we showed direct in vitro phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK?, and have used mass spectrometry and an IKK? phospho-substrate antibody to show that Ser418 of CYLD is, in fact, the in vivo site phosphorylated by IKK?. While it has been reported that IKK? and IKK? can phosphorylate Ser418 of CYLD ( Reiley et al., 2005 ), we demonstrated that CYLD is phosphorylated much more efficiently by IKK? than by either of the canonical IKKs. Upon finding that an oncoprotein is capable of strongly phosphorylating a known tumor suppressor, we predicted that CYLD phosphorylation at Ser418 might play an important role in cell transformation. Indeed, we found that introduction of CYLD S418A suppressed anchorage-independent growth in IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells and hindered IKK?-driven tumor growth. The data presented here therefore define one potential mechanism by which IKK? induces tumorigenesis. Further examination showed that phosphorylation of CYLD at S418 decreases its deubiquitinase activity and increases NF-?B activation. Activation of NF-?B therefore appears to be one important mechanism by which CYLD phosphorylation regulates cell transformation. As CYLD also has functions independent of NF-?B it is likely that other signaling pathways may also be involved. Moreover, we recognize that IKK? may also modulate other substrates in addition to CYLD during cell transformation. Thus, although further work will be necessary to evaluate the full mechanisms by which IKK? and CYLD contribute to transformation, these observations connect an oncogene and a tumor suppressor that both regulate NF-?B to cell transformation. The role of chronic inflammation in the development of inflammation-related cancers is well-known, but the mechanisms by which inflammatory mediators cause cell transformation are poorly understood ( Basseres and Baldwin, 2006 ; Karin and Greten, 2005 ; Perkins, 2007 ). For kinases involved in these signaling pathways, such as the anti-viral mediator and oncoprotein IKK?, our inability to identify the complete repertoire of intracellular substrates has hindered progress towards understanding how these enzymes exert their oncogenic effects. The techniques described here, involving the identification of the phosphorylation motif for a kinase, followed by development of a phospho-substrate antibody and bioinformatic prediction of substrates, can provide an efficient and unbiased method for the identification and validation of physiologically relevant kinase substrates. We have validated this method through the identification of CYLD as a novel IKK? substrate and have shown that CYLD phosphorylation is necessary for full IKK?-mediated anchorage-independent growth. As expression of CYLD S418A does not completely suppress IKK?-driven cell transformation, CYLD is unlikely to be the only IKK? substrate important for cell transformation. However, the strength of the approach described here, as opposed to more targeted methods of substrate identification, is that it has simultaneously identified a large number of other potentially important IKK? substrates. Available in vitro assays should allow other putative substrates to be efficiently tested for their ability to modulate IKK?-driven cell transformation, leading to both an increased understanding of how IKK? controls oncogenesis, and, perhaps, new insights into therapeutic targets for IKK?-driven cancers.  Discussion IKK? plays a central role in regulating innate immunity and also acts as an oncogene in a significant fraction of breast cancers. To gain a deeper understanding of the role(s) of IKK? in these biological processes, we used an unbiased proteomic and bioinformatic approach, which allowed us to identify the optimal substrate phosphorylation motif for IKK?. Based on these findings, a proteome-wide search for sites that correspond to the IKK? phosphorylation motif then led to the identification of a large number of putative IKK? substrates. Of the candidate IKK? substrates identified, many have known roles in inflammatory and/or oncogenic signaling pathways ( Table 1 ). In particular, serine 418 of the deubiquitinase and tumor suppressor CYLD emerged as a very likely site of IKK? phosphorylation. Here we showed direct in vitro phosphorylation of CYLD by IKK?, and have used mass spectrometry and an IKK? phospho-substrate antibody to show that Ser418 of CYLD is, in fact, the in vivo site phosphorylated by IKK?. While it has been reported that IKK? and IKK? can phosphorylate Ser418 of CYLD ( Reiley et al., 2005 ), we demonstrated that CYLD is phosphorylated much more efficiently by IKK? than by either of the canonical IKKs. Upon finding that an oncoprotein is capable of strongly phosphorylating a known tumor suppressor, we predicted that CYLD phosphorylation at Ser418 might play an important role in cell transformation. Indeed, we found that introduction of CYLD S418A suppressed anchorage-independent growth in IKK?-transformed NIH-3T3 cells and hindered IKK?-driven tumor growth. The data presented here therefore define one potential mechanism by which IKK? induces tumorigenesis. Further examination showed that phosphorylation of CYLD at S418 decreases its deubiquitinase activity and increases NF-?B activation. Activation of NF-?B therefore appears to be one important mechanism by which CYLD phosphorylation regulates cell transformation. As CYLD also has functions independent of NF-?B it is likely that other signaling pathways may also be involved. Moreover, we recognize that IKK? may also modulate other substrates in addition to CYLD during cell transformation. Thus, although further work will be necessary to evaluate the full mechanisms by which IKK? and CYLD contribute to transformation, these observations connect an oncogene and a tumor suppressor that both regulate NF-?B to cell transformation. The role of chronic inflammation in the development of inflammation-related cancers is well-known, but the mechanisms by which inflammatory mediators cause cell transformation are poorly understood ( Basseres and Baldwin, 2006 ; Karin and Greten, 2005 ; Perkins, 2007 ). For kinases involved in these signaling pathways, such as the anti-viral mediator and oncoprotein IKK?, our inability to identify the complete repertoire of intracellular substrates has hindered progress towards understanding how these enzymes exert their oncogenic effects. The techniques described here, involving the identification of the phosphorylation motif for a kinase, followed by development of a phospho-substrate antibody and bioinformatic prediction of substrates, can provide an efficient and unbiased method for the identification and validation of physiologically relevant kinase substrates. We have validated this method through the identification of CYLD as a novel IKK? substrate and have shown that CYLD phosphorylation is necessary for full IKK?-mediated anchorage-independent growth. As expression of CYLD S418A does not completely suppress IKK?-driven cell transformation, CYLD is unlikely to be the only IKK? substrate important for cell transformation. However, the strength of the approach described here, as opposed to more targeted methods of substrate identification, is that it has simultaneously identified a large number of other potentially important IKK? substrates. Available in vitro assays should allow other putative substrates to be efficiently tested for their ability to modulate IKK?-driven cell transformation, leading to both an increased understanding of how IKK? controls oncogenesis, and, perhaps, new insights into therapeutic targets for IKK?-driven cancers. 