CARBOPLATIN-BASED PRIMARY CHEMOTHERAPY FOR INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN WITH CNS TUMORS Background A carboplatin-based chemotherapy regimen was used as primary post-operative therapy in infants with central nervous system tumors to limit renal and ototoxicity and to target systemic exposure. Patients and Methods 53 patients ? age 3 years with embryonal CNS tumor medulloblastoma (MB, n=20), ependymoma (EP, n=21), choroid plexus carcinoma (CPCA, n=5), and primitive embryonal neoplasms including atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors (n=7) were treated with cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and carboplatin. Radiation therapy was utilized only for residual disease at the end of chemotherapy or disease progression. Results The response rate after two cycles of chemotherapy was 34% (complete response [CR] 13.8%, partial response [PR] 20.7%). Myelosuppression was the dominant toxicity; 2 patients had toxic deaths related to thrombocytopenia with trauma. The five-year overall survival (OS) was 49 ± 7%, and the progression-free survival (PFS) was 31 ± 7% with a median follow-up of 11.4 yrs (range: 5.2–15.0 years). For medulloblastoma, the five-year PFS is 26% ± 9%; for EP 33 ± 10%; for CPCA, 80 ± 18%; for PNET and atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (ATRT) 0%. Localized ependymoma patients with GTR who did not undergo radiotherapy had a 5-year PFS of 57 ±17% and OS of 71 ± 16%. Two patients developed late second malignancies; one associated with germline p53 mutation. Conclusion The results confirm that carboplatin has similar activity to cisplatin in otherwise similar regimens. Five-year survival data are comparable to those reported in other recent studies, including high-dose chemotherapy studies. Of note, is the marked activity in CPCA and gross totally resected ependymoma  INTRODUCTION Postoperative chemotherapy is the standard approach to the treatment of central nervous system tumors in infants and very young children ( 1 – 6 ), with the goal of delaying or avoiding the need for radiation therapy with its known adverse neuropsychologic and neuroendocrine effects in this population ( 7 – 20 ). While Duffner et al demonstrated that cisplatin-based chemotherapy regimens led to objective response rates of 40% overall, the median time-to-progression was only 6–9 months ( 1 ). More recent studies have demonstrated that certain subgroups of patients have been cured by postoperative cisplatin-based chemotherapy alone ( 4 , 5 ). Grill et al reported the feasibility of chemotherapy alone in younger patients with ependymomas ( 5 ) and medulloblastomas ( 4 ) with 4-year PFS for ependymoma of 22%, and 5-year PFS for gross totally resected M0 medulloblastoma of 29% (CI=18–44%). Geyer et al. demonstrated that a more intensive chemotherapy regimen led to avoidance of radiation therapy (RT) in 58% of medulloblastoma patients, with a 5-year OS and PFS of 43±3% and 27±3% respectively( 2 ). Finally, Rutkowski et al. reported that among M0 medulloblastoma patients, dose-intense chemotherapy with intravenous and intrathecal (IT) methotrexate led to 5-year PFS and OS of 68 ± 8% and 77 ± 8%, respectively ( 3 ). Here, we report results of a phase II study of a carboplatin-based chemotherapy regimen and its effects on the response and survival in infants and young children with CNS tumors. This regimen differs from some other published reports with respect to the use of carboplatin instead of cisplatin in otherwise similar combination regimens with the use of 99Tc plasma clearance.  PATIENTS AND METHODS Between May 1992 and April 1996, 54 children with primary intra-cranial CNS tumors were treated on a collaborative, limited-institution study. Eligibility included children of age ? 3 years at diagnosis with histological confirmation of medulloblastoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumors [PNET], atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (ATRT), choroid plexus carcinoma (CPCA), or ependymoma. Patients were required to have an estimated life expectancy of at least eight weeks as well as normal hepatic and renal function for age. The parents of all patients signed a document of informed consent consistent with institutional and federal guidelines, which outlined the investigational nature of the treatment. Surgical resection was carried out with the intent of maximal safe resection. The extent of resection was defined as: gross total resection (GTR), resection of all visible tumor confirmed by postoperative neuroimaging; near total resection (NTR), less than total but >90% resection; subtotal resection (STR), <90% but >50% resection; biopsy (Bx), <50% resection. All patients had the extent of resection confirmed with postoperative MRI scans, which were generally obtained within the first 72 hours of surgery. Postoperative neuraxis evaluation included lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology and spinal MRI, generally done within 10–14 days of surgery, followed by the assignment of Chang “M” stage.( 22 ) Chemotherapy The chemotherapy regimen consisted of cyclophosphamide, 1200 mg/m2 along with MESNA on day 1, carboplatin at a dose targeted to produce a systemic exposure (AUC) of 6.5, on day 2, based on 99Tc renal clearance measurements of glomerular filtration rate, as previously described ( 23 ); etoposide (VP-16), 100 mg/m2 was given intravenously on days 1 and 2, following cyclophosphamide and carboplatin. Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (5 mcg/kg) was given for 10–14 days starting on day 3. Each cycle was 3 weeks in duration. The total scheduled duration of therapy was 16 cycles. Delays in administration beyond day 28 or grade 4 hematological toxicity (defined as an absolute neutrophil count <500/mm3 or platelet count of <25,000/mm3) led to an initial 20% reduction in the cyclophosphamide dose; the second dose of VP-16 was eliminated in patients with persistent myelotoxicity. Carboplatin doses were reduced only if previously-described dose modifications were insufficient to avoid grade 4 hematologic toxicity. Toxicities were graded according to the Common Toxicity Criteria, version 1. Therapy was held if serum creatinine was greater than twice the pretreatment level. Once the serum creatinine was less than twice the pretreatment level, 99Tc DTPA plasma clearance was repeated and the carboplatin dose recalculated. Blood counts, chemistries, renal (BUN, creatinine and 99Tc DTPA plasma clearance) and audiological evaluations were performed regularly. MRI of brain was performed after cycles 2 and 4 and thereafter every 4 courses until completion of therapy, every 3 months for during year 2, every 4 months during year 3 and 4 and every 6 months thereafter. Patients with initially positive neuraxis staging had spinal MRI and CSF cytology at the same intervals. Patients whose neuraxis staging was negative initially, had spinal MRIs performed after cycle 8 of chemotherapy, at completion of scheduled chemotherapy and every 6 months for the first 18 months after completion of therapy. Response was determined at the completion of two cycles of chemotherapy by comparing the product of the largest two cross sectional diameters of the tumor before and after chemotherapy. A complete response (CR) was defined as the disappearance of all tumors. A partial response (PR) was defined as at least a 50% decrease in tumor size. Patients with less than a 50% change in size were considered to have stable disease (SD). Progressive disease was defined as an increase of more than 25% increase in size or the appearance of any new lesion. For patients with more than one evaluable site of disease, overall response was determined by the site showing the least response. Thus, patients with an objective response at either the primary or metastatic site and disease progression at the remaining site were considered to have disease progression overall. Radiation Therapy Radiation therapy (RT) was planned only for those patients with neuraxis dissemination at diagnosis, residual disease at the completion of chemotherapy, those who discontinued chemotherapy early (less than 12 cycles) as a result of toxicity, or those with disease progression. In the above groups, RT was to start as soon as possible after allowing for appropriate treatment planning. The RT dose and volume were adjusted according to age, diagnosis, and extent of disease (as indicated below). All patients with M0 disease received conventional fractionation (CF) at 150–160 cGy/day. Patients with M+ disease received hyperfractionated schedules (HF) using 110 cGy bid with a six-hour interfraction interval. Patients with ependymoma were given CF posterior fossa RT only; 48 Gy, 51 Gy, or 54 Gy, respectively, for ages <18 months, 18–30 months, or >30 months at the time RT was given. Patients with medulloblastoma, CPCA, or PNET were treated with craniospinal RT to doses of 27 Gy CF (35.2 Gy HF for M+), 30 Gy CF (40.7 Gy HF for M+) or 34.5 Gy CF (48.4 Gy HF for M+), respectively, for ages <18 months, 18–30 months, or >30 months at the time RT was given. Subsequent local boost doses to the pre operative/pre chemotherapy volume plus 2 cm margins delivered a total of 48 Gy CF (55 Gy HF for M+), 51 Gy CF (60.5 Gy HF for M+), or 54 Gy CF (66 Gy HF for M+), respectively, based upon the age criteria noted above. Statistical Considerations Overall survival (OS) was measured from the date on study to death from any cause or last date of contact. Progression-free survival (PFS) was measured from the date on study to the date of disease progression, death due to tumor or last contact. Five patients were censored at the dates of second malignancy (n=2) and deaths due to hematological toxicity (n=2) or death unrelated to tumor progression or toxicity (cause unknown, n=1) with respect to PFS but are considered failures at these dates in the estimate of event-free survival (EFS). Distributions of PFS, EFS, and OS were estimated using the method of Kaplan-Meier ( 24 ). Standard errors for the Kaplan-Meier estimates were calculated by the method proposed by Peto and coworkers ( 25 ). Analyses of the relationships between clinical and treatment factors versus outcome were performed using the log rank test or the exact log-rank test when the number of failures was small. Exact tests were performed using StatXact (Cytel Software corporation, Cambridge, MA). Survival estimates are based on follow-up observations as of October 2007.  Chemotherapy The chemotherapy regimen consisted of cyclophosphamide, 1200 mg/m2 along with MESNA on day 1, carboplatin at a dose targeted to produce a systemic exposure (AUC) of 6.5, on day 2, based on 99Tc renal clearance measurements of glomerular filtration rate, as previously described ( 23 ); etoposide (VP-16), 100 mg/m2 was given intravenously on days 1 and 2, following cyclophosphamide and carboplatin. Granulocyte colony stimulating factor (5 mcg/kg) was given for 10–14 days starting on day 3. Each cycle was 3 weeks in duration. The total scheduled duration of therapy was 16 cycles. Delays in administration beyond day 28 or grade 4 hematological toxicity (defined as an absolute neutrophil count <500/mm3 or platelet count of <25,000/mm3) led to an initial 20% reduction in the cyclophosphamide dose; the second dose of VP-16 was eliminated in patients with persistent myelotoxicity. Carboplatin doses were reduced only if previously-described dose modifications were insufficient to avoid grade 4 hematologic toxicity. Toxicities were graded according to the Common Toxicity Criteria, version 1. Therapy was held if serum creatinine was greater than twice the pretreatment level. Once the serum creatinine was less than twice the pretreatment level, 99Tc DTPA plasma clearance was repeated and the carboplatin dose recalculated. Blood counts, chemistries, renal (BUN, creatinine and 99Tc DTPA plasma clearance) and audiological evaluations were performed regularly. MRI of brain was performed after cycles 2 and 4 and thereafter every 4 courses until completion of therapy, every 3 months for during year 2, every 4 months during year 3 and 4 and every 6 months thereafter. Patients with initially positive neuraxis staging had spinal MRI and CSF cytology at the same intervals. Patients whose neuraxis staging was negative initially, had spinal MRIs performed after cycle 8 of chemotherapy, at completion of scheduled chemotherapy and every 6 months for the first 18 months after completion of therapy. Response was determined at the completion of two cycles of chemotherapy by comparing the product of the largest two cross sectional diameters of the tumor before and after chemotherapy. A complete response (CR) was defined as the disappearance of all tumors. A partial response (PR) was defined as at least a 50% decrease in tumor size. Patients with less than a 50% change in size were considered to have stable disease (SD). Progressive disease was defined as an increase of more than 25% increase in size or the appearance of any new lesion. For patients with more than one evaluable site of disease, overall response was determined by the site showing the least response. Thus, patients with an objective response at either the primary or metastatic site and disease progression at the remaining site were considered to have disease progression overall.  Radiation Therapy Radiation therapy (RT) was planned only for those patients with neuraxis dissemination at diagnosis, residual disease at the completion of chemotherapy, those who discontinued chemotherapy early (less than 12 cycles) as a result of toxicity, or those with disease progression. In the above groups, RT was to start as soon as possible after allowing for appropriate treatment planning. The RT dose and volume were adjusted according to age, diagnosis, and extent of disease (as indicated below). All patients with M0 disease received conventional fractionation (CF) at 150–160 cGy/day. Patients with M+ disease received hyperfractionated schedules (HF) using 110 cGy bid with a six-hour interfraction interval. Patients with ependymoma were given CF posterior fossa RT only; 48 Gy, 51 Gy, or 54 Gy, respectively, for ages <18 months, 18–30 months, or >30 months at the time RT was given. Patients with medulloblastoma, CPCA, or PNET were treated with craniospinal RT to doses of 27 Gy CF (35.2 Gy HF for M+), 30 Gy CF (40.7 Gy HF for M+) or 34.5 Gy CF (48.4 Gy HF for M+), respectively, for ages <18 months, 18–30 months, or >30 months at the time RT was given. Subsequent local boost doses to the pre operative/pre chemotherapy volume plus 2 cm margins delivered a total of 48 Gy CF (55 Gy HF for M+), 51 Gy CF (60.5 Gy HF for M+), or 54 Gy CF (66 Gy HF for M+), respectively, based upon the age criteria noted above.  Statistical Considerations Overall survival (OS) was measured from the date on study to death from any cause or last date of contact. Progression-free survival (PFS) was measured from the date on study to the date of disease progression, death due to tumor or last contact. Five patients were censored at the dates of second malignancy (n=2) and deaths due to hematological toxicity (n=2) or death unrelated to tumor progression or toxicity (cause unknown, n=1) with respect to PFS but are considered failures at these dates in the estimate of event-free survival (EFS). Distributions of PFS, EFS, and OS were estimated using the method of Kaplan-Meier ( 24 ). Standard errors for the Kaplan-Meier estimates were calculated by the method proposed by Peto and coworkers ( 25 ). Analyses of the relationships between clinical and treatment factors versus outcome were performed using the log rank test or the exact log-rank test when the number of failures was small. Exact tests were performed using StatXact (Cytel Software corporation, Cambridge, MA). Survival estimates are based on follow-up observations as of October 2007.  RESULTS Tumor Histology, disease extent and degree of resection One patient who, on central pathology review, had a diagnosis of anaplastic astrocytoma was declared ineligible, Among the 53 eligible patients, the concordance between institutional diagnosis and central review diagnosis was 100%. There were 29 males and 24 females with a median age of 2.15 years (range, 0.18–3.97). Table 1 outlines the initial tumor location, M stage and extent of resection by tumor category of the 53 eligible patients. There were 20 patients with medulloblastoma (MB); 21 with ependymoma (EP); 5 with CPCA; and 7 with other primitive embryonal neoplasms (3 supratentorial primitive neuroepithelial tumors, 1 medulloepithelioma, 2 pineoblastoma, 1 atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor). Neuraxis staging was complete in all but 2 patients. All patients were evaluable for extent of resection. Response to Chemotherapy Among the 53 eligible patients, 30 patients had measurable disease. One patient withdrew consent prior to completion of the first two courses of chemotherapy and is not evaluable for response. Thus, 29 patients with measurable disease were assessable for response after completing two cycles of chemotherapy. The overall objective response rate (CR + PR) in these 29 patients was 34% (complete response [CR] 13.8%, partial response [PR] 20.7%); 62.1% experienced stable disease [SD] and 3.4% progressive disease [PD]. Among 23 GTR/M0 patients, 22 remained in complete and continuous remission after 2 cycles of chemotherapy and one patient experienced progressive disease after 2 cycles. Table 2 shows the responses among the various tumor subgroups. Among patients evaluable for response, 15 patients received ? 12 cycles of chemotherapy with at least stable disease. An additional 14 completed < 12 cycles free of progression. Toxicity of Chemotherapy The frequency of hematologic toxicity and related events including delays in hematologic recovery beyond day 28, and the number of patients requiring dose modifications and incidence of infections after treatment cycles 1, 3, and 5 are summarized in Table 3 . Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (platelet counts less than 25 × 103/mm3) was the most common event followed by neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count of less than 500/mm3). Among these 53 patients, 8 stopped chemotherapy early because of hematologic toxicity after a median of ten cycles (range: 3–11 cycles). There were 2 toxic deaths; both were intracranial hemorrhages associated with trauma during periods of thrombocytopenia. Non-hematologic toxicities were infrequent. Allergic reactions to carboplatin were observed in four patients, and only one patient had a greater than 20% increase in creatinine from pretreatment baseline. Ototoxicity was uncommon; 3 patients experienced grade 3 ototoxicity after 8–12 courses of therapy. Cyclophosphamide-related grade 1 hematuria was observed in one patient twice during course 12 of therapy. Use of RT and Subsequent Outcome Figure 1 summarizes the therapy received by patients and their subsequent outcome. Among the 53 patients, 9 completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR and thus did not receive consolidative XRT per protocol. Six patients did not complete chemotherapy because of non-compliance (n=4) and toxic death (n=2). Hence, 38 patients were potentially eligible for protocol-directed or salvage RT for the following reasons: completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD (n=6), experiencing progression before completing chemotherapy (n=24), or early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8). Eighteen received RT and 20 did not because of parental (n=18) or physician (n=2) preference. Among the nine patients completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR, 5 (50%) remain in CCR at a median of 12.4 years (range: 5.2–13.7 yrs) from study entry; 3 had PD at a median of 1.7 yrs (range: 1.2–4.7 yrs), and one patient developed a second malignancy at 6.2 years from study entry. Six patients completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD. Although all were to receive consolidative RT according to protocol, only 1 did and remained progression-free until developing a second malignancy at 2 years from study entry. Four of five who did not receive consolidative RT had PD at a median time of 1.8 years (range: 1.3–2.1 yrs) from study entry and 1 remains progression free at 10.2 yrs. Among the 4 patients who had PD, three received salvage RT and one also underwent high-dose chemotherapy; all four remain alive without subsequent progression of their disease. Twenty-four patients experienced PD before completing chemotherapy (median number of courses 7 range, 1–13). Twelve received scheduled salvage RT, and 6 remain free of subsequent progression with a 4-year second PFS of 42 ± 13%. Among the 12 who did not receive RT, all patients progressed or died within 2 years of study enrollment. Fourteen patients had early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8), non-compliance (n=4), or toxic deaths (n=2). Of the 8 with toxicity, (median number of cycles 10, range 3–11), five patients received consolidative RT and three of these (medulloblastoma [n=2], ependymoma [n=1]) remain failure-free at 10.3, 11.2 and 14.8 years from study entry. Two of the five patients progressed at 1.4 and 2.1 years from study entry. Three patients with toxicity-related early termination of chemotherapy did not receive consolidative RT and all have died at 2.0, 3.9, and 9.6 years from study enrollment. Two patients with M+ disease at diagnosis completed chemotherapy free of progression (medulloblastoma n=1, CPCA n=1). The, patient with CPCA died of a second malignancy free of her original tumor. The remaining patient did not receive adjuvant XRT and. remains alive at 15.6 yrs from study enrollment. Survival and Prognostic Factors For the 24 patients who remain alive, the median follow-up from diagnosis is 11.4 yrs (range: 5.2–15.0 years). Table 4 lists the 5-year survival data for all patient groups in the current study as well as other recent studies. The 5-year OS and PFS (± standard error) for the entire group of 53 patients is 49 ± 7% and 31 ± 7%, respectively ( Fig 2 ). The 5-year PFS for histological subgroups are shown in figure 3. Among the 6 M0 medulloblastoma patients with a GTR, PFS and OS at 5 years were 40 ± 18% and 33 ± 16%, respectively. As specified in the protocol, 2 patients who completed chemotherapy without progression did not receive RT and both remain disease-free. Three others progressed on chemotherapy, underwent salvage RT and died of their disease. One patient had a toxic death (head trauma and thrombocytopenia). Among all M0 patients with medulloblastoma regardless of extent of resection, 5-year EFS, PFS and OS were 33± 14%, 38 ± 15% and 44±15%, respectively. Among the 9 M0 ependymoma patients who underwent GTR, EFS, PFS and OS at 5 years were 56 ±15%, 56 ±15%, and 78 ± 13%, respectively. Five patients completed chemotherapy and did not receive RT; 4 remain disease-free at last follow-up and one patient died of a second malignancy without recurrence of his ependymoma. Among the 4 remaining M0 GTR ependymoma patients, 2 received RT after early termination of chemotherapy due to toxicity; one of the two progressed 1.8 years after local RT and underwent radiosurgery; both patients are disease-free long-term (11.2 years and 14.5 years from diagnosis); 2 others experienced disease progression with chemotherapy; but were successfully salvaged with RT with one surviving at 13.8 years from diagnosis and one dying from disease at 3.9 years from diagnosis. Among the 5 patients with CPCA, 4 were M0, 1 had M2 disease. All patients underwent a GTR. Only one of five with CPCA has relapsed at 9.7 months and died of disease; one other expired from a secondary malignancy at 9.6 years from study enrollment. 5 year OS and PFS are 60 ±19% and 80 ± 18%, respectively The median time to disease progression for all patients was 8.3 months: 7 months for MB, 13 months for EP, and 6.5 months for PNET. Patterns of Failure and Late Toxicity Among the 34 patients with PD, 14 had progression of their disease prior to receiving RT and were evaluable for patterns of failure during or following the completion of chemotherapy. Among this group, 10 (71%; 4 MB, 6 EP), including four who were initially M+, had recurrences only at their primary tumor site. Four (29%; 3 MB, 1 EP) had both local and distant recurrences, three of whom were initially free of distant disease. Of note, no initially M0 patient had an isolated distant recurrence. One patient with M3 medulloblastoma received 12 courses of chemotherapy prior to experiencing PD, then underwent radiotherapy at 5 years of age (5450 cGy locally and 3520 CSI) and developed multiple radiotherapy-related complications, 6 years after coming off study. These included transient ischemic episodes, a cerebrovascular accident, congestive heart failure and esophageal strictures requiring regular esophageal dilatations. Two patients have developed second malignancies. One CPCA developed treatment related myelodysplasia 4 months after completion of therapy (17 courses of chemotherapy plus consolidative RT). The patient had a germline p53 mutation and a family history suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Another patient with a complete resection of a posterior fossa ependymoma developed biopsy-proven glioblastoma multiforme at the site of her original tumor 55 months after completion of chemotherapy; she had not received RT.  RESULTS Tumor Histology, disease extent and degree of resection One patient who, on central pathology review, had a diagnosis of anaplastic astrocytoma was declared ineligible, Among the 53 eligible patients, the concordance between institutional diagnosis and central review diagnosis was 100%. There were 29 males and 24 females with a median age of 2.15 years (range, 0.18–3.97). Table 1 outlines the initial tumor location, M stage and extent of resection by tumor category of the 53 eligible patients. There were 20 patients with medulloblastoma (MB); 21 with ependymoma (EP); 5 with CPCA; and 7 with other primitive embryonal neoplasms (3 supratentorial primitive neuroepithelial tumors, 1 medulloepithelioma, 2 pineoblastoma, 1 atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor). Neuraxis staging was complete in all but 2 patients. All patients were evaluable for extent of resection. Response to Chemotherapy Among the 53 eligible patients, 30 patients had measurable disease. One patient withdrew consent prior to completion of the first two courses of chemotherapy and is not evaluable for response. Thus, 29 patients with measurable disease were assessable for response after completing two cycles of chemotherapy. The overall objective response rate (CR + PR) in these 29 patients was 34% (complete response [CR] 13.8%, partial response [PR] 20.7%); 62.1% experienced stable disease [SD] and 3.4% progressive disease [PD]. Among 23 GTR/M0 patients, 22 remained in complete and continuous remission after 2 cycles of chemotherapy and one patient experienced progressive disease after 2 cycles. Table 2 shows the responses among the various tumor subgroups. Among patients evaluable for response, 15 patients received ? 12 cycles of chemotherapy with at least stable disease. An additional 14 completed < 12 cycles free of progression. Toxicity of Chemotherapy The frequency of hematologic toxicity and related events including delays in hematologic recovery beyond day 28, and the number of patients requiring dose modifications and incidence of infections after treatment cycles 1, 3, and 5 are summarized in Table 3 . Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (platelet counts less than 25 × 103/mm3) was the most common event followed by neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count of less than 500/mm3). Among these 53 patients, 8 stopped chemotherapy early because of hematologic toxicity after a median of ten cycles (range: 3–11 cycles). There were 2 toxic deaths; both were intracranial hemorrhages associated with trauma during periods of thrombocytopenia. Non-hematologic toxicities were infrequent. Allergic reactions to carboplatin were observed in four patients, and only one patient had a greater than 20% increase in creatinine from pretreatment baseline. Ototoxicity was uncommon; 3 patients experienced grade 3 ototoxicity after 8–12 courses of therapy. Cyclophosphamide-related grade 1 hematuria was observed in one patient twice during course 12 of therapy. Use of RT and Subsequent Outcome Figure 1 summarizes the therapy received by patients and their subsequent outcome. Among the 53 patients, 9 completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR and thus did not receive consolidative XRT per protocol. Six patients did not complete chemotherapy because of non-compliance (n=4) and toxic death (n=2). Hence, 38 patients were potentially eligible for protocol-directed or salvage RT for the following reasons: completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD (n=6), experiencing progression before completing chemotherapy (n=24), or early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8). Eighteen received RT and 20 did not because of parental (n=18) or physician (n=2) preference. Among the nine patients completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR, 5 (50%) remain in CCR at a median of 12.4 years (range: 5.2–13.7 yrs) from study entry; 3 had PD at a median of 1.7 yrs (range: 1.2–4.7 yrs), and one patient developed a second malignancy at 6.2 years from study entry. Six patients completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD. Although all were to receive consolidative RT according to protocol, only 1 did and remained progression-free until developing a second malignancy at 2 years from study entry. Four of five who did not receive consolidative RT had PD at a median time of 1.8 years (range: 1.3–2.1 yrs) from study entry and 1 remains progression free at 10.2 yrs. Among the 4 patients who had PD, three received salvage RT and one also underwent high-dose chemotherapy; all four remain alive without subsequent progression of their disease. Twenty-four patients experienced PD before completing chemotherapy (median number of courses 7 range, 1–13). Twelve received scheduled salvage RT, and 6 remain free of subsequent progression with a 4-year second PFS of 42 ± 13%. Among the 12 who did not receive RT, all patients progressed or died within 2 years of study enrollment. Fourteen patients had early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8), non-compliance (n=4), or toxic deaths (n=2). Of the 8 with toxicity, (median number of cycles 10, range 3–11), five patients received consolidative RT and three of these (medulloblastoma [n=2], ependymoma [n=1]) remain failure-free at 10.3, 11.2 and 14.8 years from study entry. Two of the five patients progressed at 1.4 and 2.1 years from study entry. Three patients with toxicity-related early termination of chemotherapy did not receive consolidative RT and all have died at 2.0, 3.9, and 9.6 years from study enrollment. Two patients with M+ disease at diagnosis completed chemotherapy free of progression (medulloblastoma n=1, CPCA n=1). The, patient with CPCA died of a second malignancy free of her original tumor. The remaining patient did not receive adjuvant XRT and. remains alive at 15.6 yrs from study enrollment. Survival and Prognostic Factors For the 24 patients who remain alive, the median follow-up from diagnosis is 11.4 yrs (range: 5.2–15.0 years). Table 4 lists the 5-year survival data for all patient groups in the current study as well as other recent studies. The 5-year OS and PFS (± standard error) for the entire group of 53 patients is 49 ± 7% and 31 ± 7%, respectively ( Fig 2 ). The 5-year PFS for histological subgroups are shown in figure 3. Among the 6 M0 medulloblastoma patients with a GTR, PFS and OS at 5 years were 40 ± 18% and 33 ± 16%, respectively. As specified in the protocol, 2 patients who completed chemotherapy without progression did not receive RT and both remain disease-free. Three others progressed on chemotherapy, underwent salvage RT and died of their disease. One patient had a toxic death (head trauma and thrombocytopenia). Among all M0 patients with medulloblastoma regardless of extent of resection, 5-year EFS, PFS and OS were 33± 14%, 38 ± 15% and 44±15%, respectively. Among the 9 M0 ependymoma patients who underwent GTR, EFS, PFS and OS at 5 years were 56 ±15%, 56 ±15%, and 78 ± 13%, respectively. Five patients completed chemotherapy and did not receive RT; 4 remain disease-free at last follow-up and one patient died of a second malignancy without recurrence of his ependymoma. Among the 4 remaining M0 GTR ependymoma patients, 2 received RT after early termination of chemotherapy due to toxicity; one of the two progressed 1.8 years after local RT and underwent radiosurgery; both patients are disease-free long-term (11.2 years and 14.5 years from diagnosis); 2 others experienced disease progression with chemotherapy; but were successfully salvaged with RT with one surviving at 13.8 years from diagnosis and one dying from disease at 3.9 years from diagnosis. Among the 5 patients with CPCA, 4 were M0, 1 had M2 disease. All patients underwent a GTR. Only one of five with CPCA has relapsed at 9.7 months and died of disease; one other expired from a secondary malignancy at 9.6 years from study enrollment. 5 year OS and PFS are 60 ±19% and 80 ± 18%, respectively The median time to disease progression for all patients was 8.3 months: 7 months for MB, 13 months for EP, and 6.5 months for PNET. Patterns of Failure and Late Toxicity Among the 34 patients with PD, 14 had progression of their disease prior to receiving RT and were evaluable for patterns of failure during or following the completion of chemotherapy. Among this group, 10 (71%; 4 MB, 6 EP), including four who were initially M+, had recurrences only at their primary tumor site. Four (29%; 3 MB, 1 EP) had both local and distant recurrences, three of whom were initially free of distant disease. Of note, no initially M0 patient had an isolated distant recurrence. One patient with M3 medulloblastoma received 12 courses of chemotherapy prior to experiencing PD, then underwent radiotherapy at 5 years of age (5450 cGy locally and 3520 CSI) and developed multiple radiotherapy-related complications, 6 years after coming off study. These included transient ischemic episodes, a cerebrovascular accident, congestive heart failure and esophageal strictures requiring regular esophageal dilatations. Two patients have developed second malignancies. One CPCA developed treatment related myelodysplasia 4 months after completion of therapy (17 courses of chemotherapy plus consolidative RT). The patient had a germline p53 mutation and a family history suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Another patient with a complete resection of a posterior fossa ependymoma developed biopsy-proven glioblastoma multiforme at the site of her original tumor 55 months after completion of chemotherapy; she had not received RT.  Tumor Histology, disease extent and degree of resection One patient who, on central pathology review, had a diagnosis of anaplastic astrocytoma was declared ineligible, Among the 53 eligible patients, the concordance between institutional diagnosis and central review diagnosis was 100%. There were 29 males and 24 females with a median age of 2.15 years (range, 0.18–3.97). Table 1 outlines the initial tumor location, M stage and extent of resection by tumor category of the 53 eligible patients. There were 20 patients with medulloblastoma (MB); 21 with ependymoma (EP); 5 with CPCA; and 7 with other primitive embryonal neoplasms (3 supratentorial primitive neuroepithelial tumors, 1 medulloepithelioma, 2 pineoblastoma, 1 atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor). Neuraxis staging was complete in all but 2 patients. All patients were evaluable for extent of resection.  Tumor Histology, disease extent and degree of resection One patient who, on central pathology review, had a diagnosis of anaplastic astrocytoma was declared ineligible, Among the 53 eligible patients, the concordance between institutional diagnosis and central review diagnosis was 100%. There were 29 males and 24 females with a median age of 2.15 years (range, 0.18–3.97). Table 1 outlines the initial tumor location, M stage and extent of resection by tumor category of the 53 eligible patients. There were 20 patients with medulloblastoma (MB); 21 with ependymoma (EP); 5 with CPCA; and 7 with other primitive embryonal neoplasms (3 supratentorial primitive neuroepithelial tumors, 1 medulloepithelioma, 2 pineoblastoma, 1 atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor). Neuraxis staging was complete in all but 2 patients. All patients were evaluable for extent of resection.  Response to Chemotherapy Among the 53 eligible patients, 30 patients had measurable disease. One patient withdrew consent prior to completion of the first two courses of chemotherapy and is not evaluable for response. Thus, 29 patients with measurable disease were assessable for response after completing two cycles of chemotherapy. The overall objective response rate (CR + PR) in these 29 patients was 34% (complete response [CR] 13.8%, partial response [PR] 20.7%); 62.1% experienced stable disease [SD] and 3.4% progressive disease [PD]. Among 23 GTR/M0 patients, 22 remained in complete and continuous remission after 2 cycles of chemotherapy and one patient experienced progressive disease after 2 cycles. Table 2 shows the responses among the various tumor subgroups. Among patients evaluable for response, 15 patients received ? 12 cycles of chemotherapy with at least stable disease. An additional 14 completed < 12 cycles free of progression.  Response to Chemotherapy Among the 53 eligible patients, 30 patients had measurable disease. One patient withdrew consent prior to completion of the first two courses of chemotherapy and is not evaluable for response. Thus, 29 patients with measurable disease were assessable for response after completing two cycles of chemotherapy. The overall objective response rate (CR + PR) in these 29 patients was 34% (complete response [CR] 13.8%, partial response [PR] 20.7%); 62.1% experienced stable disease [SD] and 3.4% progressive disease [PD]. Among 23 GTR/M0 patients, 22 remained in complete and continuous remission after 2 cycles of chemotherapy and one patient experienced progressive disease after 2 cycles. Table 2 shows the responses among the various tumor subgroups. Among patients evaluable for response, 15 patients received ? 12 cycles of chemotherapy with at least stable disease. An additional 14 completed < 12 cycles free of progression.  Toxicity of Chemotherapy The frequency of hematologic toxicity and related events including delays in hematologic recovery beyond day 28, and the number of patients requiring dose modifications and incidence of infections after treatment cycles 1, 3, and 5 are summarized in Table 3 . Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (platelet counts less than 25 × 103/mm3) was the most common event followed by neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count of less than 500/mm3). Among these 53 patients, 8 stopped chemotherapy early because of hematologic toxicity after a median of ten cycles (range: 3–11 cycles). There were 2 toxic deaths; both were intracranial hemorrhages associated with trauma during periods of thrombocytopenia. Non-hematologic toxicities were infrequent. Allergic reactions to carboplatin were observed in four patients, and only one patient had a greater than 20% increase in creatinine from pretreatment baseline. Ototoxicity was uncommon; 3 patients experienced grade 3 ototoxicity after 8–12 courses of therapy. Cyclophosphamide-related grade 1 hematuria was observed in one patient twice during course 12 of therapy.  Toxicity of Chemotherapy The frequency of hematologic toxicity and related events including delays in hematologic recovery beyond day 28, and the number of patients requiring dose modifications and incidence of infections after treatment cycles 1, 3, and 5 are summarized in Table 3 . Grade 4 thrombocytopenia (platelet counts less than 25 × 103/mm3) was the most common event followed by neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count of less than 500/mm3). Among these 53 patients, 8 stopped chemotherapy early because of hematologic toxicity after a median of ten cycles (range: 3–11 cycles). There were 2 toxic deaths; both were intracranial hemorrhages associated with trauma during periods of thrombocytopenia. Non-hematologic toxicities were infrequent. Allergic reactions to carboplatin were observed in four patients, and only one patient had a greater than 20% increase in creatinine from pretreatment baseline. Ototoxicity was uncommon; 3 patients experienced grade 3 ototoxicity after 8–12 courses of therapy. Cyclophosphamide-related grade 1 hematuria was observed in one patient twice during course 12 of therapy.  Use of RT and Subsequent Outcome Figure 1 summarizes the therapy received by patients and their subsequent outcome. Among the 53 patients, 9 completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR and thus did not receive consolidative XRT per protocol. Six patients did not complete chemotherapy because of non-compliance (n=4) and toxic death (n=2). Hence, 38 patients were potentially eligible for protocol-directed or salvage RT for the following reasons: completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD (n=6), experiencing progression before completing chemotherapy (n=24), or early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8). Eighteen received RT and 20 did not because of parental (n=18) or physician (n=2) preference. Among the nine patients completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR, 5 (50%) remain in CCR at a median of 12.4 years (range: 5.2–13.7 yrs) from study entry; 3 had PD at a median of 1.7 yrs (range: 1.2–4.7 yrs), and one patient developed a second malignancy at 6.2 years from study entry. Six patients completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD. Although all were to receive consolidative RT according to protocol, only 1 did and remained progression-free until developing a second malignancy at 2 years from study entry. Four of five who did not receive consolidative RT had PD at a median time of 1.8 years (range: 1.3–2.1 yrs) from study entry and 1 remains progression free at 10.2 yrs. Among the 4 patients who had PD, three received salvage RT and one also underwent high-dose chemotherapy; all four remain alive without subsequent progression of their disease. Twenty-four patients experienced PD before completing chemotherapy (median number of courses 7 range, 1–13). Twelve received scheduled salvage RT, and 6 remain free of subsequent progression with a 4-year second PFS of 42 ± 13%. Among the 12 who did not receive RT, all patients progressed or died within 2 years of study enrollment. Fourteen patients had early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8), non-compliance (n=4), or toxic deaths (n=2). Of the 8 with toxicity, (median number of cycles 10, range 3–11), five patients received consolidative RT and three of these (medulloblastoma [n=2], ependymoma [n=1]) remain failure-free at 10.3, 11.2 and 14.8 years from study entry. Two of the five patients progressed at 1.4 and 2.1 years from study entry. Three patients with toxicity-related early termination of chemotherapy did not receive consolidative RT and all have died at 2.0, 3.9, and 9.6 years from study enrollment. Two patients with M+ disease at diagnosis completed chemotherapy free of progression (medulloblastoma n=1, CPCA n=1). The, patient with CPCA died of a second malignancy free of her original tumor. The remaining patient did not receive adjuvant XRT and. remains alive at 15.6 yrs from study enrollment.  Use of RT and Subsequent Outcome Figure 1 summarizes the therapy received by patients and their subsequent outcome. Among the 53 patients, 9 completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR and thus did not receive consolidative XRT per protocol. Six patients did not complete chemotherapy because of non-compliance (n=4) and toxic death (n=2). Hence, 38 patients were potentially eligible for protocol-directed or salvage RT for the following reasons: completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD (n=6), experiencing progression before completing chemotherapy (n=24), or early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8). Eighteen received RT and 20 did not because of parental (n=18) or physician (n=2) preference. Among the nine patients completing at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy in CR or CCR, 5 (50%) remain in CCR at a median of 12.4 years (range: 5.2–13.7 yrs) from study entry; 3 had PD at a median of 1.7 yrs (range: 1.2–4.7 yrs), and one patient developed a second malignancy at 6.2 years from study entry. Six patients completed at least 12 cycles of chemotherapy with PR or SD. Although all were to receive consolidative RT according to protocol, only 1 did and remained progression-free until developing a second malignancy at 2 years from study entry. Four of five who did not receive consolidative RT had PD at a median time of 1.8 years (range: 1.3–2.1 yrs) from study entry and 1 remains progression free at 10.2 yrs. Among the 4 patients who had PD, three received salvage RT and one also underwent high-dose chemotherapy; all four remain alive without subsequent progression of their disease. Twenty-four patients experienced PD before completing chemotherapy (median number of courses 7 range, 1–13). Twelve received scheduled salvage RT, and 6 remain free of subsequent progression with a 4-year second PFS of 42 ± 13%. Among the 12 who did not receive RT, all patients progressed or died within 2 years of study enrollment. Fourteen patients had early termination of chemotherapy because of toxicity (n=8), non-compliance (n=4), or toxic deaths (n=2). Of the 8 with toxicity, (median number of cycles 10, range 3–11), five patients received consolidative RT and three of these (medulloblastoma [n=2], ependymoma [n=1]) remain failure-free at 10.3, 11.2 and 14.8 years from study entry. Two of the five patients progressed at 1.4 and 2.1 years from study entry. Three patients with toxicity-related early termination of chemotherapy did not receive consolidative RT and all have died at 2.0, 3.9, and 9.6 years from study enrollment. Two patients with M+ disease at diagnosis completed chemotherapy free of progression (medulloblastoma n=1, CPCA n=1). The, patient with CPCA died of a second malignancy free of her original tumor. The remaining patient did not receive adjuvant XRT and. remains alive at 15.6 yrs from study enrollment.  Survival and Prognostic Factors For the 24 patients who remain alive, the median follow-up from diagnosis is 11.4 yrs (range: 5.2–15.0 years). Table 4 lists the 5-year survival data for all patient groups in the current study as well as other recent studies. The 5-year OS and PFS (± standard error) for the entire group of 53 patients is 49 ± 7% and 31 ± 7%, respectively ( Fig 2 ). The 5-year PFS for histological subgroups are shown in figure 3. Among the 6 M0 medulloblastoma patients with a GTR, PFS and OS at 5 years were 40 ± 18% and 33 ± 16%, respectively. As specified in the protocol, 2 patients who completed chemotherapy without progression did not receive RT and both remain disease-free. Three others progressed on chemotherapy, underwent salvage RT and died of their disease. One patient had a toxic death (head trauma and thrombocytopenia). Among all M0 patients with medulloblastoma regardless of extent of resection, 5-year EFS, PFS and OS were 33± 14%, 38 ± 15% and 44±15%, respectively. Among the 9 M0 ependymoma patients who underwent GTR, EFS, PFS and OS at 5 years were 56 ±15%, 56 ±15%, and 78 ± 13%, respectively. Five patients completed chemotherapy and did not receive RT; 4 remain disease-free at last follow-up and one patient died of a second malignancy without recurrence of his ependymoma. Among the 4 remaining M0 GTR ependymoma patients, 2 received RT after early termination of chemotherapy due to toxicity; one of the two progressed 1.8 years after local RT and underwent radiosurgery; both patients are disease-free long-term (11.2 years and 14.5 years from diagnosis); 2 others experienced disease progression with chemotherapy; but were successfully salvaged with RT with one surviving at 13.8 years from diagnosis and one dying from disease at 3.9 years from diagnosis. Among the 5 patients with CPCA, 4 were M0, 1 had M2 disease. All patients underwent a GTR. Only one of five with CPCA has relapsed at 9.7 months and died of disease; one other expired from a secondary malignancy at 9.6 years from study enrollment. 5 year OS and PFS are 60 ±19% and 80 ± 18%, respectively The median time to disease progression for all patients was 8.3 months: 7 months for MB, 13 months for EP, and 6.5 months for PNET.  Survival and Prognostic Factors For the 24 patients who remain alive, the median follow-up from diagnosis is 11.4 yrs (range: 5.2–15.0 years). Table 4 lists the 5-year survival data for all patient groups in the current study as well as other recent studies. The 5-year OS and PFS (± standard error) for the entire group of 53 patients is 49 ± 7% and 31 ± 7%, respectively ( Fig 2 ). The 5-year PFS for histological subgroups are shown in figure 3. Among the 6 M0 medulloblastoma patients with a GTR, PFS and OS at 5 years were 40 ± 18% and 33 ± 16%, respectively. As specified in the protocol, 2 patients who completed chemotherapy without progression did not receive RT and both remain disease-free. Three others progressed on chemotherapy, underwent salvage RT and died of their disease. One patient had a toxic death (head trauma and thrombocytopenia). Among all M0 patients with medulloblastoma regardless of extent of resection, 5-year EFS, PFS and OS were 33± 14%, 38 ± 15% and 44±15%, respectively. Among the 9 M0 ependymoma patients who underwent GTR, EFS, PFS and OS at 5 years were 56 ±15%, 56 ±15%, and 78 ± 13%, respectively. Five patients completed chemotherapy and did not receive RT; 4 remain disease-free at last follow-up and one patient died of a second malignancy without recurrence of his ependymoma. Among the 4 remaining M0 GTR ependymoma patients, 2 received RT after early termination of chemotherapy due to toxicity; one of the two progressed 1.8 years after local RT and underwent radiosurgery; both patients are disease-free long-term (11.2 years and 14.5 years from diagnosis); 2 others experienced disease progression with chemotherapy; but were successfully salvaged with RT with one surviving at 13.8 years from diagnosis and one dying from disease at 3.9 years from diagnosis. Among the 5 patients with CPCA, 4 were M0, 1 had M2 disease. All patients underwent a GTR. Only one of five with CPCA has relapsed at 9.7 months and died of disease; one other expired from a secondary malignancy at 9.6 years from study enrollment. 5 year OS and PFS are 60 ±19% and 80 ± 18%, respectively The median time to disease progression for all patients was 8.3 months: 7 months for MB, 13 months for EP, and 6.5 months for PNET.  Patterns of Failure and Late Toxicity Among the 34 patients with PD, 14 had progression of their disease prior to receiving RT and were evaluable for patterns of failure during or following the completion of chemotherapy. Among this group, 10 (71%; 4 MB, 6 EP), including four who were initially M+, had recurrences only at their primary tumor site. Four (29%; 3 MB, 1 EP) had both local and distant recurrences, three of whom were initially free of distant disease. Of note, no initially M0 patient had an isolated distant recurrence. One patient with M3 medulloblastoma received 12 courses of chemotherapy prior to experiencing PD, then underwent radiotherapy at 5 years of age (5450 cGy locally and 3520 CSI) and developed multiple radiotherapy-related complications, 6 years after coming off study. These included transient ischemic episodes, a cerebrovascular accident, congestive heart failure and esophageal strictures requiring regular esophageal dilatations. Two patients have developed second malignancies. One CPCA developed treatment related myelodysplasia 4 months after completion of therapy (17 courses of chemotherapy plus consolidative RT). The patient had a germline p53 mutation and a family history suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Another patient with a complete resection of a posterior fossa ependymoma developed biopsy-proven glioblastoma multiforme at the site of her original tumor 55 months after completion of chemotherapy; she had not received RT.  Patterns of Failure and Late Toxicity Among the 34 patients with PD, 14 had progression of their disease prior to receiving RT and were evaluable for patterns of failure during or following the completion of chemotherapy. Among this group, 10 (71%; 4 MB, 6 EP), including four who were initially M+, had recurrences only at their primary tumor site. Four (29%; 3 MB, 1 EP) had both local and distant recurrences, three of whom were initially free of distant disease. Of note, no initially M0 patient had an isolated distant recurrence. One patient with M3 medulloblastoma received 12 courses of chemotherapy prior to experiencing PD, then underwent radiotherapy at 5 years of age (5450 cGy locally and 3520 CSI) and developed multiple radiotherapy-related complications, 6 years after coming off study. These included transient ischemic episodes, a cerebrovascular accident, congestive heart failure and esophageal strictures requiring regular esophageal dilatations. Two patients have developed second malignancies. One CPCA developed treatment related myelodysplasia 4 months after completion of therapy (17 courses of chemotherapy plus consolidative RT). The patient had a germline p53 mutation and a family history suggesting Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Another patient with a complete resection of a posterior fossa ependymoma developed biopsy-proven glioblastoma multiforme at the site of her original tumor 55 months after completion of chemotherapy; she had not received RT.  DISCUSSION This report documents one of the longest clinical follow-up periods for any published contemporary prospective primary chemotherapy regimen for CNS tumors in infants and young children. ( 1 – 6 , 30 , 31 ) The median follow-up time in the current series is 11.4 yrs compared to a range of 5.2–15.0 years for the other series. Alkylating and platinating agents such as cyclophosphamide and cisplatin, have remained the backbone of most infant CNS tumor chemotherapy regimens. Previous data from this institution have demonstrated that carboplatin and cisplatin are similar with respect to disease response and survival rates among newly diagnosed patients with embryonal tumors ( 21 ). Geyer et al ( 2 ) have also demonstrated similar response rates to induction therapy in young children with malignant brain tumors randomized to receive either carboplatin or cisplatin-based therapy. Moreover, the carboplatin-based maintenance regimen in the study by Geyer et al led to EFS similar to previously reported results of cisplatin-containing regimens ( 2 ). The clinical features (M:F ratio, age, % GTR, % M+) of the current study cohort are similar to other recent infant CNS tumor studies (Table 5) with the exception of the report by Chi et al ( 6 ). which included patients up to 10 years of age at diagnosis, leading to a greater median age (38 months) than present in other studies. OS of patients with PNET was significantly worse compared with EP (p=0.005), MB (p=0.064) and CPCA (p=0.02). Similarly, non-metastatic EP (p= 0.06) had better PFS and OS than those with other histologies. Table 2 details the response rates in the current study compared to those of other recent series. With the exception of poorer response rates in ependymoma in this series, the objective response rates among patients with similar tumor types are similar to other recent studies. Although Chi et al. reported a 91% response rate in patients with medulloblastoma, it is important to note that the intensity of treatment (conventional chemotherapy including methotrexate plus high dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue) and greater age of the patients (57% of patients were > 3 years of age) are substantially different from this and the other series listed ( 6 ). Comparison of the 5-year PFS for the various tumor groups in the current study to those of other recent studies ( table 4 ) demonstrates substantial overlap. For patients with medulloblastoma, the 5-year PFS of 26±9% in the current report is similar to most other series. Rutkowski et al.’s study reporting a 5-year PFS of 58 ± 9% represents the best results reported in the literature for patients with medulloblastoma ( 3 ). With respect to the better risk M0, GTR medulloblastoma patients, those in the current series who completed chemotherapy and did not receive irradiation had a 5-year PFS of 40 ± 18% (EFS of 33 ±16%). This result is similar to all but Rutkowski et al, who reported a PFS of 68 ± 8% and Dhall et al who reported a 5-year EFS of 64±13% ( 32 ). Of note, the Rutkowski series also employed a carboplatin-based regimen, but added intravenous and intrathecal methotrexate ( 3 ). Despite the encouraging PFS in that report, 82% of the group demonstrated neuroimaging evidence of leukoencephalopathy even without the use of radiation therapy. The neuropsychologic function of both groups was diminished although the decrement was greater in the irradiated group. This raises concern over the “functional efficacy” of this approach. For patients with ependymoma, the 5-year PFS of 33±10% is very similar to that of the other reported studies in table 5 (5-year PFS range: 27±8.4% to 32±6%). Among patients with M0 GTR ependymoma who completed chemotherapy without being irradiated, the 5-year PFS was 57±17%, similar to other reports ( 4 , 33 ). Although the numbers are small, the 80% ± 17% 5-year PFS for the 5 patients with CPCA is excellent. All had GTR. One patient with M+ disease had eventual CR to chemotherapy and survived progression-free for 19 months, but developed a second malignancy. None of the other four surviving CPCA patients received RT. These data suggest that the current study may improve the outcome of CPCA( 3 ; 4 ), although in M0 patients with GTR other reports show 50–80% PFS after surgery alone. ( 28 , 29 ). Our results confirm and extend confidence to recent reports ( 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 33 ) that suggest chemotherapy alone is curative for some subgroups of infants and young children with CNS tumors. Our results compare favorably to that of other regimens with respect to outcome. We also confirm earlier reports that RT is capable of salvaging a proportion of patients with recurrent tumor after chemotherapy ( 17 , 30 , 31 ). The 5-year freedom from secondary progression is 48% overall; 58% in the ependymoma group and 38% in the medulloblastoma group. However, this observation must be viewed within the context of unacceptably poor neuropsychologic function following CSI RT. ( 17 ) OS and PFS of most patient groups differed little between 2 and 5 years post diagnosis in this and other studies; there were few relapses beyond 2 years post diagnosis. These data suggest that extending the duration of conventional chemotherapy regimens beyond 12 cycles may not significantly alter outcome. ( 2 , 28 , 29 ) The pattern of failure in this and other studies are quite similar, dominated by local and local+ distant events; isolated distant events are uncommon. The above suggests that better and earlier local control is necessary, perhaps the use of early local conformal XRT may limit the local and local + distant relapse rates with acceptable toxicity. The major toxicity of the current regimen was myelosuppression. Hematologic toxicity was similar to that of other regimens ( 1 , 2 ). Only 5 pts (11%) treated with the current carboplatin-based regimen had grade 3 hearing loss, in contrast to 34% and 25%, respectively in the cisplatin-based regimens reported by Mason, et al ( 34 ) and Duffner et al ( 1 ). Similar to Geyer et al’s results in the carboplatin-induction arm ( 2 ), only 2% of pts in the current study had clinically significant changes in renal function. Two toxic deaths (4%), secondary to head trauma associated with thrombocytopenia were reported in the current series, compared to 17 (8%) toxic deaths in Geyer’s more dose-intense carboplatin-based regimen ( 2 ). Overall, the combined toxicities associated with the current regimen compare quite favorably with those reported for other regimens. This study confirms that a moderately dose-intense carboplatin-based regimen is associated with response and outcome similar to that reported for cisplatin-containing regimens in medulloblastoma, ependymoma and CPCA and lacks significant oto- or renal toxicity. These results are bolstered by the long duration of follow-up and similar results reported by Geyer et al ( 2 ), demonstrating equal efficacy and more acceptable toxicity for carboplatin vs cisplatin-based regimens.  DISCUSSION This report documents one of the longest clinical follow-up periods for any published contemporary prospective primary chemotherapy regimen for CNS tumors in infants and young children. ( 1 – 6 , 30 , 31 ) The median follow-up time in the current series is 11.4 yrs compared to a range of 5.2–15.0 years for the other series. Alkylating and platinating agents such as cyclophosphamide and cisplatin, have remained the backbone of most infant CNS tumor chemotherapy regimens. Previous data from this institution have demonstrated that carboplatin and cisplatin are similar with respect to disease response and survival rates among newly diagnosed patients with embryonal tumors ( 21 ). Geyer et al ( 2 ) have also demonstrated similar response rates to induction therapy in young children with malignant brain tumors randomized to receive either carboplatin or cisplatin-based therapy. Moreover, the carboplatin-based maintenance regimen in the study by Geyer et al led to EFS similar to previously reported results of cisplatin-containing regimens ( 2 ). The clinical features (M:F ratio, age, % GTR, % M+) of the current study cohort are similar to other recent infant CNS tumor studies (Table 5) with the exception of the report by Chi et al ( 6 ). which included patients up to 10 years of age at diagnosis, leading to a greater median age (38 months) than present in other studies. OS of patients with PNET was significantly worse compared with EP (p=0.005), MB (p=0.064) and CPCA (p=0.02). Similarly, non-metastatic EP (p= 0.06) had better PFS and OS than those with other histologies. Table 2 details the response rates in the current study compared to those of other recent series. With the exception of poorer response rates in ependymoma in this series, the objective response rates among patients with similar tumor types are similar to other recent studies. Although Chi et al. reported a 91% response rate in patients with medulloblastoma, it is important to note that the intensity of treatment (conventional chemotherapy including methotrexate plus high dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue) and greater age of the patients (57% of patients were > 3 years of age) are substantially different from this and the other series listed ( 6 ). Comparison of the 5-year PFS for the various tumor groups in the current study to those of other recent studies ( table 4 ) demonstrates substantial overlap. For patients with medulloblastoma, the 5-year PFS of 26±9% in the current report is similar to most other series. Rutkowski et al.’s study reporting a 5-year PFS of 58 ± 9% represents the best results reported in the literature for patients with medulloblastoma ( 3 ). With respect to the better risk M0, GTR medulloblastoma patients, those in the current series who completed chemotherapy and did not receive irradiation had a 5-year PFS of 40 ± 18% (EFS of 33 ±16%). This result is similar to all but Rutkowski et al, who reported a PFS of 68 ± 8% and Dhall et al who reported a 5-year EFS of 64±13% ( 32 ). Of note, the Rutkowski series also employed a carboplatin-based regimen, but added intravenous and intrathecal methotrexate ( 3 ). Despite the encouraging PFS in that report, 82% of the group demonstrated neuroimaging evidence of leukoencephalopathy even without the use of radiation therapy. The neuropsychologic function of both groups was diminished although the decrement was greater in the irradiated group. This raises concern over the “functional efficacy” of this approach. For patients with ependymoma, the 5-year PFS of 33±10% is very similar to that of the other reported studies in table 5 (5-year PFS range: 27±8.4% to 32±6%). Among patients with M0 GTR ependymoma who completed chemotherapy without being irradiated, the 5-year PFS was 57±17%, similar to other reports ( 4 , 33 ). Although the numbers are small, the 80% ± 17% 5-year PFS for the 5 patients with CPCA is excellent. All had GTR. One patient with M+ disease had eventual CR to chemotherapy and survived progression-free for 19 months, but developed a second malignancy. None of the other four surviving CPCA patients received RT. These data suggest that the current study may improve the outcome of CPCA( 3 ; 4 ), although in M0 patients with GTR other reports show 50–80% PFS after surgery alone. ( 28 , 29 ). Our results confirm and extend confidence to recent reports ( 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 33 ) that suggest chemotherapy alone is curative for some subgroups of infants and young children with CNS tumors. Our results compare favorably to that of other regimens with respect to outcome. We also confirm earlier reports that RT is capable of salvaging a proportion of patients with recurrent tumor after chemotherapy ( 17 , 30 , 31 ). The 5-year freedom from secondary progression is 48% overall; 58% in the ependymoma group and 38% in the medulloblastoma group. However, this observation must be viewed within the context of unacceptably poor neuropsychologic function following CSI RT. ( 17 ) OS and PFS of most patient groups differed little between 2 and 5 years post diagnosis in this and other studies; there were few relapses beyond 2 years post diagnosis. These data suggest that extending the duration of conventional chemotherapy regimens beyond 12 cycles may not significantly alter outcome. ( 2 , 28 , 29 ) The pattern of failure in this and other studies are quite similar, dominated by local and local+ distant events; isolated distant events are uncommon. The above suggests that better and earlier local control is necessary, perhaps the use of early local conformal XRT may limit the local and local + distant relapse rates with acceptable toxicity. The major toxicity of the current regimen was myelosuppression. Hematologic toxicity was similar to that of other regimens ( 1 , 2 ). Only 5 pts (11%) treated with the current carboplatin-based regimen had grade 3 hearing loss, in contrast to 34% and 25%, respectively in the cisplatin-based regimens reported by Mason, et al ( 34 ) and Duffner et al ( 1 ). Similar to Geyer et al’s results in the carboplatin-induction arm ( 2 ), only 2% of pts in the current study had clinically significant changes in renal function. Two toxic deaths (4%), secondary to head trauma associated with thrombocytopenia were reported in the current series, compared to 17 (8%) toxic deaths in Geyer’s more dose-intense carboplatin-based regimen ( 2 ). Overall, the combined toxicities associated with the current regimen compare quite favorably with those reported for other regimens. This study confirms that a moderately dose-intense carboplatin-based regimen is associated with response and outcome similar to that reported for cisplatin-containing regimens in medulloblastoma, ependymoma and CPCA and lacks significant oto- or renal toxicity. These results are bolstered by the long duration of follow-up and similar results reported by Geyer et al ( 2 ), demonstrating equal efficacy and more acceptable toxicity for carboplatin vs cisplatin-based regimens. 