Cancer Survivorship, Health Insurance, and Employment Transitions among Older Workers This study examined the effect of job-related health insurance on employment transitions (labor force exits, reductions in hours, and job changes) of older working cancer survivors. Using multivariate models, we compared longitudinal data for the period 1997–2002 from the Penn State Cancer Survivor Study to similar data for workers with no cancer history in the Health and Retirement Study, who were also ages 55 to 64 at follow up. The interaction of cancer survivorship with health insurance at diagnosis was negative and significant in predicting labor force exits, job changes, and transitions to part-time employment for both genders. The differential effect of job-related health insurance on the labor market dynamics of cancer survivors represents an additional component of the economic and psychosocial burden of cancer on survivors.  INTRODUCTION Job-related health insurance is particularly valuable to cancer survivors. Cancer survivors, like other people with expensive or potentially expensive chronic illnesses, are limited in their ability to purchase individual health insurance in the non-group market. The regulations governing the non-group market vary by state, but survivors are likely to encounter limited coverage of cancer-related expenses because of pre-existing condition exclusions, high premiums, and refusals by some insurers to sell to them at all ( Pollitz, Richard, and Thomas 2001 ; Hewitt, Greenfield, and Stovall 2005 ). A March 2007 story in the New York Times described the health insurance predicament of one survivor, who was diagnosed with breast cancer after leaving a job with health insurance benefits to become a self-employed real estate agent. Although her cancer treatment was successfully completed, the only individual policy that she was offered cost more than $27,000 per year ( Pear 2007 ). Even if cancer survivors are able to buy individual insurance, they are likely to find that the coverage is not as comprehensive as that offered by most employers, a particular hardship for survivors with ongoing medical problems resulting from their cancer and its treatment. Under these circumstances, one would expect cancer survivors with job-related health insurance to give considerable weight to maintaining access to group insurance when contemplating changes in employment. Because part-time workers are often ineligible for health insurance benefits available to full-time workers ( Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Education Research Trust 2007 ), even cutting back from full-time to part-time work without changing employers may threaten continued coverage. Some unlucky survivors may find themselves in a Catch-22 situation where their ability to work has been compromised by their cancer and treatment, yet because of health insurance considerations they are unable to adapt by reducing hours, changing jobs, or exiting the labor force. Two federal laws, the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), offer limited protection to workers who leave jobs with health insurance benefits ( Hewitt, Greenfield, and Stovall 2005 ; Hoffman 2005 ). COBRA requires employers with 20 or more employees to extend job-related coverage for 18 months after an employee or dependent would otherwise leave the plan, but only by paying the total premium (employer and employee shares) with a 2-percent add-on for administrative costs. Many states extend this requirement to smaller employers ( Kaiser Family Foundation 2007 ). HIPAA makes coverage more seamless for workers who move from one employer plan to another, by prohibiting pre-existing condition exclusions for workers with prior group coverage (within the preceding 63 days) and by prohibiting the exclusion of individuals from group plans because of health status. HIPAA also guarantees conversion to individual insurance for workers who leave job-related health insurance, but only after exercising and exhausting COBRA. Because these federal laws guarantee access to health insurance without regulating premiums or guaranteeing affordability, cancer survivors who leave jobs with health insurance still run the risk of finding themselves with no other source of affordable coverage. Economists have demonstrated that health insurance considerations affect labor supply and job choices in a variety of contexts ( Gruber and Madrian 2004 ). Empirical studies have shown that retiree health insurance encourages retirement ( Gruber and Madrian 1996 ; Rogowski and Karoly 2000 ; Blau and Gilleskie 2001 ), that women are more likely to work in jobs with health insurance when their husbands do not have insurance benefits ( Buchmueller and Valletta 1999 ), and—somewhat less definitively--that job mobility in the United States is reduced by the reluctance of workers to leave jobs with health insurance benefits (a phenomenon commonly called “job lock”). Identifying and measuring the effects of insurance on labor market dynamics is an empirical challenge, because demonstrating that workers with health insurance are more attached to their jobs than workers without health insurance is not sufficient to demonstrate a causal connection to insurance. Other unmeasured differences in the quality of jobs, or the quality and professionalism of workers in jobs with better fringe benefits, could also explain the greater attachment of insured workers to their jobs. One commonly accepted solution is to use a difference-in-difference analysis to identify and measure the specific effects of health insurance. This test for the effect of insurance on employment transitions involves showing that the difference in transition rates between workers with and without health insurance is larger in a subgroup where health insurance is particularly valuable, compared to another subgroup where it is less valuable. Most commonly, this test has been formulated by comparing differences between policyholders who do and do not have access to employer health insurance through a spouse ( Madrian 1994 ; Holtz-Eakin 1994 ; Buchmueller and Valletta 1996 ; Berger, Black, and Scott 2004 ; Adams 2004 ; Bradley et al. 2006 ). However, subgroups with differing valuations of job-related insurance have also been constructed on the basis of family size ( Madrian 1994 ; Adams 2004 ), pregnancy ( Madrian 1994 ), and health status ( Kapur 1998 ; Stroupe, Kinney, and Kniesner 2001 ; Pelkowski and Berger 2003 ; Berger, Black, and Scott 2004 ; Rashad and Sarpong 2006 ). As an alternative to difference-in-differences in identifying job lock, studies have also examined the effects of continuation-of-coverage laws on job mobility ( Madrian 1994 ; Gruber and Madrian 1996 ) or considered variation in the predicted probability of obtaining coverage on a new job ( Cooper and Monheit 1993 ). Studies aimed at determining whether workers with more health problems or a greater demand for medical care are “stuck” in jobs because of health insurance have mostly ( Stroupe, Kinney, and Kniesner 2001 ; Pelkowski and Berger 2003 ; Rashad and Sarpong 2006 ), but not always ( Kapur 1998 ), found that less healthy workers are more likely to remain in jobs with health insurance. In a recent study that examined the effects of employment-contingent health insurance on the labor supply of married breast cancer survivors at 6, 12 and 18 months after diagnosis, Bradley et al. (2006) found that reductions in labor supply shortly after a cancer diagnosis were larger for working women insured at diagnosis by their spouse’s job-related insurance compared to women with their own job-related health insurance. The average 5-year survival rate for cancer has improved to 65% ( Jemal et al. 2004 ), and there are now 10.8 million cancer survivors in the United States ( Office of Cancer Survivorship 2008 ). These trends have given rise to a new conception of cancer as a chronic illness, encouraging a new emphasis on the quality of life of patients who survive cancer ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Lance Armstrong Foundation 2004 ; The President’s Cancer Panel 2004 ; Hewitt, Greenfield, and Stovall 2005 ). Both the Institute of Medicine’s Committee on Cancer Survivorship ( Hewitt, Greenfield, and Stovall 2005 ) and the President’s Cancer Panel (2004) have expressed concern that health insurance issues may limit the employment choices and opportunities available to cancer survivors. In the telephone interviews conducted for our study, 27% of insured survivors reported that the fear of losing their insurance had kept them from looking for another job. In this article, we use a difference-in-difference approach to measure the effect of health insurance on employment transitions for cancer survivors. We test the hypothesis that differences in transition rates, comparing workers with and without job-related health insurance, are greater in a sample of cancer survivors than a comparison group without cancer. Our analyses compare longitudinal data from the Penn State Cancer Survivor Study (PSCSS), for survivors who were working when diagnosed from 1997 through 1999 and were 55 to 64 years old in 2002, to longitudinal data for a non-cancer sample of the same age from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), an ongoing national cohort study of Americans born from 1931 to 1947. The term “job lock” is commonly used to describe the reluctance of workers to move from one job to another, out of a desire to retain health insurance from their current job. In this study we go beyond job lock to consider the broader effects of job-related health insurance on three types of employment transitions: changing jobs (job lock), reducing hours from full-time to part-time, and quitting work altogether. Depending on the alternatives available to a particular worker, making any of these changes could result in losing employer-sponsored health insurance, which is generally preferable to individually purchased insurance because of favorable tax treatment, lower premiums, more comprehensive coverage, and absence of individual risk rating. By making change more costly for some workers, we expect the presence of employer-sponsored insurance to be associated with lower average rates of change in all three of these domains. Furthermore, because the loss of employer-sponsored insurance is particularly costly for cancer survivors, we expect the average rate of change to be even lower among cancer survivors with employer-sponsored insurance. Our study builds in several ways on previous work by Bradley and colleagues (2006) demonstrating insurance-related inertia in the employment choices of breast cancer survivors. Our sample includes survivors of both genders with all types of cancer, except for superficial skin cancers. While the Bradley study focused on insurance-related differences within a sample of cancer survivors, we implement a difference-in-difference analysis that compares insurance-related differences in our cancer sample to insurance-related differences in a non-cancer sample. We examine employment changes from diagnosis to a later point in survivorship, an average of nearly 4 years post-diagnosis, and consider job lock in addition to changes in employment status and hours. We also control for two additional job characteristics, pensions and job tenure, that could otherwise inflate the apparent attachment of cancer survivors to jobs with health insurance.  METHODS Data Cancer sample The Penn State Cancer Survivor Study (PSCSS) was a longitudinal survey that tracked the employment of a cohort of cancer survivors diagnosed from 1997 through 1999 at three large hospitals in central and northeastern Pennsylvania (Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Geisinger Medical Center, and Lehigh Valley Hospital) and The Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. After the sample was identified from the hospitals’ tumor registries, hospital employees in each site recruited subjects and obtained informed consent. The research protocol was approved by Institutional Review Boards at Penn State’s University Park campus and the four hospitals. Because the main research goal was to study the effects of cancer survivorship on employment, eligibility was limited to adults 25 to 62 years of age at diagnosis. Virtually all types of cancer, except for superficial skin cancers, were included. Most cases diagnosed at Stage 4 were excluded, because they were unlikely to survive to the end of a multi-year study; the exceptions were some Stage 4 leukemias, lymphomas, and plasma cells cancers with relatively favorable prognoses. Because the registry at John Hopkins lacked administrative control over urological cancers, they were omitted from that facility’s sample. Survivors who could not be interviewed in English were also excluded. Approximately 5000 cases (2000 from Johns Hopkins and 3000 from the Pennsylvania registries) met the eligibility criteria. Forty-three percent of the eligible cases gave consent (N=2076). Of these, 75 subjects were discovered to be ineligible when they were contacted for an interview. Eighty-eight percent of the consenting and eligible cases (N=1763) were interviewed ( Short, Vasey, and Tunceli 2005 ). Eighty-nine percent of surviving respondents in the first interview participated in the second interview, conducted in 2002 (N=1511). For these analyses we restricted the 2002 sample to the age group from 55 to 64 years old, the age range common to the PSCSS and HRS (N=603). Additional exclusions included subjects who were still in initial treatment for active cancer in 2002 (n = 12), who were not working (n = 123) or were self employed (n = 75) at diagnosis, or who were involuntarily separated from their jobs from diagnosis to follow-up because of business closures or lay offs (n = 17). The resulting cancer sample consisted of 376 survivors who were disease-free (n = 302), who had new cancers (n = 69), or who had missing data with respect to new cancers (n = 5). Considering the low rate of recruitment into the study, we conducted extensive analyses using de-identified data for non-participants to identify correlates of non-participation and to test for non-participation biases ( Short and Mallonee 2006 ). Although there were significant differences in participation by gender, race, cancer site, and facility among the roughly 5000 eligible individuals, further tests did not find evidence of residual biases in multivariate models similar to those estimated here. We also assessed attrition after the first interview and found a few significant differences related to age, nonwhite race, any college education, poverty, and treatment at the facility with the lowest initial participation rate. The first of four computer-assisted telephone interviews was conducted from October 2000 to December 2001. Many of the questions were take from the HRS, to facilitate comparisons between the surveys. The first interview ascertained current employment (at the time of interview) and, retrospectively, employment at the time of diagnosis. In this article, we compared employment data from the second PSCSS interview in 2002 with employment data from the 2002 HRS interview. At the second PSCSS interview, 71% of the cancer sample had survived from 3 to 5 years post-diagnosis. Time from diagnosis ranged from 26 to 70 months (mean = 45.9, standard deviation = 10.3). Comparison group A comparison group with no history of cancer was drawn from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is a national longitudinal cohort study funded by the National Institute on Aging and conducted biennially by the Institute for Social Research (2006) at the University of Michigan. The sample interviewed in the first wave of the HRS was nationally representative of people 51–61 years old in 1992 (who were born from 1931 to 1941), as well as their spouses regardless of age ( Gustman, Mitchell, and Steinmeier 1995 ). In 1998, another cohort born from 1942 to 1947 was added. We used RAND’s longitudinal compilation file ( RAND 2004 ) where possible and otherwise the HRS public use files for each wave. We characterized the employment status of HRS subjects at a baseline comparable to the date of diagnosis in the cancer sample by following a procedure similar to one used by Bradley and colleagues ( Bradley et al. 2005 ). Baseline dates were randomly assigned to the HRS sample from dates of diagnosis in the cancer sample, separately by gender, with replacement. We excluded HRS subjects with any history of cancer, other than superficial skin cancers, and those who were not working or self-employed at baseline, or who were involuntarily separated at the time of the follow-up. After also restricting the HRS sample to the age range common to both surveys, there were 2772 cases for analysis. While we might have implemented these comparisons solely with data from HRS, based on self-reporting of cancer in that survey, we see the Penn State Cancer Survivor Survey as offering several advantages over the HRS as the source of our cancer sample. First, the number of cancer cases meeting the requirements of our analysis (incident cases diagnosed in adults 62 or younger with 3–5 years of follow up) is considerably smaller in the HRS. Second, we expect that the nature and timing of cancer incidence (incorporating the exclusion of common skin cancers) is measured more reliably from cancer registries than from comparing and reconciling respondents’ answers to the question, “has a doctor ever told you that you have cancer or a malignant tumor, excluding minor skin cancer?” Empirical Strategy We adopted a standard difference-in-difference (DD) estimation strategy for identifying the extent to which employer-sponsored health insurance (ESHI) inhibits employment transitions (job-to-job, full-time to part-time, and labor force exits) among cancer survivors. For expositional convenience in discussing this methodology, we will use the term “job lock” in a broad sense to refer to insurance-induced reductions in any of these transition probabilities. As we explain below, the DD estimation strategy addresses first-order issues of data comparability associated with using different data sources for the cancer and non-cancer comparison groups. It also accounts for first-order differences in job and worker quality associated with job-related health insurance. The basic relationship to be estimated takes the form, (1) y i = ? o + ? 1 CANCER i + ? 2 ESHI i + ? 3 CANCER i ? ESHI i + ? i , where the DD estimator is ?3, the difference in the effect of ESHI on employment transitions for workers with a history of cancer compared to workers with no history of cancer. Here, ?i is the error term that denotes the effect of unobservable factors affecting the propensity for employment changes. Following Meyer (1995) , the statistical prerequisites for obtaining an unbiased estimate of ?3 can be identified by taking expected values of the differences implied by Equation (1) for workers in the four subgroups defined by the cross-classification of cancer and health insurance. The expected differences between individuals with and without insurance are described by the following expressions, shown separately for the cancer and non-cancer comparison groups. The superscripts c and o identify cancer survivors and other adults, respectively. (2a) E [ ? y c ] = ? 2 + ? 3 + E [ ? i ? CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? CANCER , No ESHI ] (2b) E [ ? y o ] = ? 2 + E [ ? i ? No CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? No CANCER , No ESHI ] The expected value of the difference in these differences is the expected value of the DD estimator itself: (3) E [ ? y c - ? y o ] = ? 3 + { ( E [ ? i ? CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? CANCER , No ESHI ] ) - ( E [ ? i ? No CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? No CANCER , No ESHI ] ) } . The difference-in-difference estimator is unbiased if the expression in curly brackets in ( 3 ), corresponding to the difference between the following two expressions, (4) E [ ? i ? CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? CANCER , No ESHI ] ) (5) ( E [ ? i ? No CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? No CANCER , No ESHI ] ) is zero. Each of these last two expressions is the difference in the average unobserved propensity of workers with and without health insurance to make employment transitions, for the cancer and non-cancer groups respectively. As Equation (3) demonstrates, the validity of the DD estimator does not require comparability of the unobservable labor-market tendencies of the two insurance groups (i.e., zero values for each of expressions ( 4 ) and ( 5 )), because differencing between the cancer and non-cancer groups (i.e., subtracting ( 5 ) from ( 4 )) “nets out” any insurance-related differences. Similarly, by rearranging the terms in Equation (3) to difference out any cancer-related (or survey-specific) differences between the insurance groups, one can show that the unobservable labor market tendencies in the cancer and non-cancer samples need not be identical either. The netting out of unobservable differences is the great advantage of the DD estimator over a single-difference estimator that contrasts cancer survivors with and without insurance but has no non-cancer group (where the correlation between unobservables and health insurance must be zero), or a single-difference design that contrasts insured cancer survivors with other insured adults but has no uninsured group (where the correlation between unobservables and cancer must be zero). What the DD estimator does require is that any insurance-related differences in the unobservable tendencies affecting employment transitions must be similar in the cancer and non-cancer groups (or, equivalently, that any cancer-related differences must be similar in the two insurance groups). This condition could be violated in our application if working cancer survivors value jobs with ESHI more highly than other workers for reasons other than the availability of health insurance. For example, it could be that jobs with ESHI provide other workplace amenities that are differentially valued by those with a history of cancer; examples might include more flexible work schedules, more sick days, or an ability to work from home. Because these amenities will not generally be as valuable to healthy survivors as they are to those with ongoing health problems, a natural specification check is to re-estimate the baseline DD model using only healthy survivors. This is not a perfect test, however, since healthy survivors may not value health insurance as much either. To support the assumptions underlying our DD estimator, we put considerable weight on comparing the two samples over the same calendar time period. This consideration, along with the availability of the requisite data items, largely dictated our decision to select the non-cancer group from the HRS instead of another longitudinal national survey, although our use of the HRS necessarily limited the analysis to older workers with and without cancer. 1 Otherwise, for example, if there were differences in macroeconomic conditions at the times the samples were interviewed, and if differences in the macro economy exert a differential influence on employment transitions for jobs with and without health insurance, the identifying assumption underlying our DD estimator would be violated. Also, because the cancer survey questionnaire drew heavily from the HRS questionnaire, drawing the non-cancer sample from the HRS enhances data comparability. Given that our cancer sample was regional rather than national, we sought to control for regional differences in labor market conditions by including indicator variables for the Census divisions in our multivariate DD models. To account for regional differences in a less parametric way, we also re-estimated the models with the comparison group restricted to the same Census divisions as the cancer sample, thereby (implicitly) interacting Census division with all other coefficients in the model (including the interaction of health insurance and cancer survivorship that identifies job lock). Initially, we compared unadjusted differences in employment transitions associated with having job-related health insurance from one’s own employer, separately for the cancer and non-cancer samples. Job-related health insurance was measured at baseline (1997, 1998, or 1999), just prior to diagnosis for the cancer survivors. Beginning with everyone employed at baseline, three kinds of transitions from baseline to follow-up in 2002 were examined: a change in employers; a change in employment status (working vs. not working); and, for full-time workers at baseline, a change from full-time to part-time employment (defined as working < 35 hours per week). These simple DD estimates were supplemented with a regression-based approach that conditioned on a set of job and worker characteristics likely to influence the degree of job attachment and/or the likelihood of having ESHI. 2 In particular, we controlled for the following job characteristics, measured at baseline: pension type (none, defined benefit, defined contribution, both defined benefit and defined contribution, and “unknown”); occupation (managerial, professional, or technical versus all others); and job tenure (measured in months). In addition, an indicator for being employed full-time was included in the models of labor force exits and job change 3 to account for the degree of labor market attachment in the baseline period. We also controlled for two spousal job characteristics at baseline (spousal employment and spousal health insurance) that may influence job attachment by providing access to an alternative source of income, or in the case of spousal health insurance, an alternative source of group health coverage. In addition to the baseline employment variables described above, we also controlled for a number of socio-demographic variables. These include age (dummy variables for each year), race (white versus nonwhite), marital status (married/partnered versus not married), the presence of children under 18 in the household, educational attainment (less than high school, high school, some college, college, and post college), and Census region and division (Mid-Atlantic, including Pennsylvania; South Atlantic, including Maryland; New England; rest of South; Midwest; West). All models also included an indicator for the presence of any of five common chronic conditions (diabetes, chronic lung disease, heart disease, stroke, arthritis). These were measured at follow-up, since comparable baseline measures were not available for the cancer sample. We did not use the HRS weights in our analysis, as we were not attempting to make estimates for the U.S. population from the HRS. The HRS weights are post-stratified by birth year, gender, and race/ethnicity to control totals for the U.S. population. Our regressions controlled for differences between the HRS and cancer samples along these dimensions.  Data Cancer sample The Penn State Cancer Survivor Study (PSCSS) was a longitudinal survey that tracked the employment of a cohort of cancer survivors diagnosed from 1997 through 1999 at three large hospitals in central and northeastern Pennsylvania (Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Geisinger Medical Center, and Lehigh Valley Hospital) and The Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. After the sample was identified from the hospitals’ tumor registries, hospital employees in each site recruited subjects and obtained informed consent. The research protocol was approved by Institutional Review Boards at Penn State’s University Park campus and the four hospitals. Because the main research goal was to study the effects of cancer survivorship on employment, eligibility was limited to adults 25 to 62 years of age at diagnosis. Virtually all types of cancer, except for superficial skin cancers, were included. Most cases diagnosed at Stage 4 were excluded, because they were unlikely to survive to the end of a multi-year study; the exceptions were some Stage 4 leukemias, lymphomas, and plasma cells cancers with relatively favorable prognoses. Because the registry at John Hopkins lacked administrative control over urological cancers, they were omitted from that facility’s sample. Survivors who could not be interviewed in English were also excluded. Approximately 5000 cases (2000 from Johns Hopkins and 3000 from the Pennsylvania registries) met the eligibility criteria. Forty-three percent of the eligible cases gave consent (N=2076). Of these, 75 subjects were discovered to be ineligible when they were contacted for an interview. Eighty-eight percent of the consenting and eligible cases (N=1763) were interviewed ( Short, Vasey, and Tunceli 2005 ). Eighty-nine percent of surviving respondents in the first interview participated in the second interview, conducted in 2002 (N=1511). For these analyses we restricted the 2002 sample to the age group from 55 to 64 years old, the age range common to the PSCSS and HRS (N=603). Additional exclusions included subjects who were still in initial treatment for active cancer in 2002 (n = 12), who were not working (n = 123) or were self employed (n = 75) at diagnosis, or who were involuntarily separated from their jobs from diagnosis to follow-up because of business closures or lay offs (n = 17). The resulting cancer sample consisted of 376 survivors who were disease-free (n = 302), who had new cancers (n = 69), or who had missing data with respect to new cancers (n = 5). Considering the low rate of recruitment into the study, we conducted extensive analyses using de-identified data for non-participants to identify correlates of non-participation and to test for non-participation biases ( Short and Mallonee 2006 ). Although there were significant differences in participation by gender, race, cancer site, and facility among the roughly 5000 eligible individuals, further tests did not find evidence of residual biases in multivariate models similar to those estimated here. We also assessed attrition after the first interview and found a few significant differences related to age, nonwhite race, any college education, poverty, and treatment at the facility with the lowest initial participation rate. The first of four computer-assisted telephone interviews was conducted from October 2000 to December 2001. Many of the questions were take from the HRS, to facilitate comparisons between the surveys. The first interview ascertained current employment (at the time of interview) and, retrospectively, employment at the time of diagnosis. In this article, we compared employment data from the second PSCSS interview in 2002 with employment data from the 2002 HRS interview. At the second PSCSS interview, 71% of the cancer sample had survived from 3 to 5 years post-diagnosis. Time from diagnosis ranged from 26 to 70 months (mean = 45.9, standard deviation = 10.3). Comparison group A comparison group with no history of cancer was drawn from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is a national longitudinal cohort study funded by the National Institute on Aging and conducted biennially by the Institute for Social Research (2006) at the University of Michigan. The sample interviewed in the first wave of the HRS was nationally representative of people 51–61 years old in 1992 (who were born from 1931 to 1941), as well as their spouses regardless of age ( Gustman, Mitchell, and Steinmeier 1995 ). In 1998, another cohort born from 1942 to 1947 was added. We used RAND’s longitudinal compilation file ( RAND 2004 ) where possible and otherwise the HRS public use files for each wave. We characterized the employment status of HRS subjects at a baseline comparable to the date of diagnosis in the cancer sample by following a procedure similar to one used by Bradley and colleagues ( Bradley et al. 2005 ). Baseline dates were randomly assigned to the HRS sample from dates of diagnosis in the cancer sample, separately by gender, with replacement. We excluded HRS subjects with any history of cancer, other than superficial skin cancers, and those who were not working or self-employed at baseline, or who were involuntarily separated at the time of the follow-up. After also restricting the HRS sample to the age range common to both surveys, there were 2772 cases for analysis. While we might have implemented these comparisons solely with data from HRS, based on self-reporting of cancer in that survey, we see the Penn State Cancer Survivor Survey as offering several advantages over the HRS as the source of our cancer sample. First, the number of cancer cases meeting the requirements of our analysis (incident cases diagnosed in adults 62 or younger with 3–5 years of follow up) is considerably smaller in the HRS. Second, we expect that the nature and timing of cancer incidence (incorporating the exclusion of common skin cancers) is measured more reliably from cancer registries than from comparing and reconciling respondents’ answers to the question, “has a doctor ever told you that you have cancer or a malignant tumor, excluding minor skin cancer?”  Cancer sample The Penn State Cancer Survivor Study (PSCSS) was a longitudinal survey that tracked the employment of a cohort of cancer survivors diagnosed from 1997 through 1999 at three large hospitals in central and northeastern Pennsylvania (Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Geisinger Medical Center, and Lehigh Valley Hospital) and The Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. After the sample was identified from the hospitals’ tumor registries, hospital employees in each site recruited subjects and obtained informed consent. The research protocol was approved by Institutional Review Boards at Penn State’s University Park campus and the four hospitals. Because the main research goal was to study the effects of cancer survivorship on employment, eligibility was limited to adults 25 to 62 years of age at diagnosis. Virtually all types of cancer, except for superficial skin cancers, were included. Most cases diagnosed at Stage 4 were excluded, because they were unlikely to survive to the end of a multi-year study; the exceptions were some Stage 4 leukemias, lymphomas, and plasma cells cancers with relatively favorable prognoses. Because the registry at John Hopkins lacked administrative control over urological cancers, they were omitted from that facility’s sample. Survivors who could not be interviewed in English were also excluded. Approximately 5000 cases (2000 from Johns Hopkins and 3000 from the Pennsylvania registries) met the eligibility criteria. Forty-three percent of the eligible cases gave consent (N=2076). Of these, 75 subjects were discovered to be ineligible when they were contacted for an interview. Eighty-eight percent of the consenting and eligible cases (N=1763) were interviewed ( Short, Vasey, and Tunceli 2005 ). Eighty-nine percent of surviving respondents in the first interview participated in the second interview, conducted in 2002 (N=1511). For these analyses we restricted the 2002 sample to the age group from 55 to 64 years old, the age range common to the PSCSS and HRS (N=603). Additional exclusions included subjects who were still in initial treatment for active cancer in 2002 (n = 12), who were not working (n = 123) or were self employed (n = 75) at diagnosis, or who were involuntarily separated from their jobs from diagnosis to follow-up because of business closures or lay offs (n = 17). The resulting cancer sample consisted of 376 survivors who were disease-free (n = 302), who had new cancers (n = 69), or who had missing data with respect to new cancers (n = 5). Considering the low rate of recruitment into the study, we conducted extensive analyses using de-identified data for non-participants to identify correlates of non-participation and to test for non-participation biases ( Short and Mallonee 2006 ). Although there were significant differences in participation by gender, race, cancer site, and facility among the roughly 5000 eligible individuals, further tests did not find evidence of residual biases in multivariate models similar to those estimated here. We also assessed attrition after the first interview and found a few significant differences related to age, nonwhite race, any college education, poverty, and treatment at the facility with the lowest initial participation rate. The first of four computer-assisted telephone interviews was conducted from October 2000 to December 2001. Many of the questions were take from the HRS, to facilitate comparisons between the surveys. The first interview ascertained current employment (at the time of interview) and, retrospectively, employment at the time of diagnosis. In this article, we compared employment data from the second PSCSS interview in 2002 with employment data from the 2002 HRS interview. At the second PSCSS interview, 71% of the cancer sample had survived from 3 to 5 years post-diagnosis. Time from diagnosis ranged from 26 to 70 months (mean = 45.9, standard deviation = 10.3).  Comparison group A comparison group with no history of cancer was drawn from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is a national longitudinal cohort study funded by the National Institute on Aging and conducted biennially by the Institute for Social Research (2006) at the University of Michigan. The sample interviewed in the first wave of the HRS was nationally representative of people 51–61 years old in 1992 (who were born from 1931 to 1941), as well as their spouses regardless of age ( Gustman, Mitchell, and Steinmeier 1995 ). In 1998, another cohort born from 1942 to 1947 was added. We used RAND’s longitudinal compilation file ( RAND 2004 ) where possible and otherwise the HRS public use files for each wave. We characterized the employment status of HRS subjects at a baseline comparable to the date of diagnosis in the cancer sample by following a procedure similar to one used by Bradley and colleagues ( Bradley et al. 2005 ). Baseline dates were randomly assigned to the HRS sample from dates of diagnosis in the cancer sample, separately by gender, with replacement. We excluded HRS subjects with any history of cancer, other than superficial skin cancers, and those who were not working or self-employed at baseline, or who were involuntarily separated at the time of the follow-up. After also restricting the HRS sample to the age range common to both surveys, there were 2772 cases for analysis. While we might have implemented these comparisons solely with data from HRS, based on self-reporting of cancer in that survey, we see the Penn State Cancer Survivor Survey as offering several advantages over the HRS as the source of our cancer sample. First, the number of cancer cases meeting the requirements of our analysis (incident cases diagnosed in adults 62 or younger with 3–5 years of follow up) is considerably smaller in the HRS. Second, we expect that the nature and timing of cancer incidence (incorporating the exclusion of common skin cancers) is measured more reliably from cancer registries than from comparing and reconciling respondents’ answers to the question, “has a doctor ever told you that you have cancer or a malignant tumor, excluding minor skin cancer?”  Empirical Strategy We adopted a standard difference-in-difference (DD) estimation strategy for identifying the extent to which employer-sponsored health insurance (ESHI) inhibits employment transitions (job-to-job, full-time to part-time, and labor force exits) among cancer survivors. For expositional convenience in discussing this methodology, we will use the term “job lock” in a broad sense to refer to insurance-induced reductions in any of these transition probabilities. As we explain below, the DD estimation strategy addresses first-order issues of data comparability associated with using different data sources for the cancer and non-cancer comparison groups. It also accounts for first-order differences in job and worker quality associated with job-related health insurance. The basic relationship to be estimated takes the form, (1) y i = ? o + ? 1 CANCER i + ? 2 ESHI i + ? 3 CANCER i ? ESHI i + ? i , where the DD estimator is ?3, the difference in the effect of ESHI on employment transitions for workers with a history of cancer compared to workers with no history of cancer. Here, ?i is the error term that denotes the effect of unobservable factors affecting the propensity for employment changes. Following Meyer (1995) , the statistical prerequisites for obtaining an unbiased estimate of ?3 can be identified by taking expected values of the differences implied by Equation (1) for workers in the four subgroups defined by the cross-classification of cancer and health insurance. The expected differences between individuals with and without insurance are described by the following expressions, shown separately for the cancer and non-cancer comparison groups. The superscripts c and o identify cancer survivors and other adults, respectively. (2a) E [ ? y c ] = ? 2 + ? 3 + E [ ? i ? CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? CANCER , No ESHI ] (2b) E [ ? y o ] = ? 2 + E [ ? i ? No CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? No CANCER , No ESHI ] The expected value of the difference in these differences is the expected value of the DD estimator itself: (3) E [ ? y c - ? y o ] = ? 3 + { ( E [ ? i ? CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? CANCER , No ESHI ] ) - ( E [ ? i ? No CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? No CANCER , No ESHI ] ) } . The difference-in-difference estimator is unbiased if the expression in curly brackets in ( 3 ), corresponding to the difference between the following two expressions, (4) E [ ? i ? CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? CANCER , No ESHI ] ) (5) ( E [ ? i ? No CANCER , ESHI ] - E [ ? i ? No CANCER , No ESHI ] ) is zero. Each of these last two expressions is the difference in the average unobserved propensity of workers with and without health insurance to make employment transitions, for the cancer and non-cancer groups respectively. As Equation (3) demonstrates, the validity of the DD estimator does not require comparability of the unobservable labor-market tendencies of the two insurance groups (i.e., zero values for each of expressions ( 4 ) and ( 5 )), because differencing between the cancer and non-cancer groups (i.e., subtracting ( 5 ) from ( 4 )) “nets out” any insurance-related differences. Similarly, by rearranging the terms in Equation (3) to difference out any cancer-related (or survey-specific) differences between the insurance groups, one can show that the unobservable labor market tendencies in the cancer and non-cancer samples need not be identical either. The netting out of unobservable differences is the great advantage of the DD estimator over a single-difference estimator that contrasts cancer survivors with and without insurance but has no non-cancer group (where the correlation between unobservables and health insurance must be zero), or a single-difference design that contrasts insured cancer survivors with other insured adults but has no uninsured group (where the correlation between unobservables and cancer must be zero). What the DD estimator does require is that any insurance-related differences in the unobservable tendencies affecting employment transitions must be similar in the cancer and non-cancer groups (or, equivalently, that any cancer-related differences must be similar in the two insurance groups). This condition could be violated in our application if working cancer survivors value jobs with ESHI more highly than other workers for reasons other than the availability of health insurance. For example, it could be that jobs with ESHI provide other workplace amenities that are differentially valued by those with a history of cancer; examples might include more flexible work schedules, more sick days, or an ability to work from home. Because these amenities will not generally be as valuable to healthy survivors as they are to those with ongoing health problems, a natural specification check is to re-estimate the baseline DD model using only healthy survivors. This is not a perfect test, however, since healthy survivors may not value health insurance as much either. To support the assumptions underlying our DD estimator, we put considerable weight on comparing the two samples over the same calendar time period. This consideration, along with the availability of the requisite data items, largely dictated our decision to select the non-cancer group from the HRS instead of another longitudinal national survey, although our use of the HRS necessarily limited the analysis to older workers with and without cancer. 1 Otherwise, for example, if there were differences in macroeconomic conditions at the times the samples were interviewed, and if differences in the macro economy exert a differential influence on employment transitions for jobs with and without health insurance, the identifying assumption underlying our DD estimator would be violated. Also, because the cancer survey questionnaire drew heavily from the HRS questionnaire, drawing the non-cancer sample from the HRS enhances data comparability. Given that our cancer sample was regional rather than national, we sought to control for regional differences in labor market conditions by including indicator variables for the Census divisions in our multivariate DD models. To account for regional differences in a less parametric way, we also re-estimated the models with the comparison group restricted to the same Census divisions as the cancer sample, thereby (implicitly) interacting Census division with all other coefficients in the model (including the interaction of health insurance and cancer survivorship that identifies job lock). Initially, we compared unadjusted differences in employment transitions associated with having job-related health insurance from one’s own employer, separately for the cancer and non-cancer samples. Job-related health insurance was measured at baseline (1997, 1998, or 1999), just prior to diagnosis for the cancer survivors. Beginning with everyone employed at baseline, three kinds of transitions from baseline to follow-up in 2002 were examined: a change in employers; a change in employment status (working vs. not working); and, for full-time workers at baseline, a change from full-time to part-time employment (defined as working < 35 hours per week). These simple DD estimates were supplemented with a regression-based approach that conditioned on a set of job and worker characteristics likely to influence the degree of job attachment and/or the likelihood of having ESHI. 2 In particular, we controlled for the following job characteristics, measured at baseline: pension type (none, defined benefit, defined contribution, both defined benefit and defined contribution, and “unknown”); occupation (managerial, professional, or technical versus all others); and job tenure (measured in months). In addition, an indicator for being employed full-time was included in the models of labor force exits and job change 3 to account for the degree of labor market attachment in the baseline period. We also controlled for two spousal job characteristics at baseline (spousal employment and spousal health insurance) that may influence job attachment by providing access to an alternative source of income, or in the case of spousal health insurance, an alternative source of group health coverage. In addition to the baseline employment variables described above, we also controlled for a number of socio-demographic variables. These include age (dummy variables for each year), race (white versus nonwhite), marital status (married/partnered versus not married), the presence of children under 18 in the household, educational attainment (less than high school, high school, some college, college, and post college), and Census region and division (Mid-Atlantic, including Pennsylvania; South Atlantic, including Maryland; New England; rest of South; Midwest; West). All models also included an indicator for the presence of any of five common chronic conditions (diabetes, chronic lung disease, heart disease, stroke, arthritis). These were measured at follow-up, since comparable baseline measures were not available for the cancer sample. We did not use the HRS weights in our analysis, as we were not attempting to make estimates for the U.S. population from the HRS. The HRS weights are post-stratified by birth year, gender, and race/ethnicity to control totals for the U.S. population. Our regressions controlled for differences between the HRS and cancer samples along these dimensions.  Results Tables 1A (males) and 1B (females) describe the characteristics of the PSCSS (“cancer”) and HRS samples by insurance status. Significant differences between the two samples are highlighted in bold. Overall, the cancer survivors were more likely to work in managerial/professional/technical jobs and, in the group without ESHI, to have pensions (especially defined benefit pensions) and longer tenure in the baseline job. These employment differences were consistent with socio-demographic differences between the two samples, where the cancer sample was younger (except for males without ESI), more often white, and more likely to have a college degree. The cancer sample was less likely to have a spouse with ESI, except for females without ESI. The samples differed by region of the country because the PSCSS sample was regional (Central and Northeastern Pennsylvania and Baltimore, Maryland) while the HRS sample was national. In Tables 2A, 2B, and 2C we present simple (unadjusted) DD estimates of the extent to which having ESHI through one’s employer inhibited employment transitions by male and female cancer survivors. These estimates are similar in magnitude to the regression-adjusted estimates subsequently shown in Table 3 , but provide a more transparent picture of the influences of ESHI on employment transitions. Focusing first on exits from the labor force ( Table 2A ), we find that among individuals without ESHI, cancer survivors left work at a greater rate than their counterparts with no history of cancer (men: +23.5 percentage points (pp), p < 0.01; women: +13.2 pp, p<0.05). In contrast, for individuals with ESHI, the exit rate for cancer survivors was much smaller and was not statistically different from the exit rate for those with no history of cancer. 4 Differencing these differences yields DD estimates of the effect of ESHI on exit rates among cancer survivors of ?29.2 p< 0.01) and ?17.2 pp (p<0.01) for men and women, respectively, suggesting that having health insurance through one’s employer substantially reduced transitions out of the labor force for both male and female cancer survivors. For those working at follow-up, job-to-job transition rates varied substantially across workers with and without a history of cancer, by insurance status ( Table 2B ). Among individuals without employer coverage, cancer survivors changed jobs at a higher rate than other workers (men: +27.4 pp, p < 0.01; women: +16.7 pp, p<0.05). Among workers with ESHI, job transition rates were significantly lower for female cancer survivors than for other female workers (?9.7 pp, p<0.05), while the difference for males (?5.9 pp) was also negative but not statistically significant. The DD estimates for job-to-job transitions were large and statistically significant: ?33.4 pp (p<0.01) for males and ?26.4 pp (p<0.01) for females. Finally, among those working full-time at baseline, we examined variations in transition rates into part-time work by cancer history and insurance status ( Table 2C ). We found a large and statistically significant difference between cancer survivors and other workers in the propensity to move to part-time work for those without ESHI (men: +30.9 percentage points (pp), p < 0.01; women: +19.2 pp, p<0.05), but not for workers with ESHI. Taken together, these changes yield DD estimates of ?25.0 pp (p<0.05) for men and ?22.3 pp (p<0.01) for women, pointing to a large role for ESHI in impeding survivors’ transitions into part-time employment. In Table 3 , we replicate our simple DD estimates using linear probability models that allowed us to condition on the set of job and worker characteristics described in the previous section. Our regression-adjusted job-lock estimates, measured by the coefficients on the interaction terms involving cancer survivorship and ESHI, are shown in the third row of Table 3 . Consistent with the simple DD estimates, we found large negative effects of ESHI on the employment transitions of cancer survivors of both genders, with magnitudes that were similar to the unadjusted DD estimates presented in Table 2 . Estimates were significant at the 0.05 level or better for all three employment transitions. 5 Turning briefly to other covariates, the independent effect of cancer on employment was evident for both genders, while the independent effect of ESHI was significant only among women. Defined-benefit pension coverage had a predictable effect on labor supply in our sample of 55–64 year olds, increasing the likelihood of retirement and decreasing the probability of changing employers. Spousal employment, and spousal health insurance coverage were significant predictors of employment mobility in some specifications, although their magnitude and statistical significance varied by gender. Female workers with working spouses were more likely to work and less likely to change jobs at follow-up compared to females who were unmarried or married to non-working spouses. In addition, female workers who were married to husbands with health insurance coverage were less likely to work at follow-up. In Table 4 , we report the results of three sensitivity checks. For comparison purposes, our baseline estimates from Table 3 are displayed in Panel A. In Panel B, we re-estimated the DD parameter using a Probit specification in conjunction with a procedure developed by Ai and Norton (2003 , 2004) for calculating interaction effects and their associated standard errors in Logit and Probit models. There is little difference between the average interaction effects derived from the Probit models and those obtained from our baseline linear probability models. In Panel C, we re-estimated our baseline DD models using only HRS respondents who lived in the same Census divisions as participants in the Penn State Cancer Survivor Study (the Mid Atlantic and South Atlantic regions). These geographic indicators crudely control for local labor market conditions, within the constraints of the geographic identifiers available on the HRS public use files. The fact that our original estimates remain virtually unchanged after removing seven of the nine Census divisions from our comparison group suggests that geographic differences in labor market dynamics are not playing a major role in our results. Finally, in Panel D, we re-estimated our baseline DD models restricting attention to “healthy survivors” (those with no recurrence of their cancer). The similarity between these estimates and those from the full sample provides some evidence that our original estimates were not confounded by cancer survivors differentially valuing jobs with ESHI, for reasons beyond the availability of health insurance.  Results Tables 1A (males) and 1B (females) describe the characteristics of the PSCSS (“cancer”) and HRS samples by insurance status. Significant differences between the two samples are highlighted in bold. Overall, the cancer survivors were more likely to work in managerial/professional/technical jobs and, in the group without ESHI, to have pensions (especially defined benefit pensions) and longer tenure in the baseline job. These employment differences were consistent with socio-demographic differences between the two samples, where the cancer sample was younger (except for males without ESI), more often white, and more likely to have a college degree. The cancer sample was less likely to have a spouse with ESI, except for females without ESI. The samples differed by region of the country because the PSCSS sample was regional (Central and Northeastern Pennsylvania and Baltimore, Maryland) while the HRS sample was national. In Tables 2A, 2B, and 2C we present simple (unadjusted) DD estimates of the extent to which having ESHI through one’s employer inhibited employment transitions by male and female cancer survivors. These estimates are similar in magnitude to the regression-adjusted estimates subsequently shown in Table 3 , but provide a more transparent picture of the influences of ESHI on employment transitions. Focusing first on exits from the labor force ( Table 2A ), we find that among individuals without ESHI, cancer survivors left work at a greater rate than their counterparts with no history of cancer (men: +23.5 percentage points (pp), p < 0.01; women: +13.2 pp, p<0.05). In contrast, for individuals with ESHI, the exit rate for cancer survivors was much smaller and was not statistically different from the exit rate for those with no history of cancer. 4 Differencing these differences yields DD estimates of the effect of ESHI on exit rates among cancer survivors of ?29.2 p< 0.01) and ?17.2 pp (p<0.01) for men and women, respectively, suggesting that having health insurance through one’s employer substantially reduced transitions out of the labor force for both male and female cancer survivors. For those working at follow-up, job-to-job transition rates varied substantially across workers with and without a history of cancer, by insurance status ( Table 2B ). Among individuals without employer coverage, cancer survivors changed jobs at a higher rate than other workers (men: +27.4 pp, p < 0.01; women: +16.7 pp, p<0.05). Among workers with ESHI, job transition rates were significantly lower for female cancer survivors than for other female workers (?9.7 pp, p<0.05), while the difference for males (?5.9 pp) was also negative but not statistically significant. The DD estimates for job-to-job transitions were large and statistically significant: ?33.4 pp (p<0.01) for males and ?26.4 pp (p<0.01) for females. Finally, among those working full-time at baseline, we examined variations in transition rates into part-time work by cancer history and insurance status ( Table 2C ). We found a large and statistically significant difference between cancer survivors and other workers in the propensity to move to part-time work for those without ESHI (men: +30.9 percentage points (pp), p < 0.01; women: +19.2 pp, p<0.05), but not for workers with ESHI. Taken together, these changes yield DD estimates of ?25.0 pp (p<0.05) for men and ?22.3 pp (p<0.01) for women, pointing to a large role for ESHI in impeding survivors’ transitions into part-time employment. In Table 3 , we replicate our simple DD estimates using linear probability models that allowed us to condition on the set of job and worker characteristics described in the previous section. Our regression-adjusted job-lock estimates, measured by the coefficients on the interaction terms involving cancer survivorship and ESHI, are shown in the third row of Table 3 . Consistent with the simple DD estimates, we found large negative effects of ESHI on the employment transitions of cancer survivors of both genders, with magnitudes that were similar to the unadjusted DD estimates presented in Table 2 . Estimates were significant at the 0.05 level or better for all three employment transitions. 5 Turning briefly to other covariates, the independent effect of cancer on employment was evident for both genders, while the independent effect of ESHI was significant only among women. Defined-benefit pension coverage had a predictable effect on labor supply in our sample of 55–64 year olds, increasing the likelihood of retirement and decreasing the probability of changing employers. Spousal employment, and spousal health insurance coverage were significant predictors of employment mobility in some specifications, although their magnitude and statistical significance varied by gender. Female workers with working spouses were more likely to work and less likely to change jobs at follow-up compared to females who were unmarried or married to non-working spouses. In addition, female workers who were married to husbands with health insurance coverage were less likely to work at follow-up. In Table 4 , we report the results of three sensitivity checks. For comparison purposes, our baseline estimates from Table 3 are displayed in Panel A. In Panel B, we re-estimated the DD parameter using a Probit specification in conjunction with a procedure developed by Ai and Norton (2003 , 2004) for calculating interaction effects and their associated standard errors in Logit and Probit models. There is little difference between the average interaction effects derived from the Probit models and those obtained from our baseline linear probability models. In Panel C, we re-estimated our baseline DD models using only HRS respondents who lived in the same Census divisions as participants in the Penn State Cancer Survivor Study (the Mid Atlantic and South Atlantic regions). These geographic indicators crudely control for local labor market conditions, within the constraints of the geographic identifiers available on the HRS public use files. The fact that our original estimates remain virtually unchanged after removing seven of the nine Census divisions from our comparison group suggests that geographic differences in labor market dynamics are not playing a major role in our results. Finally, in Panel D, we re-estimated our baseline DD models restricting attention to “healthy survivors” (those with no recurrence of their cancer). The similarity between these estimates and those from the full sample provides some evidence that our original estimates were not confounded by cancer survivors differentially valuing jobs with ESHI, for reasons beyond the availability of health insurance.  Discussion When we compared changes in the employment of older cancer survivors to changes in the employment of otherwise similar older workers without cancer, we found significant differences only for survivors in jobs without health insurance at diagnosis (compared to other workers in jobs without insurance). These survivors, who had no job-related health insurance to lose by changing employment, were more likely to stop working, switch jobs, and cut back from full-time to part-time work than their counterparts without cancer. However, survivors in jobs that did have health insurance at diagnosis—who had something to lose—were no more likely to make changes in their employment after being treated for cancer than insured workers without cancer. These findings, relating to employment changes over an average of 4 years, for older survivors of both genders treated for a variety of cancers, are consistent with the findings of Bradley and her colleagues for breast cancer survivors over a shorter timeframe of 6 to 18 months post-diagnosis. Despite the barriers that cancer survivors confront in purchasing health insurance in the individual market, national statistics show that their enrollment in private insurance is comparable to the rate of private enrollment for other Americans ( Sabatino et al. 2006 ). If anything, adult cancer survivors are somewhat more likely to be insured than other adults under age 65, because of increased enrollment in Medicare and Medicaid (public programs that cover severely disabled adults under age 65 who are unable to work). The propensity of survivors to remain in jobs with health insurance benefits, as documented in this paper, may help to explain why the rate of private insurance for cancer survivors is similar to the national average. Although our findings imply that cancer survivors succeed in staying insured by holding onto jobs with insurance benefits, these findings also imply that the employment opportunities available to survivors are more constrained by health insurance considerations than the opportunities available to other workers. Not only are survivors handicapped in advancing their careers or pursuing leisure interests by their need for health insurance, but those who have continuing health problems as a result of cancer and treatment may be less able to accommodate changes in their health or functional status by changing jobs or cutting back on work. In these ways, survivors pay a higher “price” for health insurance that affects their quality of life and adds to the economic burden of cancer. In making comparisons to the HRS, which follows a national sample of older Americans into retirement, we necessarily focused on employment transitions in an older group of working cancer survivors (55–64 years of age in 2002). Because cancer is a disease associated with aging, older workers are particularly affected by cancer. Nearly half of new cancers diagnosed in the age group from 20 to 64 are diagnosed after age 54 ( Ries et al. 2006 ). Nevertheless, because our estimates of insurance-related differences in employment transitions do not necessarily generalize to younger workers, the age group that we examined is an important limitation of our study. The extended recall of employment at diagnosis and the representativeness of the cancer survivor sample are also potential limitations. Employment status and job characteristics at diagnosis were ascertained in the first interview of our cancer survivor survey, 1 to 5 years post-diagnosis. Not only did the long recall increase the likelihood of reporting errors, but we were unable to ask about key variables at the time of diagnosis (including wage rates and health status). The generalizability of employment patterns in our cancer sample to the employment of cancer survivors nationally is also a potential concern. Compared to cancer survivors nationally ( Ibrahim, Short, and Tunceli 2004 ; Short, Vasey, and Tunceli 2005 ), our cancer sample--drawn from the tumor registries of four medical centers in Pennsylvania and Maryland--was relatively advantaged in terms of socioeconomic status, employment rates, and enrollment in private insurance. Although we used de-identified data from the sampling frame to identify correlates of participation and controlled for them in our employment analyses, non-participation bias is another issue potentially affecting the representativeness of the cancer sample. Our difference-in-differences approach should net out most unobserved differences in job attachment between the cancer and non-cancer samples, or between workers with and without job-related health insurance. However, we acknowledge that our DD estimator will be biased if cancer-related differences in unobserved job-attachment vary with insurance (or, equivalently, insurance-related differences vary between the cancer and non-cancer samples). Nevertheless, the fact that our DD estimates are large and highly significant, consistent across three different employment outcomes for both genders, and robust to several specification checks, heightens confidence that our estimates primarily reflect insurance-induced reductions in employment transitions, rather than confounding from unobservables. Cancer survivors live with a variety of health and financial risks. In addition to the possibility of recurrence, their health risks include a higher rate of unrelated second cancers and the possibility of continuing or delayed effects from treatment ( Hewitt, Greenfield, and Stovall 2005 ). Their financial risks include the possibility of large out-of-pocket health care expenditures and a considerable loss of earnings in the event of severe disability or premature death. Even if they successfully negotiate these other risks, cancer survivors also confront the risk of becoming uninsured without job-related health insurance. Our findings suggest that survivors effectively “insure” against this risk by remaining in jobs with health insurance in situations where exiting the labor force, reducing hours, or changing employers would otherwise be the more attractive alternative. Public policies that provided affordable alternatives to job-related health insurance would spread this risk more broadly and relieve cancer survivors (and others with chronic illnesses) of the costs associated with protecting their access to health insurance.  Discussion When we compared changes in the employment of older cancer survivors to changes in the employment of otherwise similar older workers without cancer, we found significant differences only for survivors in jobs without health insurance at diagnosis (compared to other workers in jobs without insurance). These survivors, who had no job-related health insurance to lose by changing employment, were more likely to stop working, switch jobs, and cut back from full-time to part-time work than their counterparts without cancer. However, survivors in jobs that did have health insurance at diagnosis—who had something to lose—were no more likely to make changes in their employment after being treated for cancer than insured workers without cancer. These findings, relating to employment changes over an average of 4 years, for older survivors of both genders treated for a variety of cancers, are consistent with the findings of Bradley and her colleagues for breast cancer survivors over a shorter timeframe of 6 to 18 months post-diagnosis. Despite the barriers that cancer survivors confront in purchasing health insurance in the individual market, national statistics show that their enrollment in private insurance is comparable to the rate of private enrollment for other Americans ( Sabatino et al. 2006 ). If anything, adult cancer survivors are somewhat more likely to be insured than other adults under age 65, because of increased enrollment in Medicare and Medicaid (public programs that cover severely disabled adults under age 65 who are unable to work). The propensity of survivors to remain in jobs with health insurance benefits, as documented in this paper, may help to explain why the rate of private insurance for cancer survivors is similar to the national average. Although our findings imply that cancer survivors succeed in staying insured by holding onto jobs with insurance benefits, these findings also imply that the employment opportunities available to survivors are more constrained by health insurance considerations than the opportunities available to other workers. Not only are survivors handicapped in advancing their careers or pursuing leisure interests by their need for health insurance, but those who have continuing health problems as a result of cancer and treatment may be less able to accommodate changes in their health or functional status by changing jobs or cutting back on work. In these ways, survivors pay a higher “price” for health insurance that affects their quality of life and adds to the economic burden of cancer. In making comparisons to the HRS, which follows a national sample of older Americans into retirement, we necessarily focused on employment transitions in an older group of working cancer survivors (55–64 years of age in 2002). Because cancer is a disease associated with aging, older workers are particularly affected by cancer. Nearly half of new cancers diagnosed in the age group from 20 to 64 are diagnosed after age 54 ( Ries et al. 2006 ). Nevertheless, because our estimates of insurance-related differences in employment transitions do not necessarily generalize to younger workers, the age group that we examined is an important limitation of our study. The extended recall of employment at diagnosis and the representativeness of the cancer survivor sample are also potential limitations. Employment status and job characteristics at diagnosis were ascertained in the first interview of our cancer survivor survey, 1 to 5 years post-diagnosis. Not only did the long recall increase the likelihood of reporting errors, but we were unable to ask about key variables at the time of diagnosis (including wage rates and health status). The generalizability of employment patterns in our cancer sample to the employment of cancer survivors nationally is also a potential concern. Compared to cancer survivors nationally ( Ibrahim, Short, and Tunceli 2004 ; Short, Vasey, and Tunceli 2005 ), our cancer sample--drawn from the tumor registries of four medical centers in Pennsylvania and Maryland--was relatively advantaged in terms of socioeconomic status, employment rates, and enrollment in private insurance. Although we used de-identified data from the sampling frame to identify correlates of participation and controlled for them in our employment analyses, non-participation bias is another issue potentially affecting the representativeness of the cancer sample. Our difference-in-differences approach should net out most unobserved differences in job attachment between the cancer and non-cancer samples, or between workers with and without job-related health insurance. However, we acknowledge that our DD estimator will be biased if cancer-related differences in unobserved job-attachment vary with insurance (or, equivalently, insurance-related differences vary between the cancer and non-cancer samples). Nevertheless, the fact that our DD estimates are large and highly significant, consistent across three different employment outcomes for both genders, and robust to several specification checks, heightens confidence that our estimates primarily reflect insurance-induced reductions in employment transitions, rather than confounding from unobservables. Cancer survivors live with a variety of health and financial risks. In addition to the possibility of recurrence, their health risks include a higher rate of unrelated second cancers and the possibility of continuing or delayed effects from treatment ( Hewitt, Greenfield, and Stovall 2005 ). Their financial risks include the possibility of large out-of-pocket health care expenditures and a considerable loss of earnings in the event of severe disability or premature death. Even if they successfully negotiate these other risks, cancer survivors also confront the risk of becoming uninsured without job-related health insurance. Our findings suggest that survivors effectively “insure” against this risk by remaining in jobs with health insurance in situations where exiting the labor force, reducing hours, or changing employers would otherwise be the more attractive alternative. Public policies that provided affordable alternatives to job-related health insurance would spread this risk more broadly and relieve cancer survivors (and others with chronic illnesses) of the costs associated with protecting their access to health insurance. 