Gene-expression-based prognostic and predictive markers for breast cancer - - A primer for practicing pathologists Context Gene-expression-based prognostic assays for breast cancer are now available as commercial reference laboratory tests covered by insurance. Objective The objective of this review is to provide practicing pathologists information about the nature of these assays, differences among them, and how clinical oncologists utilize them in the management of patients diagnosed with breast cancer. Data Sources Review of literature and unpublished data from the NSABP. This review focused on a general conceptual description of the technology behind these assays and differences among them to aid understanding by pathologists in practice. Conclusions While these assays are clinically useful, they are still evolving. The future development of gene-expression-based markers will need to be more clinical-context-specific to be clinically useful.  CONCLUSION The field of gene-expression-based prognostic assays is rapidly evolving and much experience has been gained in the field. It is important to stress that context-specific-markers are the ones most useful to clinicians. Pre-specifying clinical context will be critical in the development and validation of new assays.  Table Table 1 Summary of Differences Between Two Commercially Available Prognostic Tests in USA Onco type Dx® MammaPrint® Sample requirement Three to six 10 micron thick unstained sections made from routine formalin fixed paraffin embedded tumor block Snap frozen or fresh tissue procured in RNARetain solution Technology Real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction Oligonucleotide microarray Number of genes 16 (plus 5 reference genes) 70 What is reported? Continuous risk score from 0 to 100 and associated risk of distant recurrence in 10 years, HER2, Estrogen and progesterone receptor mRNA levels Dichotomous classification (Low or high risk) Web link to sample reports http://www.genomichealth.com/oncotype/publications/oncotype_reportform.pdf http://row.agendia.com/en/your_test_results_3.html Algorithm Based on Cox model Based on distance of each case to centroids derived from reference study Clinical context Node negative estrogen receptor positive and treated with tamoxifen Any Independently validated prognostic utility Yes Yes Predictive of degree of benefit from chemotherapy Yes Most likely yes but not been tested formally Cost About 3,400 USD About 4,000 USD Agency clearance CLIA FDA Utilization in US Over 30,000 cases tested Not known (claimed to be over 15,000 worldwide) 