AFM Detects Differences in the Surface Brush of Normal and Cancerous Cervical Cells The atomic force microscope is broadly used to study the morphology of cells 1 – 5 but it can also probe the mechanics of cells. It is now known that cancerous cells may have different mechanical properties than normal cells 6 – 8 but the reasons for these differences are poorly understood 9 . Here we report quantitatively the differences between normal and cancerous human cervical epithelial cells by considering the brush layer on the cell surface. These brush layers, which consist mostly of microvilli, microridges, and cilia are important for interacting with the environment. Deformation force curves obtained from cells in vitro are processed according to the 'brush on soft cell model 10 . We found that normal cells have brushes with one length while cancerous cells displayed long and short brushes with significantly different densities. The observed differences suggest that brush layers should be taken into account when characterizing the cell surface by mechanical means.  Materials and Methods Cell cultures We used primary cultures of human cervical epithelial cells prepared from tissues collected from transformation zone of cervix from three cancer patients and three healthy individuals. The cell isolation was performed by a two-stage enzymatic digestion using dispase to remove the epithelium and then trypsin to disperse the individual epithelial cell 27 . Normal and cancerous cell cultures were maintained in keratinocyte serum free medium (KSFM, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) under the same experimental conditions. KSF-M is a well defined and widely used medium for growth of epithelial cells. The epithelial cells adhered tightly to the bottom of the plastic dish, and the 60mm cell culture dishes were mounted on the chuck of the AFM with a double sticky tape. Cells were grown to approximately 10% of confluency before using them for scanning (to avoid induction of squamous differentiation of normal cells). All scanning and measurements related to rigidity were performed on proliferating viable cells maintained to room temperature in Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) within 2–3 hours after removal of growth medium. Atomic force microscopy A Nanoscope Dimension 3100 (Digital Instruments/Veeco, Inc., Santa Barbara, CA) atomic force microscope (AFM) was used in the present study. A standard cantilever holder for operation in liquids was employed. To collect sufficient statistics, the force-volume mode of operation was utilized. For details, see Methods in SI Text . Dye staining of glycoconjugates of the pericellular brushes We used the cationic dye Alcian blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to study glycoconjugates of the pericellular brushes of normal and cancerous cells. Using the critical electrolyte concentration method 28 , one can also distinguish weakly and strongly charged proteoglycan groups in the cell glycocalix 29 . For details, see Methods in SI Text . Confocal Microscopy A confocal microscope (Nikon C1, 10mW 488nm and 514 nm argon laser, 100x 1.4 NA CFI VC oil immersed objective) was used. The cells were attached to a LabTek slide (cell suspension in growth medium was placed to the slide for a couple of days). To visualize the cell and cytoplasmic membrane corrugations, 20 ?L of 5% ethanol aqueous solution of Nile Red fluorescent dye was added to 1mL of buffer. Within 15 minutes after placing the cells in this buffer, viable cells were imaged directly in that buffer. Electron Microscopy Cells were fixed with Karnovsky'sfixative at 4°C for 2 days, post-stained with 1%osmium tetroxide, further stained with 0.67% aqueous ruthenium tetroxide. SEM imaging was done on freeze-dried samples. For TEM-type of imaging, cells were further dehydrated with absolute ethanol and embedded in Spurr epoxy (firm formulation). Thinsections (20–50nm) were viewed using electron back-scattering SEM mode. FEI Phenom SEM was used in this study. Data analysis The data have been fitted to the analytical expression using the Levenberg-Marquardt and Simplex algorithms. The error of the fit is one standard deviation. When calculating “error-bars” for average values, individual standard deviations are discarded as small, and RMS value of mean values is calculated. So, the “error-bars” for average values should be called “variability bar”. Statistically significant difference was defined using t-test statistics at p<0.05 level.  Cell cultures We used primary cultures of human cervical epithelial cells prepared from tissues collected from transformation zone of cervix from three cancer patients and three healthy individuals. The cell isolation was performed by a two-stage enzymatic digestion using dispase to remove the epithelium and then trypsin to disperse the individual epithelial cell 27 . Normal and cancerous cell cultures were maintained in keratinocyte serum free medium (KSFM, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) under the same experimental conditions. KSF-M is a well defined and widely used medium for growth of epithelial cells. The epithelial cells adhered tightly to the bottom of the plastic dish, and the 60mm cell culture dishes were mounted on the chuck of the AFM with a double sticky tape. Cells were grown to approximately 10% of confluency before using them for scanning (to avoid induction of squamous differentiation of normal cells). All scanning and measurements related to rigidity were performed on proliferating viable cells maintained to room temperature in Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) within 2–3 hours after removal of growth medium.  Atomic force microscopy A Nanoscope Dimension 3100 (Digital Instruments/Veeco, Inc., Santa Barbara, CA) atomic force microscope (AFM) was used in the present study. A standard cantilever holder for operation in liquids was employed. To collect sufficient statistics, the force-volume mode of operation was utilized. For details, see Methods in SI Text .  Dye staining of glycoconjugates of the pericellular brushes We used the cationic dye Alcian blue (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to study glycoconjugates of the pericellular brushes of normal and cancerous cells. Using the critical electrolyte concentration method 28 , one can also distinguish weakly and strongly charged proteoglycan groups in the cell glycocalix 29 . For details, see Methods in SI Text .  Confocal Microscopy A confocal microscope (Nikon C1, 10mW 488nm and 514 nm argon laser, 100x 1.4 NA CFI VC oil immersed objective) was used. The cells were attached to a LabTek slide (cell suspension in growth medium was placed to the slide for a couple of days). To visualize the cell and cytoplasmic membrane corrugations, 20 ?L of 5% ethanol aqueous solution of Nile Red fluorescent dye was added to 1mL of buffer. Within 15 minutes after placing the cells in this buffer, viable cells were imaged directly in that buffer.  Electron Microscopy Cells were fixed with Karnovsky'sfixative at 4°C for 2 days, post-stained with 1%osmium tetroxide, further stained with 0.67% aqueous ruthenium tetroxide. SEM imaging was done on freeze-dried samples. For TEM-type of imaging, cells were further dehydrated with absolute ethanol and embedded in Spurr epoxy (firm formulation). Thinsections (20–50nm) were viewed using electron back-scattering SEM mode. FEI Phenom SEM was used in this study.  Data analysis The data have been fitted to the analytical expression using the Levenberg-Marquardt and Simplex algorithms. The error of the fit is one standard deviation. When calculating “error-bars” for average values, individual standard deviations are discarded as small, and RMS value of mean values is calculated. So, the “error-bars” for average values should be called “variability bar”. Statistically significant difference was defined using t-test statistics at p<0.05 level.  Supplementary Material 1 2 