Prostate Cancer Regulatory Networks Although the timing with which common epithelial malignancies arise and become established remains a matter of debate, it is clear that by the time they are detected these tumors harbor hundreds of deregulated, aberrantly expressed or mutated genes. This enormous complexity poses formidable challenges to identify gene pathways that are drivers of tumorigenesis, potentially suitable for therapeutic intervention. An alternative approach is to consider cancer pathways as interconnected networks, and search for potential nodal proteins capable of connecting multiple signaling networks of tumor maintenance. We have modeled this approach in advanced prostate cancer, a condition with current limited therapeutic options. We propose that the integration of three signaling networks, including chaperone-mediated mitochondrial homeostasis, integrin-dependent cell signaling, and Runx2-regulated gene expression in the metastatic bone microenvironment plays a critical role in prostate cancer maintenance, and offers novel options for molecular therapy.  A UNIFIED AND INTEGRATED PROSTATE CANCER REGULATORY NETWORK: IMPLICATIONS FOR DISEASE PROGRESSION AND PATHWAY-ORIENTED DRUG DISCOVERY Recent experimental evidence suggests that the three regulatory networks outlined above are extensively interconnected, sharing common signaling pathways, and utilizing a common set of effector and nodal molecules. In addition, because of their synergistic role in fundamental mechanisms of disease progression and metastatic dissemination, these pathways and their associated nodal proteins may provide novel opportunities for pathway-oriented drug discovery. Specifically, analysis of subnetwork interactions using systems biology tools reveals an extensive degree of connectivity ( Fig. 1 ). The first Hsp90 subnetwork interfaces extensively with Runx2 regulation of gene transcription in the bone microenvironment, controls multiple pathways of cell survival often exploited in prostate cancer, and regulates the stability and function of multiple effector molecules of integrin signaling ( Fig. 1 ). The second subnetwork of ?V integrin-initiated signal transduction also interfaces with critical components of mitochondrial cell death, preserving cell viability, controlling Runx2 transcriptional activity through modifications in Runx2 phosphorylation [ Sun et al., 2001 ; Chang et al., 2008 ], and integrates matrix metalloproteinase and TGF? signals of pivotal importance for metastatic dissemination, especially to the bones ( Fig. 1 ). This is mirrored by a comparable set of interactions involving the third subnetwork of Runx2-dependent gene expression, which affects integrin expression and signaling, mitochondrial integrity via Bax regulation of outer membrane permeability, and modulation of TGF? responses in both early and late events of prostate cancer tumorigenesis, and metastatic bone disease [ Mundy, 2002 ; Buijs et al., 2007 ; Nguyen and Massague, 2007 ; Baselga et al., 2008 ; Pratap et al., 2008 ; Li et al., 2008a ] ( Fig. 1 ). In addition, this integrated regulatory network utilizes common nodal proteins. Survivin is a regulator of apoptosis participating in prostate cancer progression [ Altieri, 2008 ] that is implicated in mitochondrial homeostasis, and whose expression in prostate cancer is controlled by both Runx2- and integrin-initiated signaling. Similarly, Hsp90 homeostasis has also been implicated in preservation of mitochondrial integrity [ Kang et al., 2007 ], but also in the control of pivotal client proteins [ Whitesell and Lindquist, 2005 ] of the second and third subnetworks, including TGF?, and androgen receptor (AR), as well as in the direct contribution of cell invasion and metastasis [ Eustace et al., 2004 ]. In this context, it may be possible to envision the development and characterization of a novel set of “network inhibitors” capable of targeting the nodal proteins in this integrated set of pathways. Although small molecule antagonists of Hsp90 have now reached the clinic, their therapeutic efficacy as single agents has been modest, at best, generally below the expectations for these agents to function as genuine pathway antagonists. The regulatory network outlined above suggests that the segregation of Hsp90 in specialized subcellular compartments, including mitochondria, may provide novel options for the development of targeted inhibitors. In this context, proof-of-principle experiments to target Hsp90 inhibitors to mitochondria have produced encouraging results, causing mitochondrial collapse in tumor cells, accompanied by sudden and massive cell death and inhibition of tumor growth in preclinical experiments, in vivo. Similar considerations apply to the potential role of integrins as cell surface receptors, drugable targets. In this context, the ?V integrins are emerging as an attractive molecular target for inhibition of an integrated network of cell invasion and migration, including pleiotropic TGF? signaling responses. This may be particularly relevant in prostate cancer, where interference with metastatic bone colonization frequently involves deregulation of TGF? functions. Lastly, although transcription factors are typically considered non-drugable, therapeutic targeting of Runx2 by local delivery of short hairpin RNA (shRNA) could interrupt an integrated network of gene expression required to maintain the metastatic niche in the bone microenvironment, and concomitantly deregulate cell survival and cell migration pathways of invading prostate cancer cells.  A UNIFIED AND INTEGRATED PROSTATE CANCER REGULATORY NETWORK: IMPLICATIONS FOR DISEASE PROGRESSION AND PATHWAY-ORIENTED DRUG DISCOVERY Recent experimental evidence suggests that the three regulatory networks outlined above are extensively interconnected, sharing common signaling pathways, and utilizing a common set of effector and nodal molecules. In addition, because of their synergistic role in fundamental mechanisms of disease progression and metastatic dissemination, these pathways and their associated nodal proteins may provide novel opportunities for pathway-oriented drug discovery. Specifically, analysis of subnetwork interactions using systems biology tools reveals an extensive degree of connectivity ( Fig. 1 ). The first Hsp90 subnetwork interfaces extensively with Runx2 regulation of gene transcription in the bone microenvironment, controls multiple pathways of cell survival often exploited in prostate cancer, and regulates the stability and function of multiple effector molecules of integrin signaling ( Fig. 1 ). The second subnetwork of ?V integrin-initiated signal transduction also interfaces with critical components of mitochondrial cell death, preserving cell viability, controlling Runx2 transcriptional activity through modifications in Runx2 phosphorylation [ Sun et al., 2001 ; Chang et al., 2008 ], and integrates matrix metalloproteinase and TGF? signals of pivotal importance for metastatic dissemination, especially to the bones ( Fig. 1 ). This is mirrored by a comparable set of interactions involving the third subnetwork of Runx2-dependent gene expression, which affects integrin expression and signaling, mitochondrial integrity via Bax regulation of outer membrane permeability, and modulation of TGF? responses in both early and late events of prostate cancer tumorigenesis, and metastatic bone disease [ Mundy, 2002 ; Buijs et al., 2007 ; Nguyen and Massague, 2007 ; Baselga et al., 2008 ; Pratap et al., 2008 ; Li et al., 2008a ] ( Fig. 1 ). In addition, this integrated regulatory network utilizes common nodal proteins. Survivin is a regulator of apoptosis participating in prostate cancer progression [ Altieri, 2008 ] that is implicated in mitochondrial homeostasis, and whose expression in prostate cancer is controlled by both Runx2- and integrin-initiated signaling. Similarly, Hsp90 homeostasis has also been implicated in preservation of mitochondrial integrity [ Kang et al., 2007 ], but also in the control of pivotal client proteins [ Whitesell and Lindquist, 2005 ] of the second and third subnetworks, including TGF?, and androgen receptor (AR), as well as in the direct contribution of cell invasion and metastasis [ Eustace et al., 2004 ]. In this context, it may be possible to envision the development and characterization of a novel set of “network inhibitors” capable of targeting the nodal proteins in this integrated set of pathways. Although small molecule antagonists of Hsp90 have now reached the clinic, their therapeutic efficacy as single agents has been modest, at best, generally below the expectations for these agents to function as genuine pathway antagonists. The regulatory network outlined above suggests that the segregation of Hsp90 in specialized subcellular compartments, including mitochondria, may provide novel options for the development of targeted inhibitors. In this context, proof-of-principle experiments to target Hsp90 inhibitors to mitochondria have produced encouraging results, causing mitochondrial collapse in tumor cells, accompanied by sudden and massive cell death and inhibition of tumor growth in preclinical experiments, in vivo. Similar considerations apply to the potential role of integrins as cell surface receptors, drugable targets. In this context, the ?V integrins are emerging as an attractive molecular target for inhibition of an integrated network of cell invasion and migration, including pleiotropic TGF? signaling responses. This may be particularly relevant in prostate cancer, where interference with metastatic bone colonization frequently involves deregulation of TGF? functions. Lastly, although transcription factors are typically considered non-drugable, therapeutic targeting of Runx2 by local delivery of short hairpin RNA (shRNA) could interrupt an integrated network of gene expression required to maintain the metastatic niche in the bone microenvironment, and concomitantly deregulate cell survival and cell migration pathways of invading prostate cancer cells.  Figure Fig. 1 Prostate Cancer Signaling Network. The integration of regulatory pathways in plasma membrane (integrins), cytosol (Hsp90), and nucleus (Runx2) that provide therapeutic targets in prostate cancer is indicated.  Figure Fig. 1 Prostate Cancer Signaling Network. The integration of regulatory pathways in plasma membrane (integrins), cytosol (Hsp90), and nucleus (Runx2) that provide therapeutic targets in prostate cancer is indicated. 