Regulated cell death pathways: New twists in modulation of BCL2 family function A number of cell death pathways have been recognized. Though apoptosis and autophagy have been well characterized, programmed necrosis has recently received attention and may provide clinical alternatives to suppress resistant tumors. Necrosis is primarily characterized by large-scale permeabilization, swelling, and rupture of cell membranes and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Traditionally, necrosis in cancer cells has been indicative of poor prognoses, as chronic inflammation was found to encourage tumor growth. Yet, many antitumor effects associated with necrosis have been discovered in certain settings, such as the formation of an effective antitumor immune response. In this way, finding ways to attenuate the pro-tumor effects of necrosis while engaging the antitumor pathways via drugs, radiation, and sensitization may prove valuable as a clinical focus for the future. We hypothesize that the use of Bcl-2 inhibitors may enhance necrotic death characterized by inflammation and antitumor immunity. In this article, we briefly review apoptosis and autophagy and reason how necrosis may be a suitable alternative therapeutic endpoint. We then highlight novel inhibitors of Bcl-2 that may provide clinical application of our hypothesis in the future.  Conclusions In examining the various cell death pathways, we identified the importance of necrosis as an alternative focus for cancer suppression. Whereas necrosis and inflammation was traditionally believed to be negative, further research has erased this simplistic view. In certain settings, programmed necrosis or programmed necrosis may occur and be more effective in cells, such as those resistant to apoptosis. Furthermore, acute inflammation responses may trigger antitumor immunity via antigen presentation. In analyzing these ideas, the inhibition of Bcl-2 by various methods and drugs, such as gossypol, shikonin, AS oligonucleotides, and others, may enhance the efficacy of necrotic death via upregulating the immune response. Although Bcl-2 inhibitors had been researched first for upregulating apoptosis and autophagy in cancer cells, they may hold great promise in clinical programmed necrotic cancer therapy.  Figures Figure 1 Various pathways associated with the inactivation or activation of Bcl-2 and their generalized effects toward programmed necrosis initiation. On the left side, the activation of Bcl-2 leads to various protumor effects, such as angiogenesis and chronic inflammation. The activation of VEGF inhibits the maturation of DCs and antitumor inflammation, thus inhibiting programmed necrosis. The inhibition of Bcl-2 on the right side highlights many programmed necrotic effects, such as the activation of antitumor immunity by increased CRT and NALP1. Other programmed necrosis activators include the opening of VDAC to increase [ROS] and decrease [ATP]. Figure 2 Bcl-2 as an attractive target for modulating different modes of cell death in cancer therapy due to close communications with mediators of apoptosis, programmed necrosis, and autophagy. Sharing the common upstream TNF receptor, apoptosis and programmed necrosis seem to diverge when programmed necrosis protein RIP and pro-apoptotic caspase-8 compete to bind the adaptor molecule FADD for their activation. Bcl-2 is also shown here to block the VDAC and consequent disruption of mitochondrial permeability necessary for the release of programmed necrosis factors. On the other hand, Bcl-2 induces VEGF and NF-?B production that can suppress programmed necrosis. Downstream of caspase-8 lies the apoptotic pathway involving Bid and Bax oligomerization and consequent permeabilization of the mitochondrial membrane for cytochrome c release. Bcl-2 here acts to suppress the effects of Bid and Bax. Lastly, autophagy is activated when the inhibitory binding of Bcl-2 to Beclin 1 is relieved either by BH3-domain proteins or JNK phosphorylation of Bcl-2. 