Aflibercept in epithelial ovarian carcinoma Angiogenesis is a hallmark of malignant transformation. With improved understanding of angiogenic signaling in both the normal and malignant state, there have been a number of agents developed that target VEGF signaling. These targeted agents can affect downstream VEGF signal transduction via unique mechanisms at different cellular and extracellular locations. The aflibercept, or VEGF-Trap, molecule is the subject of this article. Its molecular structure, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profile, and preclinical and early clinical data in epithelial ovarian carcinoma is reviewed. For comparison, other anti-angiogenic agents that have been or are currently being studied in epithelial ovarian carcinoma are also summarized. Finally, the anticipated role of aflibercept in the treatment of epithelial ovarian carcinoma is also discussed.  Introduction to the compound The aflibercept molecule (parental VEGF -Trap) was originally synthesized as a fusion protein combining the constant region (Fc) of IgG1 with the first three domains of VEGFR1 (VEGF?B1). It was found to have impressive, picomolar binding affinity to VEGF ligand and promising anti-tumor activity in transformed cancer cell lines. Unfortunately, it was also found in its parental form to have a significant positive charge, and as a result, to bind nonspecifically to negatively charged extracellular matrix proteins, causing its systemic half-life to be poor. It was then modified to include the Fc region of IgG1 fused with domain two of VEGFR1 and domain three of VEGFR2 (VEGF?R1R2) ( Figure 2 ). This modification served to maintain its high VEGF-A ligand affinity and relative specificity, and to significantly prolong its in vivo half-life, making it clinically useful. It also has strong, picomolar binding affinity for PlGF. All of the aflibercept variants were produced and purified from Chinese hamster ovary cells [ 24 ]. Aflibercept has undergone extensive pre-clinical testing to establish it as an effective inhibitor of angiogenesis and tumor growth in animal models. Subcutaneous mouse tumor xenograft studies using cancer cell lines from multiple species (murine melanoma, human rhabdomyosarcoma and rat glioma) were performed. Aflibercept at high (25 mg/kg) and low (2.5 mg/kg) doses was administered subcutaneously twice-weekly. Measurement of tumor volumes at multiple time points from initiation of therapy demonstrated significant regression in tumor in two of the three models. Examination of tumor sections from sacrificed treatment and control mice demonstrated substantial decreases in tumor vascularity in treated mice, particularly those who received high doses [ 24 ]. With the knowledge that VEGF plays an important role in the development of malignant ascites, a mouse model of ovarian cancer using VEGF overexpressing SKOV-3 cells was created. Mice were administered aflibercept 25 mg/kg twice-weekly or placebo. Aflibercept treated mice developed minimal to no ascites in comparison to placebo-treated mice. In a similar experiment using OVCAR-3 cells, both inhibition of ascites as well as tumor growth were significantly improved with aflibercept relative to placebo [ 25 ]. Initial anti-angiogenic strategies targeting VEGF were tested in preclinical models and in humans who were known to have minimal disease (e.g., early stage or immediately following surgical cytoreduction). It has been postulated that pro-angiogenic growth factors secreted by pericytes found in established or bulky tumors would make them refractory to VEGF antagonism. To test this in the preclinical setting, mice with bulky, orthotopic, SK-NEP-1 (Wilms tumor) xenografts were injected subcutaneously with aflibercept 500 ?g or an equivalent placebo volume twice-weekly. Mice were then sacrificed at multiple time points and their tumors were weighed. Significant differences between treated mice and controls were observed at multiple time points, with a 79.3% decrease noted in VEGF treated mice at the longest tested treatment duration (36 days). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick-end labeling (TUNEL) and platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) staining strongly indicated that apoptosis was the mechanism responsible for the loss of tumor cells [ 26 ]. Aflibercept was also evaluated in an orthotopic murine renal cancer cell model. Aflibercept's ability to prevent tumor formation after ortho-topic injection of luciferase-tagged renal cancer cells, as well as its effect on measurable tumor burden, was assessed. In the prevention assay, twice-weekly injections of aflibercept 10 mg/kg versus control were performed starting day 3 or 4 after injection of cancer cells. Luciferase assay at 30 days demonstrated an 87% decrease in tumor growth (p = 0.007), and survival in these mice was increased by 27 days (p < 0.0001). In the intervention assay, aflibercept 10 and 25 mg/kg versus control was administered subcutaneously twice-weekly for up to 30 days. Aflibercept inhibited primary tumor growth by 74 and 78%, respectively by luciferase expression, and this was confirmed by tumor weight ana lysis. Formation of detectable lung metastases was inhibited in 98% of cases (p = 0.004) [ 27 ].  Chemistry As mentioned previously, aflibercept is a soluble fusion protein consisting of the Fc portion of IgG1 combined with the second domain of VEGFR1 and the third domain of VEGFR2. Its molecular weight is 115 kDa, and it is produced from Chinese hamster ovaries [ 24 ]. Aflibercept is depicted in Figure 2 .  Pharmacokinetics & metabolism Published data regarding the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic qualities of aflibercept were performed using subcutaneous injection of the drug. Since that time, additional experiments have been performed comparing intra venous dosing with subcutaneous dosing, demonstrating nearly identical bioavailability between the two dosing methods [ 28 ]. The pharmacokinetic qualities of aflibercept were obtained by injecting VEGFR1R2 (4 mg/kg) into mice. Cmax and AUC were found to be 16 ?g/ml and 36.28 ?g × days/ml, respectively. Equilibrium binding assays were also performed, demonstrating a Kd = 1 pM for the predominant VEGF isoform in humans, VEGF165 [ 24 ]. Pharmacokinetic studies performed during development of the aflibercept molecule identified that, in comparison with VEGF targeting Mabs, which forms a multimeric immune complex, the Trap molecule forms a 1:1 stable and inert complex with VEGF-A ligand that is measurable and persists systemically for up to 14 days after a single subcutaneous dose. Holash et al. described experiments in murine cancer models where the attainment of an optimal ratio of free VEGF-Trap to complexed VEGF-Trap in measured serum samples correlated with maximal tumor response, allowing the Trap complex to serve as its own biomarker for the achievement of optimal dosing [ 13 ].  Pharmacodynamics Pharmacodynamic performance in vivo was assessed by examining the ability of aflibercept to block dose-dependent hypotension caused by VEGF infusion in mice. A single dose of aflibercept (25 mg/kg) 24 h prior to VEGF administration completely blocked VEGF-induced hypotension. Its in vivo durability was tested by measuring the blockage of hypotension at 1, 3 and 7 days after aflibercept administration (5 mg/kg × 1). It was completely effective at blocking hypotension through day 3, indicating in vivo activity through this duration [ 24 ]. One of the potential differences between aflibercept and bevacizumab stems from their different pharmacodynamic properties. As mentioned above, the aflibercept molecule forms a 1:1, relatively low molecular weight complex with the VEGF-A ligand [ 28 ]. Bevacizumab, in contrast, is known to form larger molecular weight multimeric immune complexes. Some authors have hypothesized that some of the class effects of VEGF targeted therapies, such as hypertension, proteinuria and arterial thrombosis, are largely a result of immune complex deposition and immunogenicity. For this reason, some authors question whether the smaller molecular weight and presumably less immunogenic aflibercept IC will result in fewer such adverse effects [ 28 ]. Interestingly, Meyer et al. recently reported that bevacizumab immune complexes were able to induce platelet aggregation via activation of the Fc?RIIa receptor found on human platelets [ 29 ].  Clinical efficacy To date there is only one peer-reviewable published trial regarding aflibercept; however, there have been numerous published abstracts that describe its clinical efficacy in a variety of solid tumors [ 30 ]. While it has shown some activity as a single agent, its use in combination with other agents has been more impressive. A Phase I study of single-agent aflibercept administered intravenously every 2 weeks explored doses ranging between 0.3 and 7.0 mg/kg. Free aflibercept concentrations remained in excess of bound aflibercept concentration during the entire 2-week dosing interval for dose levels at 2.0 mg/ kg and above, suggesting that enough aflibercept was present to bind all endogenous and tumor-produced VEGF [ 31 ]. Thus, a 4.0 mg/kg every 2 weeks dose of aflibercept has been utilized in several Phase II studies. The results of a randomized, double-blind, Phase II study of 215 women with advanced ovarian cancer (predominantly third- and fourth-line therapy) who were treated with single-agent aflibercept at a dose of either 2 mg/kg or 4 mg/kg every 2 weeks were reported in 2007 [ 32 ]. Response to treatment was assessed both by the clinical investigators and an independent review committee (IRC). As assessed by the investigators, Response Evaluation In Solid Tumors (RECIST) response rates were 7.3 and 3.8% for the 4 mg/kg and 2 mg/kg dose, respectively. The response rates as assessed by the IRC were 4.6 and 0.9% in the 4 mg/kg and 2 mg/kg arms, respectively. The CA-125 response rates were defined as at least a 50% reduction in CA-125 protein levels, and were approximately 11% in both arms. A total of 18 (13.8%) of the 130 patients evaluable for CA-125 response from the combined groups had either a RECIST (as assessed by the IRC) or CA-125 response. The median progression-free survival was 13.3 and 13.0 weeks with the 4 mg/kg and 2 mg/kg doses, respectively. The median overall survival was 49.3 and 55.4 weeks with the 4 mg/kg and 2 mg/kg doses, respectively. Of the 40 patients in both dose groups who had evaluable ascites at baseline, 77.5% had either a complete disappearance or stabilization of their ascites [ 32 ]. Aflibercept is also being evaluated in combination with a variety of chemotherapeutic agents. A Phase I study evaluating aflibercept with docetaxel revealed that it could be safely combined with docetaxel with no increase in docetaxel-related toxicity. The recommended dose was aflibercept 6.0 mg/kg intravenously and docetaxel 75 mg/m2 intravenously every 21 days [ 33 ]. There is also a Phase I/II clinical trial in recurrent EOC evaluating aflibercept and docetaxel (in progress). The completed Phase I trial did not identify a maximum tolerated dose, and recommended that the Phase II dose for aflibercept was 6 mg/kg intravenously every 21 days in this combination regimen. There were two out of nine confirmed partial responders in the Phase I; the two-stage designed Phase II has suspended accrual after completing first-stage enrollment and is evaluating for responses in order to determine whether second-stage accrual is warranted [Coleman RC: Update on data analysis regarding VEGF-Trap plus docetaxel in EOC. Pers. Commun.]. Also notable is a Phase I trial performed in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma and symptomatic ascites. Based on preclinical data describing a dramatic decrease in ascites in a murine model, the goal of this trial was to achieve a repeat paracentesis response rate, defined as a doubling in time between repeat paracentesis procedures compared with a baseline average. Aflibercept 4 mg/m2 was administered every 2 weeks. Eight out of ten evaluable patients achieved a repeat paracentesis response rate. Significant adverse events were notable as well; four out of ten patients experienced a bowel obstruction, one patient experienced a bowel perforation and three out of ten had grade 3/4 nausea and vomiting. Apparent from the abstract is that the majority of enrolled patients were in the terminal phase of their disease, making it less likely that aflibercept was primarily responsible for the adverse events [ 34 ]. The current development strategy for aflibercept includes four randomized Phase III trials in combination with standard chemotherapy regimens in patients with prostate, non-small-cell lung, colorectal and pancreatic cancers. These trials are currently underway.  Safety & tolerability In general, aflibercept has been well-tolerated. A Phase I study in patients with advanced cancer (multiple tumor types) with aflibercept administered intravenously every 2 weeks explored doses ranging between 0.3 and 7.0 mg/kg. Dose-dependent adverse events, particularly hypertension and proteinuria, increased in frequency and severity at doses of 4.0 mg/kg and above [ 33 ]. Combination Phase I and II studies have validated these as the primary adverse effects of aflibercept, without significant potentiation when given in combination with docetaxel, irinotecan, 5-fluououracil, cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin [ 31 , 32 , 35 ]. Grade 3/4 hypertension has been described in 9–32% of patients, and proteinuria in 4–13%. Although rare, other well-described anti-angiogenic associated adverse events, such as bowel perforations, bowel obstructions, hemorrhagic events, reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome and pulmonary emboli, have been described in association with the drug. A summary of adverse effects is illustrated in Table 4 [ 31 , 32 , 35 , 36 ]. Overall, it is not clear based on published data whether there is any significant difference in the frequency or severity of the off-target side effects mentioned above when comparing aflibercept and bevacizumab.  Regulatory affairs Aflibercept has also been identified as VEGF-Trap and AVE0005. (NSC #724770, IND #BB100137). It was developed by Regeneron (NY, USA), and is being developed in collaboration with Sanofi-Aventis Pharmaceuticals (Paris, France). The drug is also distributed by the Clinical Trials Evaluation Program, the Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis and the National Cancer Institute. In addition to the primary tumors mentioned above, ovarian cancer is the subject of a future randomized clinical trial evaluating chemotherapy in combination with aflibercept [Coleman RC: Update on data analysis regarding VEGF-Trap plus docetaxel in EOC. Pers. Commun.]. Executive summary ? Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the predominant form of ovarian cancer, and it is most frequently diagnosed after becoming widely disseminated. Despite its initial chemosensitivity, it is an aggressive disease with few effective treatment options for patients in whom it recurs. ? There is consensus in the setting of primary treatment regarding cytotoxic chemotherapy agents; however, there is little or no consensus regarding the utility of adjuvant targeted agents in combination with platinum and taxanes in both the setting of primary treatment and recurrence. ? Clinically available anti-angiogenic agents have shown activity in EOC and can be classified mechanistically as monoclonal antibodies, receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and decoy receptor (Trap) molecules. ? Aflibercept is a synthetic, soluble decoy receptor with high affinity for the predominant VEGF-ligand. It has impressive anti-tumor activity in murine xenograft models and early clinical trials based on preliminary data. It is well-tolerated and active as monotherapy and in combination therapies in EOC; however, it has shown better clinical activity in combination with cytotoxic agents. ? The market for VEGF-targeted therapy in EOC is currently dominated by the monoclonal antibody, bevacizumab, which is undergoing multiple Phase III trials in both the primary and recurrent treatment setting. Future competitors, including aflibercept, must compare favorably with regard to clinical efficacy or side effect profile to supplant this agent. Data to support a valid comparison between these two agents as well as other VEGF-targeted therapies has yet to be reported.  Conclusion Aflibercept has evolved from an experimental molecule with doubtful pharmacokinetic and pharmaco dynamic properties (previous VEGF-Trap variants), to a clinically relevant and clearly active agent in a relatively short period of time. Although peer-reviewable published data are forthcoming, it has to date been a safe and relatively well-tolerated drug, with preliminary reports suggesting anti-tumor activity as a single agent and in combination therapy for EOC patients. Because there is relatively little published prospective data available for aflibercept, it is at this point too early to make helpful comparisons regarding both its safety and efficacy in comparison with bevacizumab or other VEGF-targeted therapies.  Future perspective Anti-angiogenic therapy has been incorporated into the standard of care (combination therapy) for multiple malignancies, principally in the metastatic and recurrent settings. The only clinically available anti-angiogenic agents are monoclonal antibodies and TKIs, and while both groups contain individual drugs that have demonstrated activity in EOC, there is no clearly superior agent. Other potentially viable strategies for the future include message targeting RNA ribozymes, VEGF antisense and siRNA. Because it has been US FDA labeled and used extensively in multiple cancers, bevacizumab has emerged as the default anti-angiogenic agent by which all future drugs of this nature will be compared. Aflibercept appears to be similar to bevacizumab with regard to safety and tolerability; however, it is not possible at this time to offer an adequate, evidence-based comparison in terms of clinical efficacy. Because of its affinity for PlGF, aflibercept does offer the potential to bind more ligands in the tumor microenvironment, but whether this capacity will translate into better tumor control is yet to be elucidated. It is also unclear whether or not the pharmacodynamic properties of aflibercept will translate into an improved adverse effect profile in comparison with other anti-angiogenic therapies, particularly bevacizumab. Another important clinical question for aflibercept that remains is whether it would be better suited for EOC patients in the primary or recurrent setting. Bevacizumab, as the first available anti-angiogenic agent, is currently being evaluated in both groups of patients. It is likely that future clinical development will position aflibercept in similar settings, particularly if efficacy is demonstrated in recurrent disease.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Epithelial ovarian cancer: natural history. Figure 2 Aflibercept/VEGF<sub>R1R2</sub> structure Domain 2 of VEGFR1 and domain 3 of VEGFR2 complexed with the Fc portion of human IgG1. Table 1 National Comprehensive Cancer Network acceptable drugs in recurrent epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Cytotoxic therapy Hormonal therapy Targeted therapy Preferred agents Cisplatin (if platinum-sensitive) – – Carboplatin (if platinum-sensitive) Gemcitabine Carboplatin/paclitaxel (category 1) (if platinum-sensitive) Gemcitabine/carboplatin Liposomal doxorubicin Topotecan Other potentially active agents Altretamine Anastrozole Bevacizumab Capecitabine Letrozole Cyclophosphamide Tamoxifen Docetaxel Etoposide, oral Ifosfamide Irinotecan Melphalan Oxaliplatin Paclitaxel Vinorelbine Data taken from [ 6 ]. Table 2 Phase III VEGF-inhibitor trials in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Trial name Combination Treatment setting Anticipated accrual GOG-218 Carboplatin, paclitaxel, bevacizumab Primary 2000 ICON-7 Carboplatin, paclitaxel, bevacizumab Primary 1444 ICON-6 Carboplatin, paclitaxel, cediranib ‡ Recurrent 2000 GOG-213 Carboplatin, paclitaxel, bevacizumab Recurrent * 660 OCEANS Carboplatin, paclitaxel, bevacizumab Recurrent * 440 * Platinum sensitive. ‡ VEGFR-2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor. GOG: Gynecologic Oncology Group; ICON: Internationational Collaborative Ovarian Neoplasm. Table 3 Bevacizumab in epithelial ovarian carcinoma (Phase II). Variable Cannistra (n = 44) (%) Garcia * (n = 70) (%) Burger (n = 62) (%) Previous regimens 1 100 34 2 52 3 48 Response rate CR 0 0 3 PR 16 24 18 GI perforations 11 6 0 Arterial thrombosis 7 4 0 Bevacizumab-related deaths 7 4 0 Ref. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 7 ] * Combined with oral cyclophosphamide. CR: Complete response; GI: Gastrointestinal; PR: Partial response. Table 4 Afibercept-related adverse effects. Year Publication form Author AF doses (mg/kg) Combination agent(s) G2 events (%) G3–G4 events (%) Ref. Phase I 2008 Abstract Rixe 2–6 Irinotecan, 5-FU, leucovorin Dysphonia (24), epistaxis (18) Hypertension (32), proteinuria (11) [ 31 ] 2008 Abstract Freyer 4, 6 Docetaxel, cisplatin Epistaxis (19), proteinuria (17) dysphonia (13) Hypertension (13) [ 36 ] 2008 Absract Limentani 2, 3, 4, 5 Oxaliplatin, 5-FU, leucovorin (FOLFOX-4) Not reported Hypertension (13), proteinuria (13), hemorrhagic events (3), deep vein thrombosis (3) [ 35 ] 2008 Abstract Coleman 2–6 Docetaxel 75 mg/kg Fatigue (33), mucositis (11) Hypertension (22), neutropenia (89) [ 37 ] Phase II 2007 Abstract Tew 2, 4 None Not reported Hypertension (9), proteinuria (4), encephalopathy (2), renal failure (2) [ 32 ] 2008 Unpublished Coleman 6 Docetaxel 75 mg/kg Study in progress Study in progress 5-FU: 5-fluorouracil; AF: Aflibercept . Table 5 Tyrosine kinase inhibitors in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. Drug Generic name Target Current trials in ovarian carcinoma US FDA approval (indication) Ref. SU11248 Sutent VEGFR, EGFR, PDGFR, c-KIT Phase II/III Yes (renal) [ 14 ] ZD6474 Vandetanib VEGFR, EGFR Phase II Yes [ 21 ] Sorafenib Sorafenib RAF-1, VEGFR-2, EGFR-3 PDGFR-?, FLT-3, c-KIT Phase I/II/III Yes (renal) [ 16 ] AZD2171 Cediranib VEGFR-1-3, PDGFR, c-KIT Phase I/II/III No [ 22 ] GW786034 Pazopanib VEGFR1-3, PDGFR-?/?, c-KIT Phase II No [ 15 ] PTK787 Vatalanib VEGFR-1-3, PDGFR, c-KIT Phase I No [ 20 ] BIBF 1120 Vargatef VEGFR, PDGFR, FGFR Phase I No [ 17 ] BMS-582664 Brivanib VEGFR-2, FGFR Phase I No [ 18 ] 