Impact of heat-shock protein 90 on cancer metastasis Cancer metastasis is the result of complex processes, including alteration of cell adhesion/motility in the microenvironment and neoangiogenesis, that are necessary to support cancer growth in tissues distant from the primary tumor. The molecular chaperone heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90), also termed the ‘cancer chaperone’, plays a crucial role in maintaining the stability and activity of numerous signaling proteins involved in these processes. Small-molecule Hsp90 inhibitors display anticancer activity both in vitro and in vivo , and multiple Phase II and Phase III clinical trials of several structurally distinct Hsp90 inhibitors are currently underway. In this review, we will highlight the importance of Hsp90 in cancer metastasis and the therapeutic potential of Hsp90 inhibitors as antimetastasis drugs.  Conclusion This review supports the concept that Hsp90 is an attractive target for antimetastatic therapy as it is implicated in multiple aspects of the metastatic process, most notably cell adhesion, cell motility and neoangiogenesis. For the sake of simplicity and clarity, we have reviewed the literature categorically by process, and we summarized the role of Hsp90 in each process separately. However, because metastatic signaling pathways dependent on Hsp90 overlap, we fully expect the role of Hsp90 in metastasis to be more complex, and we suggest that inhibition of Hsp90 is likely to be more potent than would be predicted for an inhibitor of only one aspect of metastasis. Although Hsp90 inhibitors are well known to have anticancer activity in vitro and in vivo , and their therapeutic potential has been investigated in many clinical trials, less attention has been paid to their antimetastatic activity. In fact, only recently have Hsp90 inhibitors been shown to display promising antimetastatic activity in a broad range of cancer cells. Further investigation, especially utilizing models of in vivo metastasis, is required to unveil the complete mechanism of Hsp90-organized cancer metastasis. It is important to note, however, that reports have been published showing that Hsp90 inhibitors can indirectly accelerate bone metastasis through the activation of osteoclastogenesis in two distinct experimental murine bone metastasis models [ 54 , 55 ]. It is not clear whether Hsp90-dependent acceleration of bone metastasis also occurs in humans, but it would be prudent as a facet of the ongoing clinical evaluation of these agents to closely monitor the potential impact of Hsp90 inhibitors on bone density and the bone microenvironment.  Future perspective Hsp90 inhibitors have entered Phase II and III clinical trials, and have shown therapeutic activity in several types of cancer. Many novel small-molecule Hsp90 inhibitors are currently being assessed in vitro , in animal models and in clinical trials [ 100 - 103 ]. In addition, non-small-molecule Hsp90 inhibitors, including the Hsp90 antibody Mycograb® and the peptide inhibitor shepherdin, have displayed anticancer activity in preliminary studies [ 104 ]. It is probable that further investigation will identify Hsp90 inhibitors with improved therapeutic activity and better pharmacologic properties. Executive summary Heat-shock protein 90 Heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is a molecular chaperone that is important for the maturation, stability and activity of numerous cancer-related proteins. Hsp90 is frequently overexpressed and activated in cancer cells. Hsp90 inhibitors have entered Phase III clinical trials. Intracellular Hsp90 & cancer metastasis Hsp90 inhibitors display strong antimetastatic activity in many types of cancer cells. Cell adhesion is regulated by Hsp90 through cell matrix adhesion-related kinase activity. Cell motility is regulated by Hsp90 impact on the multiple steps of receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling. Neoangiogenesis is regulated by Hsp90 from the transcriptional to the protein level. The antimetastatic activity of Hsp90 inhibitors has to be better defined in experimental in vivo spontaneous metastasis models. Extracellular Hsp90 & cancer metastasis Hsp90 exists not only in the intracellular space, but also in the extracellular space. Although the extracellular pool of Hsp90 is increased in many types of cancer cells, the mechanism of increase is not clear. Inhibitors of extracellular Hsp90 display antimetastatic activity both in vitro and in vivo . Although extracellular Hsp90 seems to regulate cell motility through matrix-degrading proteases and cell surface receptors, further investigation is needed to better define its complete mechanism(s) of action. Hsp90 inhibitors have been shown to display promising therapeutic activity when used in conjunction with proteasome inhibitors or kinase inhibitors [ 105 , 106 ]. In a preclinical study, the Src and Bcr-Abl kinase inhibitor dasatinib was also shown to reverse Hsp90 inhibitor-dependent cancer cell proliferation in bone [ 55 ]. Future experimentation is needed to discern which combination therapies will prove to be most beneficial, as the possibilities are vast. Although extracellular Hsp90 is known to contribute to cancer metastasis, the molecular mechanisms underlying its secretion and subsequent actions are not clear. Further investigation is warranted to verify the molecular determinants of Hsp90 secretion. It is possible that extracellular Hsp90 may have nearly as varied a list of client proteins as does its intracellular counterpart, thereby contributing to its diverse effects on the metastatic process.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Heat-shock protein 90 plays multiple roles in cancer metastasis EGFR: EGF receptor; HIF: Hypoxia-inducible factor; Hsp90: Heat-shock protein 90; IGF-1R: Type 1 IGF receptor; MMPs: Matrix metalloproteinases; PDGFR: PDGF receptor; VEGFR: VEGF receptor. Figure 2 Hsp90 inhibitors induce client protein degradation and/or inactivation GA: Geldanamycin; Hsp90: Heat-shock protein 90. Table 1 A partial list of heat-shock protein 90-regulated signaling proteins involved in various aspects of cancer metastasis. Protein Description Role of Hsp90 Ref. Cell adhesion FAK Nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Stability/activity [ 16 - 19 ] ILK Serine/threonine kinase Stability [ 21 ] Cell motility ErbB2 (HER2/neu) Receptor tyrosine kinase Stability/maturation [ 29 - 33 ] EGFR (mutant) Receptor tyrosine kinase Stability/maturation [ 34 - 36 ] MET Receptor tyrosine kinase Stability/activity [ 19 , 38 , 39 ] IGF-1R Receptor tyrosine kinase Stability/activity [ 42 , 44 , 45 ] c-Src Nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Maturation/activity [ 48 - 53 ] PDK1 Serine/threonine kinase Stability [ 57 ] Akt Serine/threonine kinase Stabitity/activity [ 57 - 60 ] Ack1/2 Nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Activity [ 66 , 67 ] uPA Serine protease Activity [ 19 , 39 , 71 ] MMP-2/9 Serine protease Expression/secretion [ 39 , 89 , 93 ] Neoangiogenesis HIF-1 Transcriptional activator Activity/stability [ 75 - 77 ] VEGFR Receptor tyrosine kinase Activity [ 17 - 19 , 79 - 81 ] PDGFR Receptor tyrosine kinase Stability [ 84 ] FAK: Focal adhesion kinase; HIF: Hypoxia-inducible factor; Hsp: Heat-shock protein; IGF-1R: Type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor; ILK: Integrin-linked kinase; MMP: Matrix metalloproteinase; PDGFR: PDGF receptor; VEGFR: VEGF receptor. 