Small-molecule inhibitors of proteins involved in base excision repair potentiate the anti-tumorigenic effect of existing chemotherapeutics and irradiation There has been a recent upsurge in the development of small-molecule inhibitors specific to DNA repair proteins or proteins peripherally involved in base excision repair and the DNA damage response. These specific, nominally toxic inhibitors are able to potentiate the effect of existing cancer cell treatments in a wide array of cancers. One of the largest obstacles to overcome in the treatment of cancer is incomplete killing with initial cancer treatments, leading to resistant cancer. The progression of our understanding of cancer and normal cell responses to DNA damage has allowed us to develop biomarkers that we can use to help us predict responses of cancers, more specifically target cancer cells and overcome resistance. Initial successes using these small-molecule DNA repair inhibitors in target-validation experiments and in the early stages of clinical trials indicate an important role for these inhibitors, and allow for the possibility of a future in which cancers are potentially treated in a highly specific, individual manner.  Conclusion The DNA repair inhibitors reviewed in this article demonstrate the ability of these agents to work in a wide variety of cell lines and in combination with numerous existing chemotherapeutic agents and IR. This is important, as it is doubtful that chemotherapeutics or IR will be replaced as front-line therapies in the near future. It is becoming more evident that combination therapy with rational targets is showing promise in preclinical and clinical studies. Therefore, adding agents that enhance current front-line treatments to increase the therapeutic index and reduce acquired tumor cell drug resistance would dramatically enhance cancer therapeutic efficacy sooner rather than later. The most successful inhibitors reviewed had some commonalities: Some inhibitors were able to highly inhibit the activity (>90% inhibition) of their target at doses that caused minimal toxicity to the cell lines or xenografted mice, except BRCA1- and BRCA2-deficient cells and xenografts, which showed significant cell growth delay with the treatment of some PARP inhibitors. As low levels of the inhibitors could be used to obtain significant inhibition of activity, the inhibitors could often dramatically potentiate the growth delay effect of chemotherapeutic agents and IR in xenografts, with little increased toxicity to the mice. However, it should be reiterated that the agents potentiated by PARP are not all thought of as ‘BER agents’, indicating cross-talk between DNA repair pathways as well as PARP. The preclinical in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated some exciting potentiation of cancer cell treatments. The results of the ongoing clinical trials will be revealing for the fate of these inhibitors and inhibitors of the same genre that are currently in the preclinical pipeline. Executive summary PARP inhibitors INO-1001 potentiated the effects of irradiation (IR) in CHO cells and doxorubicin in p53-deficient xenografts. INO-1001 also helped mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient xenografts partially overcome temozolomide resistance. AG14361 potentiated the effects of temozolomide in MMR-deficient but not MMR-proficient cell lines, and in MMR-deficient and -proficient xenografts. AG14361 also potentiates the effect of IR in MMR-deficient and -proficient cell lines along with MMR-deficient xenografts. Potentiation in combination with irinotecan was demonstrated in MMR-deficient and proficient xenografts. AG14361 had no effect in IR-treated cells deficient in NF-?B. Proficient base excision repair was needed to enhance camptothecin cytotoxicity in cell lines. AG14361 was successfully used as a single agent to induce cytotoxicity and growth delay in BRCA1?/? cell lines and BRCA2?/? cell lines and xenografts. The same effect was not demonstrated in wild-type BRCA2 or BRCA2+/? cell lines or xenografts. AG014699 was able to potentiate the effects of temozolomide and topotecan in neuroblastoma cell lines and xenografts. One patient in a clinical trial using temozolomide in combination with AG014699 showed a complete response. Other patient responses across a variety of cancer types ranged from partial response to some stabilization. The doses of AG014699 used demonstrated no symptomatic toxicities. Additionally, the patients were all able to tolerate full doses of temozolomide in combination with the AG014699. ABT-888 was able to potentiate the cytotoxic effects of temozolomide, cisplatin, carboplatin and cyclophophamide in BRCA1-deficient breast carcinoma xenografts. ABT-888 was also able to potentiate the cytotoxic effects of IR in colon cancer cell lines and lung cancer cell lines and a lung cancer xenograft model. However, ABT-888 was not able to overcome temozolomide resistance in glioblastoma xenografts previously exposed to temozolomide. AZD2281 was able to potentiate the effects of temozolomide in a colon cancer tumor model and methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) in a colon cancer cell line. AZD2281 was able to potentiate tumor growth delay in cisplatin- and carboplatin-treated mouse mammary tumors, but the effect was transient. AZD2281 was able to increase the sensitivity of some glioma cell lines to IR unless the cells were not replicating. AZD2281 caused cytotoxicity as a single agent in BRCA1-deficient cells and BRCA2-deficient cells. However, mammary tumors were able to develop resistance to AZD2281 over time. Ape1 DNA repair & redox inhibitors Methoxyamine potentiates the effects of temozolomide and other alkylating agents in several cancer cell lines. Topoisomerase II may be involved in the potentiation of the temozolomide effect by methoxyamine. Lucanthone potentiates the effects of MMS, temozolomide and IR, but has too many off-target effects to be clinically relevant. 7-nitroindole-2-carboxylic acid (NCA) potentiates the effects of MMS and temozolomide, but other laboratories have not been able to demonstrate this effect. NCA is not a very viable, clinically relevant lead agent. The arylstibonic acid compound 13755 can inhibit Ape1 repair activity, but was not able to potentiate MMS in HOS cells. E3330 inhibits redox function of Ape1, but not repair function. E3330 causes single-agent cytotoxicity to several cancer cell lines, but not CD34+ (normal) cells at the same doses. The E3330 redox inhibitor inhibits growth and migration of pancreatic cancer cell lines and angiogenesis in a variety of endothelial cells at subtoxic doses. Pol ? inhibitors KA-A and its derivatives, isolated from fertilized sea urchin eggs, specifically inhibit mammalian pol ?, and KA-A prevented growth of a leukemia cell line. Stigmasterol inhibits only the lyase activity of pol ?. Oleanolic acid, edgeworin and betulinic acid inhibit both the lyase and polymerase activity of pol ?.  Executive summary  PARP inhibitors INO-1001 potentiated the effects of irradiation (IR) in CHO cells and doxorubicin in p53-deficient xenografts. INO-1001 also helped mismatch repair (MMR)-deficient xenografts partially overcome temozolomide resistance. AG14361 potentiated the effects of temozolomide in MMR-deficient but not MMR-proficient cell lines, and in MMR-deficient and -proficient xenografts. AG14361 also potentiates the effect of IR in MMR-deficient and -proficient cell lines along with MMR-deficient xenografts. Potentiation in combination with irinotecan was demonstrated in MMR-deficient and proficient xenografts. AG14361 had no effect in IR-treated cells deficient in NF-?B. Proficient base excision repair was needed to enhance camptothecin cytotoxicity in cell lines. AG14361 was successfully used as a single agent to induce cytotoxicity and growth delay in BRCA1?/? cell lines and BRCA2?/? cell lines and xenografts. The same effect was not demonstrated in wild-type BRCA2 or BRCA2+/? cell lines or xenografts. AG014699 was able to potentiate the effects of temozolomide and topotecan in neuroblastoma cell lines and xenografts. One patient in a clinical trial using temozolomide in combination with AG014699 showed a complete response. Other patient responses across a variety of cancer types ranged from partial response to some stabilization. The doses of AG014699 used demonstrated no symptomatic toxicities. Additionally, the patients were all able to tolerate full doses of temozolomide in combination with the AG014699. ABT-888 was able to potentiate the cytotoxic effects of temozolomide, cisplatin, carboplatin and cyclophophamide in BRCA1-deficient breast carcinoma xenografts. ABT-888 was also able to potentiate the cytotoxic effects of IR in colon cancer cell lines and lung cancer cell lines and a lung cancer xenograft model. However, ABT-888 was not able to overcome temozolomide resistance in glioblastoma xenografts previously exposed to temozolomide. AZD2281 was able to potentiate the effects of temozolomide in a colon cancer tumor model and methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) in a colon cancer cell line. AZD2281 was able to potentiate tumor growth delay in cisplatin- and carboplatin-treated mouse mammary tumors, but the effect was transient. AZD2281 was able to increase the sensitivity of some glioma cell lines to IR unless the cells were not replicating. AZD2281 caused cytotoxicity as a single agent in BRCA1-deficient cells and BRCA2-deficient cells. However, mammary tumors were able to develop resistance to AZD2281 over time.  Ape1 DNA repair & redox inhibitors Methoxyamine potentiates the effects of temozolomide and other alkylating agents in several cancer cell lines. Topoisomerase II may be involved in the potentiation of the temozolomide effect by methoxyamine. Lucanthone potentiates the effects of MMS, temozolomide and IR, but has too many off-target effects to be clinically relevant. 7-nitroindole-2-carboxylic acid (NCA) potentiates the effects of MMS and temozolomide, but other laboratories have not been able to demonstrate this effect. NCA is not a very viable, clinically relevant lead agent. The arylstibonic acid compound 13755 can inhibit Ape1 repair activity, but was not able to potentiate MMS in HOS cells. E3330 inhibits redox function of Ape1, but not repair function. E3330 causes single-agent cytotoxicity to several cancer cell lines, but not CD34+ (normal) cells at the same doses. The E3330 redox inhibitor inhibits growth and migration of pancreatic cancer cell lines and angiogenesis in a variety of endothelial cells at subtoxic doses.  Pol ? inhibitors KA-A and its derivatives, isolated from fertilized sea urchin eggs, specifically inhibit mammalian pol ?, and KA-A prevented growth of a leukemia cell line. Stigmasterol inhibits only the lyase activity of pol ?. Oleanolic acid, edgeworin and betulinic acid inhibit both the lyase and polymerase activity of pol ?.  Future perspective The long history and advances in the understanding of the basic science of DNA repair pathways has allowed us to better develop rationales for combinational treatments to potentiate tumor-cell killing. For example, with the knowledge that temozolomide generates lesions that are repaired by AGT and BER, we can thoughtfully pair AGT and BER inhibitors with this agent. This could widely expand the range of cancers that could be treated with temozolomide, where previous data would suggest temozolomide would not work. Hopefully, further elucidation of DNA repair pathways and their role in cancer versus normal cells will reveal many new potential targets for inhibition to potentiate tumor-cell response. Small-molecule inhibitor discovery is an intense and expensive process. New methods and strategies will certainly be developed to try to both streamline this discovery process and ensure that the end products will have the desired inhibitory effect, be soluble and deliverable. It may possibly even be important that future inhibitors contribute minimal toxicity to patients if they need to be used in combination with agents or IR that already cause toxicity to the patient. Several of the studies reviewed here demonstrated dramatic in vitro and in vivo potentiation of existing chemotherapeutic agents and IR when used in combination with BER-pathway inhibitors using an amount of chemotherapeutic agent or IR that as a single agent was minimally toxic to the cell lines or xenografts. Another important area for the use of these and future inhibitors will be the ability to test for biomarkers. Some biomarkers, such as RAD51 and H2AX-? foci formation levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells before and after treatments to predict or understand tumor response and DNA repair phenotype linkage with genotypes, are already being employed in clinical trials [ 11 , 101 ]. The hope is that cancer therapeutics will become more individualized in the near future. Once diagnosed, biopsies or samples may be taken and sent to the laboratory to screen for hundreds of biomarkers that will better allow us to predict how the tumor would react to different treatments. It will be important to develop the tests that would quickly and accurately predict these biomarkers. As we learn more regarding cancer-cell signaling and the mechanisms they use to escape cell death and thrive, we will be better able to predict combinations and treatments that will be successful and allow us to elude the development of resistance in tumors. Alternatively, if resistance does arise due to cross-talk or compensation between not only the DNA repair pathways, but also between DNA repair, cell cycle, signaling and other important pathways, it will be important to have a molecular profile of the individual cancer to help us overcome resistance.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Inhibitors of short-patch base excision repair proteins and proteins that interact with this pathway Ape1: Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease; BER: Base excision repair; KA-A: Kohamaic acid A; Ligase III: DNA ligase III; MX: Methoxyamine; NCA: 7-Nitroindole-2-carboxylic acid; PARP: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; Pol ?: DNA polymerase ?; XRCC1: X-ray complementing factor 1. Figure 2 Proposed mechanism for PARP as a sensor to single-strand breaks When there are a minimal number of SSBs, PARP interacts with XRCC1, pol ? and DNA ligase III to allow DNA repair. When there is moderate DNA damage, PARP associates and disassociates with the DNA, trying to protect the SSBs until they can be repaired. If the pathway is too overwhelmed, apoptosis is signaled and caspases come in to cleave PARP. If there is overwhelming damage, PARP is overactivated and depletes NAD+. This could lead to necrosis. Ligase III: DNA ligase III; PARP: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; Pol ?: DNA polymerase ?; SSB: Single-strand break; XRCC1: X-ray complementing factor 1. Adapted from [ 3 , 22 , 23 ]. Table 1 Inhibitors in this review that are currently in clinical trials for cancer treatments according to clinicaltrials.gov [ 101 ]. Inhibitor target Inhibitor Type of cancer/condition Drug/irradiation combination being used PARP ABT-888 (Abbott Laboratories) Nonhematologic malignancies, metastatic melanoma, BRCA-deficient breast cancer, BRCA-deficient ovarian cancer Temozolomide Solid tumors or lymphoma Cyclophosphamide Glioblastoma multiforme Temozolomide and irradiation Metastatic melanoma Temozolomide Brain metastases Irradiation Leukemia Topotecan Metastatic or unresectable solid tumors or non-Hodgkin lymphoma Cyclophosphamide Advanced solid cancer Carboplatin and paclitaxel Lymphoma, adult solid tumor Topotecan Lymphoma, adult solid tumor Irinotecan PARP AZD2281/KU-0059436 (AstraZeneca/KuDOS Pharmaceuticals Limited) Triple-negative breast cancer Cisplatin Solid tumors None Advanced solid malignancies None Platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer None Colorectal cancer Irinotecan Adult solid tumor Cisplatin, gemcitibine Malignant solid tumors Carboplatin, paclitaxel BRCA1/BRCA2-associated or hereditary metastatic or unresectable breast and/or ovarian cancer Carboplatin Advanced solid tumors Doxil BRCA1-positive advanced ovarian cancer Doxil Known BRCA or recurrent high-grade ovarian cancer or known BRCA/triple-negative breast cancer None Breast neoplasms None Ovarian neoplasms None Ovarian neoplasms, BRCA1/2 None Malignant solid tumors Topotecan Pancreatic neoplasms Gemcitabine Melanoma neoplasms Dacarbazine Advanced solid tumors Bevacizumab PARP AG014699 (Cancer Research UK in collaboration with Pfizer) Locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer or advanced ovarian cancer, BRCA1/2 mutation carrier None Ape1 TRC102/methoxyamine (Tracon Pharmaceuticals) Neoplasm Pemetrexed 