Pregnancy and estrogen receptor ? expression in a large congenital nevus Introduction Large congenital nevi carry a slightly increased risk for the development of melanoma. Pregnancy poses an additional challenge in monitoring these patients as little is known regarding the effects of increased estrogen levels on congenital nevi. Observation A young woman was observed to have clinical lightening of her garment nevus and satellite nevi during two sequential pregnancies. Post-partum, the patient experienced darkening and re-pigmentation within her large garment nevus, with continued lightening of nearby satellite lesions. In addition to photographic documentation of these changes, biopsies taken during pregnant and non-pregnant periods were evaluated with immunohistochemistry for estrogen receptor beta (ER?), the predominant estrogen receptor in nevi and melanomas. Biopsies taken during pregnancy showed a decrease in nuclear staining for ER? when compared to biopsies taken following pregnancy. These changes in ER? expression were not associated with histological atypia either during pregnancy or following delivery. Conclusion Congenital nevi may be unique in their response to altered estrogen levels. Given the slightly increased risk for the development of melanoma in giant congenital nevi and the dearth of information available regarding the effects of pregnancy on congenital nevi, this case illustrates the need for further study of these pigmented lesions.  Discussion A review of the literature yields only three case reports detailing the effects of pregnancy on congenital nevi. Two of the cases were not typical for congenital nevi. One case involved an African American patient with a congenital blue nevus which enlarged during pregnancy and was found in the postpartum period to have developed into a malignant melanoma ( 3 ). A congenital blue nevus is a rare entity, and not comparable to our case. A separate case study from Italy noted no change in a patient’s congenital garment nevus while pregnant or in the post-partum period ( 12 ), in contrast to our patient. The final case study reported the development of an agminated Spitz nevus within a congenital nevus during pregnancy ( 13 ). This nevus was also atypical for a congenital melanocytic nevus. Our fourth case has the distinct finding of clinical lightening of a giant congenital nevus and satellite nevi during two pregnancies with some re-pigmentation following parturition. This was confirmed by photographic analysis of the patient’s congenital nevi prior to, during, and following pregnancy. To our knowledge, this has not been previously reported in the literature. Our report is also novel in that we evaluated the ER? status within the lesions. Immunohistochemical staining for ER? showed decreased staining in the congenital nevi during pregnancy with increased staining for ER? following delivery, suggesting that congenital nevi may be less estrogen responsive during pregnancy. Prior work by our group found an increased expression of ER? in benign nevi removed from pregnant women as well as atypical nevi from women regardless of pregnancy status ( 11 ). Our previously published data ( 11 ) which included the ER staining data from this patient and one other patient who was pregnant with congenital nevi showed decreased staining for ER? in congenital nevi from pregnant women when compared to non-pregnant controls (17 pts.). Based on the small number of patients with congenital nevi in these studies, it remains unclear whether this typifies the normal effects of increased estrogen states on congenital nevi. Another limitation of this study is that biopsies were not taken from the same sites during and after pregnancy in this patient. Along with clinical observation, the presence of estrogen receptors on melanocytes in nevi and melanoma suggests that these nevocytes are estrogen responsive ( 2 , 7 , 11 ). Historically, cases in the literature have reported an increase in size, thickening, or darkening of nevi during pregnancy, although recent evidence suggests that this may not be the case. We observed the unusual finding of clinical lightening along with a decreased expression of ER? during pregnancy in a patient with a giant congenital nevus and satellite congenital nevi. This suggests that decreased expression of ER? in congenital nevi during pregnancy may lead to decreased production of melanin. Previous studies in melanocyte cell cultures suggest that estradiol increases tyrosinase, tyrosinase-related proteins 1 and 2 (TRP-1 and TRP-2) mRNA, ( 14 ) and up-regulates expression of melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) mRNA ( 15 ), presumably through ER?. Therefore, a decrease in ER? might be expected to have the opposite effect, and could possibly decrease pigmentation through these mechanisms (even though estrogen levels would be expected to be high in pregnancy). Certainly, the apparently altered response of congenital nevi, particularly large, garment nevi, during pregnancy compared to acquired nevi bears further study. A better understanding of congenital nevi and their response to estrogen is also indicated as patients with large, garment-type nevi have an increased risk for developing melanoma, and these patients can be difficult to follow and evaluate ( 1 , 4 ). We did not see any evidence of atypia in any of the congenital nevi we biopsied in this patient. This was an important observation because we previously had noted decreasing levels of ER? with increasing depths of melanomas ( 7 ). However, in light of the lack of histologic atypia, we do not believe a similar mechanism is responsible for the decrease in ER? seen in congenital nevi with pregnancy. While there are no conclusive data suggesting that pregnancy has a detrimental effect on the incidence or progression of melanoma, ( 8 , 9 ), careful attention should still be paid to the pregnant patient with pigmented lesions. Larger studies of pregnancy effects upon patients with large congenital nevi are indicated, because our review confirms very little data exist. Photographic documentation and dermoscopy may be useful in these patients for assessment and comparison purposes. Currently, the most effective method for evaluating and treating these patients remains close follow-up at regular and frequent intervals by a dermatologist trained at evaluating pigmented lesions.  Discussion A review of the literature yields only three case reports detailing the effects of pregnancy on congenital nevi. Two of the cases were not typical for congenital nevi. One case involved an African American patient with a congenital blue nevus which enlarged during pregnancy and was found in the postpartum period to have developed into a malignant melanoma ( 3 ). A congenital blue nevus is a rare entity, and not comparable to our case. A separate case study from Italy noted no change in a patient’s congenital garment nevus while pregnant or in the post-partum period ( 12 ), in contrast to our patient. The final case study reported the development of an agminated Spitz nevus within a congenital nevus during pregnancy ( 13 ). This nevus was also atypical for a congenital melanocytic nevus. Our fourth case has the distinct finding of clinical lightening of a giant congenital nevus and satellite nevi during two pregnancies with some re-pigmentation following parturition. This was confirmed by photographic analysis of the patient’s congenital nevi prior to, during, and following pregnancy. To our knowledge, this has not been previously reported in the literature. Our report is also novel in that we evaluated the ER? status within the lesions. Immunohistochemical staining for ER? showed decreased staining in the congenital nevi during pregnancy with increased staining for ER? following delivery, suggesting that congenital nevi may be less estrogen responsive during pregnancy. Prior work by our group found an increased expression of ER? in benign nevi removed from pregnant women as well as atypical nevi from women regardless of pregnancy status ( 11 ). Our previously published data ( 11 ) which included the ER staining data from this patient and one other patient who was pregnant with congenital nevi showed decreased staining for ER? in congenital nevi from pregnant women when compared to non-pregnant controls (17 pts.). Based on the small number of patients with congenital nevi in these studies, it remains unclear whether this typifies the normal effects of increased estrogen states on congenital nevi. Another limitation of this study is that biopsies were not taken from the same sites during and after pregnancy in this patient. Along with clinical observation, the presence of estrogen receptors on melanocytes in nevi and melanoma suggests that these nevocytes are estrogen responsive ( 2 , 7 , 11 ). Historically, cases in the literature have reported an increase in size, thickening, or darkening of nevi during pregnancy, although recent evidence suggests that this may not be the case. We observed the unusual finding of clinical lightening along with a decreased expression of ER? during pregnancy in a patient with a giant congenital nevus and satellite congenital nevi. This suggests that decreased expression of ER? in congenital nevi during pregnancy may lead to decreased production of melanin. Previous studies in melanocyte cell cultures suggest that estradiol increases tyrosinase, tyrosinase-related proteins 1 and 2 (TRP-1 and TRP-2) mRNA, ( 14 ) and up-regulates expression of melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) mRNA ( 15 ), presumably through ER?. Therefore, a decrease in ER? might be expected to have the opposite effect, and could possibly decrease pigmentation through these mechanisms (even though estrogen levels would be expected to be high in pregnancy). Certainly, the apparently altered response of congenital nevi, particularly large, garment nevi, during pregnancy compared to acquired nevi bears further study. A better understanding of congenital nevi and their response to estrogen is also indicated as patients with large, garment-type nevi have an increased risk for developing melanoma, and these patients can be difficult to follow and evaluate ( 1 , 4 ). We did not see any evidence of atypia in any of the congenital nevi we biopsied in this patient. This was an important observation because we previously had noted decreasing levels of ER? with increasing depths of melanomas ( 7 ). However, in light of the lack of histologic atypia, we do not believe a similar mechanism is responsible for the decrease in ER? seen in congenital nevi with pregnancy. While there are no conclusive data suggesting that pregnancy has a detrimental effect on the incidence or progression of melanoma, ( 8 , 9 ), careful attention should still be paid to the pregnant patient with pigmented lesions. Larger studies of pregnancy effects upon patients with large congenital nevi are indicated, because our review confirms very little data exist. Photographic documentation and dermoscopy may be useful in these patients for assessment and comparison purposes. Currently, the most effective method for evaluating and treating these patients remains close follow-up at regular and frequent intervals by a dermatologist trained at evaluating pigmented lesions. 