ER?-Negative and Triple Negative Breast Cancer: Molecular Features and Potential Therapeutic Approaches Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a type of aggressive breast cancer lacking the expression of estrogen receptors (ER), progesterone receptors (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER-2). TNBC patients account for approximately 15% of total breast cancer patients and are more prevalent among young African, African-American and Latino women patients. The currently available ER-targeted and Her-2-based therapies are not effective for treating TNBC. Recent studies have revealed a number of novel features of TNBC. In the present work, we comprehensively addressed these features and discussed potential therapeutic approaches based on these features for TNBC, with particular focus on: 1) the pathological features of TNBC/basal-like breast cancer; 2) E2/ER? – mediated signaling pathways; 3) G-protein coupling receptor-30/epithelial growth factor receptor (GPCR-30/EGFR) signaling pathway; 4) interactions of ER? with breast cancer 1/2 (BRCA1/2); 5) chemokine CXCL8 and related chemokines; 6) altered microRNA signatures and suppression of ER? expression/ER?-signaling by micro-RNAs; 7) altered expression of several pro-oncongenic and tumor suppressor proteins; and 8) genotoxic effects caused by oxidative estrogen metabolites. Gaining better insights into these molecular pathways in TNBC may lead to identification of novel biomarkers and targets for development of diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for prevention and treatment of TNBC.  9. Conclusions and Perspective The present review has provided new insights into the pathogenesis of TNBC by describing several newly identified features of TNBC, as summarized in Figure 1 , including: a) the existence of E2/ER?-mediated signaling pathways; b) GRCP-30/EGFR signaling pathway; c) Interactions between ER? and BRCA1; d) CXCL8 and related CXC Chemokines; e) MicroRNA signatures and role of miRNAs in suppression of ER? expression and ER?-signaling and f) altered expression of several oncogenes and tumor suppressor-mediated signaling pathways and g) genotoxic effects caused by oxidative estrogen metabolites, in ER?-negative and TNBC. While these molecular pathways could be relevant to ER?-negative and TNBC, more studies are needed to comprehensively determine the precise and the relative contributions of each and a combination of these pathways to the pathogenesis of ER?-negative and TNBC. Such studies will be valuable not only for gaining better understanding on the pathogenesis of TNBC but also allow identification and development of novel biomarkers/targets for diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for prevention and treatment of these types of breast cancer. Of importance and relevance are: the connection of this type of tumor with the environmental estrogens linking this type of cancer with an exogenous causative agent; and the potential treatment of this type of breast cancer with naturally derived chemopreventive agents.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Molecular Features of TNBC: 1) E2/ER?-mediated signaling pathways and Interaction with BRCA1; 2) E2/GRCP-30/EGFR signaling pathway; 3) CXCL8 and related CXC Chemokines; 4) MicroRNA signatures; 5) Notch/Suvivin; 6) Akt; 7) E-cadherin/E-Selectin and 8) Osteoponin are shown. Basic shapes filled with colors indicate increased expression; Basic shapes filled without color [ 148 ] indicate loss or reduced levels of the indicated proteins/receptors Table 1 Several immunohistochemical and pathological features of breast cancer subgroups. Properties ER, PR, Her2 Status Other Markers Clinopathological Features BC Subgroups Luminal A (LA) ER+/PR+, Her2? Relatively lower Ki67 Good prognosis Ductal carcinomas plus relatively higher % of lobular carcinomas Lower % of poorly differentiated carcinomas Luminal B (LB) ER+, PR+, HER2+ Higher FoxA1 Higher Proliferting Markers e.g. Ki67, CCNB1, MYBL2 Poorer outcomes Poor prognosis Worse patient Prognosis Smaller tumor size Basal-Like Breast Cancer (BLBC) ER?, PR?, HER2? CK 5/6+ and EGFR+ Reduced expression of genes related to ER? Markers of myoepithelial cell Associated with Mutant BRCA1 Worse Overall & Disease free survival Poorly differentiated carcinomas Majority ductal carcinomas HER2-enriched High Her2+, ER?, PR? NA Increased risk of breast cancer relapse & death Poorly differentiated carcinomas Majority ductal carcinomas BRCA1 : breast cancer 1; CCNB1 : G2/mitotic-specific cyclin B1; CK 5/6 : cytokeratin 5/6; EGFR : Epithelial growth factor receptor; ER : estrogen receptor; FOX A1 : Forkhead box protein A1; HER-2 : Human Epithelial growth factor receptor-2; Ki67 : Antigen identified by monoclonal antibody; MYBL2 : V-myb myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (avian)-like 2, and PR : Progeterone Receptor. +: represents positive; ?: represents negative. + : Positive ? : Negative 