HODGKIN LYMPHOMA: AN UPDATE ON ITS BIOLOGY WITH NEWER INSIGHTS INTO CLASSIFICATION In the last few years, there has been a greater understanding of the spectrum and biology of Hodgkin lymphoma. In standard texts, Hodgkin lymphoma is classified as two distinct entities, namely nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and classical Hodgkin lymphoma. However, recent evidence suggests that classical Hodgkin lymphoma is not a single disease. While the mixed cellularity and lymphocyte depleted subtypes may be part of a biologic continuum, the nodular sclerosis subtype has a distinct epidemiology, clinical presentation and histology. Nodular sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma may also be related to primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma and mediastinal grey zone lymphomas. We present an update on the pathobiology of Hodgkin lymphoma and discuss these biologic and clinical differences in this review.  SUMMARY Hodgkin lymphoma is a biologically heterogeneous group of neoplasms brought together by morphologic and phenotypic similarities. Although NLPHL is clearly identified as a separate entity, there is also a greater appreciation today for the differences between NSCHL and the other subtypes, mainly MCCHL/LDCHL and LRCHL. NSCHL affects young adults, is associated with mediastinal involvement and requires an intact immune system for its development. In addition to histological differences, its cytokine milieu and background lymphocyte population differ from other subtypes of CHL. The presence of an overlap with PMLBL suggests a thymic origin for mediastinal NSCHL. MCCHL and LDHL represent a spectrum, sharing many features related to incidence, pattern of spread, and association with immunodeficiency.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Nodular sclerosis Hodgkin lymphoma is characterized by broad bands of birefringent collagen. Lacunar variants of HRS cells often cluster within the nodules (H&E). Figure 2 Lymphocyte depleted CHL with abundant HRS-cells in a background rich in histiocytes, but with few lymphocytes (H&E). Figure 3 Lymphocyte rich CHL with HRS cells within expanded follicles, mainly at the periphery in the mantle and marginal zone (CD15 immunostain). Figure 4 In nodular lymphocyte predominant HL, LP cells are strongly positive for CD20 and are seen in the context of lymphoid follicles (CD20 immunostain). Figure 5 A. The classical RS cell is binucleate, each nucleus contains a prominent eosinophilic nucleolus with perinucleolar halos giving the cell an “owl-eye” appearance (H&E). B. The LP cell, the neoplastic cell in NLPHL, has a multilobate/folded nucleus with smaller basophilic nucleoli giving the cell a “popcorn” appearance (H&E). Table 1 Salient Clinical Features of Hodgkin lymphoma Subtype Incidence/Epidemiology Sites Prognosis NLPHL M:F (3:1), unimodal peak in 4th decade, also occurs in children Peripheral LN; single node rather than group of nodes Good response to Rx, slow progression, frequent relapses, may ‘progress’ to THRBCL or DLBCL LRCHL M:F (2:1) Peripheral LN Usually low stage, good prognosis, infrequent relapses MCCHL M:F (2:1), Developing countries, young children and older adults, HIV, B- symptoms Peripheral LN, spleen, advanced stage Prognosis intermediate between LRHL and LDHL LDCHL M:F (4:1), Rare, HIV, Developing countries, B- symptoms Retroperitoneal and abdominal Advanced stage Aggressive course NSCHL M:F (1:1), Most common subtype in West, adolescents and young adults, B-symptoms Cervical,, axillary and mediastinal Prognosis intermediate between LRHL and LDHL Table 2 Salient Histopathologic Features of Hodgkin lymphoma Subtype Salient histopathologic features NLPHL LP cells Background of small lymphocytes in a nodular or nodular and diffuse pattern (nodular pattern must be present at least focally). Background small B-cells with mantle cell phenotype (IgD+, IgM?). Expanded meshworks of FDCs, as seen by CD21 immunostain Epithelioid histiocytes are present in varying numbers LRCHL Classical HRS cells few in number. Most often nodular. HRS cells found in marginal/mantle zone around regressed GCs with dense FDC networks). May show aggregates of epithelioid histiocytes, but eosinophils and neutrophils are rare. MCCHL Diffuse lymph node effacement with numerous HRS cells; mixed inflammatory background with lymphocytes, eosinophils, plasma cells, histiocytes. Granulomas may be present. LDCHL Diffuse fibrosis variant - Hypocellular background and abundant disordered non-birefringent fibrosis, abundant histiocytes but fewer lymphocytes. Reticular variant - Numerous HRS cells with bizarre cytological features. NSCHL Capsular fibrosis and broad collagen bands, often perivascular Lacunar cells and mummified cells Grades I and II differ in number of HRS cells and presence of necrosis in latter. Table 3 Comparison of LP and HRS cells LP cell HRS cells Nucleus Polylobated with finely dispersed chromatin Single to multilobated with peripherally condensed chromatin Nucleoli Small, usually basophilic Large, often eosinophilic Cytoplasm Relatively sparse Abundant CD15 Negative Membrane and/or Golgi positivity CD30 Negative; rare weak positive cells Membrane and/or Golgi positivity CD20 Positive Variable (30–40% cases +) CD79a Positive Negative to variably weak CD45 Positive Negative J-chain Positive Negative OCT 2 Positive Often negative BOB.1 Positive Often negative PU.1 Positive Negative PAX5 Positive Positive (weak) EBV Negative Variably positive 