Molecular Imaging of Cancer with Copper-64 Radiopharmaceuticals and Positron Emission Tomography (PET) CONSPECTUS Molecular imaging has evolved over the past several years into an important tool for diagnosing, understanding, and the monitoring of disease. Molecular imaging has distinguished itself as an interdisciplinary field with contributions from the areas of chemistry, biology, physics and medicine. The cross-disciplinary impetus has led to significant achievements in the development of more sensitive imaging instruments, robust and safer radiopharmaceuticals, thereby providing more choices to fit the personalized medical needs. Molecular imaging is making steadfast progress in the field of cancer research among others. Cancer is a challenging disease, characterized by heterogeneity, uncontrolled cell division, and the ability of cancer cells to invade other tissues. Molecular imaging is addressing these challenges by aggressively identifying and studying key cancer-specific biomarkers such as growth factor receptors, protein kinases, cell adhesion molecules, proteases, as well as biological processes such as hypoxia, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. Positron emission tomography (PET) has become a widely used diagnostic molecular imaging tool by clinicians in the United States. Small animal PET systems that can image rodents and generate reconstructed images in a non-invasive manner with a resolution as low as 1 mm have been developed and used frequently, which in turn facilitate radiopharmaceutical development and drug discovery. Currently, [18F]-labeled 2-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is the only PET radiotracer used for routine clinical evaluation, primarily for oncological imaging. There is now increasing interest in non-traditional positron-emitting radionuclides, particularly those of the transition metals for imaging with PET because of increased production and availability. Copper based radionuclides are currently being extensively evaluated as they offer a varying range of half-lives and positron energies. For example, the half-life (12.7 h) and decay properties (?+, 0.653 MeV [17.8 %]; ??, 0.579 MeV [38.4 %]) of 64Cu make it an ideal radioisotope for PET imaging (?+) and radiotherapy (??). In addition, the well established coordination chemistry of copper allows for its reaction with a wide variety of chelator systems that can potentially be linked to antibodies, proteins, peptides and other biologically relevant molecules. New chelators with greater in vivo stability, such as the cross bridged (CB) versions of tetraazamacrocyclic TETA (1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane-1,4,8,11-tetraacetic acid), are now available. Finally, one of the major aspects of successful imaging is the identification and characterization of a relevant disease biomarker at the cellular and sub-cellular level, and a targeting moiety highly specific for the target. This account will discuss specific examples of PET imaging of some of the key cancer biomarkers such as epidermal growth-factor receptor (EGFR), somatostatin receptors (SSRs), and integrin alpha v beta 3 (?v?3) with new and improved 64Cu based radiopharmaceuticals.  Conclusions Copper-64 based radiopharmaceuticals have significant potential as oncological PET imaging agents. The longer half-life and ease of production of 64Cu by both reactor and accelerator based methods gives it a logistical and economical advantage over many positron emitting radionuclides. The development of new BFC systems that form stable complexes with high kinetic inertness to Cu(II) decomplexation has proven valuable for producing favorable in vivo pharmacokinetic profile of peptide conjugates as demonstrated by the robust stability of 64Cu-CB-TE2A over traditionally used chelators such as DOTA and TETA. A better understanding of molecular markers has resulted in targeted imaging of tumors. The progress made at the fundamental level by using small animal PET systems will encourage the translation of 64Cu-based imaging radiopharmaceuticals into humans.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Schematic of imaging with positron emission tomography (PET). The positron travels away from its origin and then collides with a negatively charged electron in tissue, producing annihilation radiation of two 511 keV photons approximately 180 degrees apart. These coincident emissions are detected by the PET scanner. Figure 2 Macrocyclic chelators that have been investigated for chelating copper radionuclides. Figure 3 Biodistribution data of selected 64Cu-labeled cyclam and bridged cyclam analogs at 24 h p.i. (post-injection) in normal rats. Adapted from references. 7 , 23 , 45 Figure 4 Schematic of a tumor cell showing the various intracellular, cell surface and extracellular targets available for molecular imaging. Figure 5 Somatostatin analogs that have been conjugated with various metal chelators and labeled with 111In or 64Cu for evaluating somatostatin receptor positive tumors in rodent models and humans. Figure 6 (A) Projection microPET images of A431 tumor- bearing nude mice after 20 and 46 hours post-administration of 64Cu-DOTA-cetuximab, with and without an injected blocking dose 20 hours prior to the imaging dose (5.6 MBq, 6 g, left; 5.6 MBq, 1 mg of cetuximab, right). (B) Coronal microPET images of 64Cu-DOTA-cetuximab in A431 (epidermal growth-factor receptor [EGFR]-positive) and MDA-MB-435 (EGFR-negative) tumor-bearing mice after 19 and 48 hours postadministration of 64Cu-DOTA-cetuximab. (C) MicroPET/computed tomography co-registration images of 64Cu-DOTA-cetuximab in a mouse bearing both A431 and MDA-MB-435 tumors (arrow) at 24 hours postinjection. Reprinted by permission of the Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., publishers from Reference 38 . Figure 7 Small-animal PET/CT of PTH-treated mice. Calvarium uptake of 64Cu-CB-TE2A-c(RGDyK) was higher in PTH-treated mice (7.4 MBq [199 ?Ci],115 ng, SUV = 0.53) than in control mice (7.7 MBq [209 ?Ci], 121 ng, SUV = 0.22) (A). In PTH-treated mice, uptake was reduced in all tissues, including calvarium, after injection of c(RGDyK) (PTH [left]: 159 ?Ci, 84 ng, SUV = 0.33; block [right]: 164 ?Ci, 87 ng, SUV = 0.18) (B). Arrowheads indicate calvarium of each animal. Fiducials (*) are indicated. Reprinted by permission of the Society of Nuclear Medicine from Reference 43 . Table 1 Pseudo -first order half-lives for acid-decomplexation and reduction potentials of Cu(II) complexes (all values are from Heroux et al. 24 unless otherwise noted). Chelator 5 M HCl 90°C 12 M HCl 90°C Ered (V) vs Ag/AgCl DOTA <3 min <3 min ?0.94 (irrev.) a cyclam <3 min <3 min ?0.68 (quasi-rev) TETA 4.5(5) min <3 min ?1.18 (irrev.) CB-cyclam 11.7(1) min <3 min ?0.52 (quasi-rev) CB-TE2A 154(6) h 1.6(2) h ?1.08 (quasi-rev.) CB-DO2A < 3 min n.d. ?0.92 (irrev.) CB-TEAMA n.d. n.d. ?0.96 (quasi-rev.) diamsar 40(1) h < 3 min ?1.1 (irrev) a reference 7 