3, 3?- DIINDOLYLMETHANE ENHANCES CHEMOSENSITIVITY OF MULTIPLE CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS IN PANCREATIC CANCER Clinical management of pancreatic cancer (PC) is a major problem, which is in part due to both de novo and acquired resistance to conventional therapeutics. Here, we present in vitro and in vivo preclinical evidence in support of chemo-sensitization of PC cells by DIM, a natural compound that can be easily obtained by consuming cruciferous vegetables. DIM pretreatment of PC cells led to a significantly increased apoptosis (p<0.01) with suboptimal concentrations of chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin) compared to monotherapy. It is known that resistance to chemotherapy in PC is associated with constitutively activated NF-?B, which becomes further activated by chemotherapeutic drugs. Our data provide mechanistic evidence for the first time showing that DIM potentiates the killing of PC cells by down-regulation of constitutive as well as drug induced activation of NF-?B and its downstream genes (Bcl-xL, XIAP, c-IAP, survivin). Most importantly, using an orthotopic animal model, we found reduction in tumor size (p<0.001) when DIM was given in combination with oxaliplatin compared to monotherapy. This was accompanied by loss of phospho p-65, down-regulation of NF-?B activity and its downstream genes (Bcl-xL, survivin and XIAP), which correlated with reduced cell proliferation (as assessed by Ki-67 immunostaining of tumor specimens) and evidence of apoptosis (as assessed by PARP cleavage and TUNEL staining). These results provide strong in vivo evidence in support of our hypothesis that DIM could abrogate chemotherapeutic drug (cisplatin, gemcitabine and/or oxaliplatin) induced activation of NF-?B, resulting in the chemo-sensitization of pancreatic tumors to conventional therapeutics.  INTRODUCTION Despite advances in multi-modality treatment including targeted therapies, pancreatic cancer (PC) remains the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the United States ( 1 ) accounting for 37,680 estimated new cases diagnosed in the year 2008 with 34,290 deaths. This grim statistics is in part due to the indolent nature of this disease and lack of specific biomarkers for early detection. Clinical management of PC becomes further complicated due to both de novo chemo-resistance and the acquisition of chemo-resistance during therapy by conventional cytotoxic agents ( 2 – 5 ). Moreover, primary treatment by surgery is most often palliative and thus post-operative therapy including chemotherapy with and without chemo-radiation therapy is necessary for the management of PC although the therapeutic outcome of current strategies is dismal without any survival benefit. Similarly targeted therapies have been proven to be ineffective in this disease. For example, inactivation of EGFR signaling pathway by EGFR related tyrosine kinase inhibitor-erlotinib have been tried in PC showing only modest survival benefit in large phase-III clinical trial when combined with gemcitabine ( 6 ), suggesting that novel approaches must be devised for improving the survival outcome for this deadly disease. Here we are reporting the results of one such novel strategy using “natural agents” that could be useful for the treatment of PC. It is now well accepted that “natural agents” from vegetables of the family Cruciferae yielding a bioactive phytochemical known as indole 3-carbinol (I3C) ( 7 , 8 ), which is chemically unstable in aqueous and gastric acidic environment, and thus it is rapidly converted to numerous condensation products among which 3,3?-diindolylmethane (DIM) showed biological activities ( 9 ). In a study reported by Reed et al., I3C was not detectable in the plasma of women ingesting I3C but DIM was the only I3C-derived compound detected in the plasma ( 10 ), suggesting that DIM is the predominant bioactive compound. Emerging preclinical evidence also suggest that I3C and its dimeric product DIM possess anti-carcinogenic effects in experimental animals and also inhibits the growth and induce apoptosis in prostate, breast, colon, cervix and pancreas cancer cells ( 11 – 20 ), which is mediated by alterations in multiple signaling pathways ( 9 , 14 , 18 , 21 , 22 ). Recently, a study reported from our laboratory concluded that inhibition of cell proliferation by DIM (a formulated DIM with enhanced pharmacokinetics) is mediated through the regulation of Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3?/?-catenin signaling and induction of Par-4 ( 20 , 22 ). Additional clinically relevant study reported by our laboratory and others confirmed that DIM inhibits human primary endothelial cell migration in culture and decreased blood vessel formation in xenograft tumors of human breast and prostate ( 21 , 23 ). Furthermore, we and others have shown that DIM and I3C reduce the activity of NF-?B in prostate, breast and other cancer cells ( 15 , 24 ). Collectively, these scientific findings led to a significant interest in the past few years to explore the potential chemopreventive and therapeutic activity of DIM against multiple cancers. It is however important to note that DIM but not I3C is safer in humans and that administration of DIM to human volunteers results in adequate serum levels that could be biologically important ( 25 – 27 ). Previously, we have conceptualized that natural dietary substances [natural agents such as 3,3?-diindolylmetahne (DIM)] may have therapeutic benefit in addition to their role as chemopreventive agent by virtue of their pleiotropic activity on cancer cells including inactivation of survival signaling pathways (EGFR/Akt/NF-?B), and simultaneous activation of multiple death pathways ( 28 ). Moreover, we have shown that the apoptosis inducing effect of erlotinib could be potentiated by DIM in PC cells in vitro ( 11 ); however such studies have not been reported using conventional chemotherapeutic agents such as gemcitabine or oxaliplatin especially because platinum containing chemotherapeutic agents including cisplatin and oxaliplatin are used as an alternate treatment option for PC ( 29 – 32 ). Since chemo-resistant phenotype is a major impediment in delivering effective cytotoxic therapy to cancer cells using conventional therapeutics, here we report for the first time, the effect of DIM in sensitizing PC cells in vitro , and PC tumors in vivo to lower concentrations of the conventional cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture The human pancreatic carcinoma cell lines PANC-1 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells [HPDE], COLO-357 and Panc-28 were obtained from MD Anderson Cancer Center (Houston, TX). The cell lines were maintained in continuous exponential growth by twice a week passaging in Dulbecco modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) or Keratinocyte SFM for HPDE cells (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithesburg, MD) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/ml penicillin and 10 mg/ml streptomycin. Antibodies were obtained from the following commercial sources: caspase-3, caspase -9, p-Akt, cytochrome C and cytochrome-c oxidase was purchased from Cell Signaling (Beverly, MA); anti mouse Bcl-xL, Bax, Mcl-1 and anti retinoblastoma antibody was procured from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santacruz, CA); anti PARP antibody was from Biomol Research (Plymouth, PA). Anti XIAP, cIAP(pan) and survivin was from RandD Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Anti ?-actin antibody was from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). DIM (LKT Laboratories, St Paul, MN) was dissolved in DMSO to make 20 mM stock solution. Cisplatin, oxaliplatin and gemcitabine was obtained from our Institute pharmacy. Cell viability inhibition by MTT Assay Cells were seeded at a density of 2–3×103cells/well in 96 well micro titer culture plates. After overnight incubation, fresh medium containing different concentrations of DIM (0–60 ?M; 0.1% final concentration of DMSO; similar approach was used for BITC and the final concentration of 10?M of BITC was used) was added to each well and incubated for 72 hrs and then subjected to MTT assay as described earlier ( 33 ) with or without cytotoxic agents. Cell viability inhibition by cytotoxic agents PANC-1, Panc-28 and Colo 357 cells were plated as described above and allowed to attach overnight. The culture medium was replaced with fresh medium containing 30?M of DIM for 24 hrs and then exposed to cytotoxic agents for an additional 72hrs. Thus, for single agent, cells were exposed to DIM for 96 hrs and to cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin for 72 hrs. The effect of pretreatment on cell viability was examined by MTT assay as described earlier ( 33 ) and synergism was calculated using CalcuSyn software (Biosoft, Ferguson, MO). Quantification of Apoptosis The Cell Apoptosis ELISA Detection Kit (Roche, Palo Alto, CA) was used to detect apoptosis as described earlier ( 34 ). Protein extraction and Western blot analysis The PC cells- PANC-1 were plated and allowed to attach for 36 hours. DIM was directly added to cell cultures at the indicated concentrations and incubated for 72 hrs. Cell lysates were prepared by suspending the cells in RIPA lysis buffer and subjected to routine Western blot analysis as described earlier ( 34 ). Cytochrome c release assay Cells were plated at a density of 5×106 cells in 100 mm dish and allowed to attach overnight. DIM was added to freshly replaced medium at indicated concentrations (0–45?M). Following termination of incubation period, cells were collected, washed with ice cold PBS, lysed and processed to obtain cytosolic and mitochondria fraction for cytochrome c immunoblotting as described earlier ( 34 ). Caspase-3 activity assay Caspase-3 activity were measured in whole-cell lysates using commercially available assay kit (RandD Assay System, Minneapolis, MN) according to manufacturer’s instruction. DNA cell cycle analysis PANC-1 cells were seeded and treated with DIM (0–45?M) for 72 hrs. After treatments, the cells were collected by trypsinization, washed with cold PBS, fixed with 70% ethanol and stained with propidium iodide for 30min. Flow cytometric analysis was carried out using FACScan. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay Nuclear extracts were prepared from treated samples and EMSA was performed by incubating 10?g of nuclear extract with IRDye™–700 labeled NF-?B oligonucleotide as described earlier ( 33 ). The DNA-protein complex formed was visualized by Odyssey Infrared Imaging System using Odyssey Software Release 1.1. Experimental animals Female ICR-SCID mice were purchased from Taconic Farms (Germantown, NY). The mice were housed and maintained under sterile conditions and were used in accordance with Animal Care and Use Guidelines of Wayne State University. Mice received Lab Diet 5021 (Purina Mills, Inc., Richmond, IN). Orthotopic implantation of tumor cells PANC-1 cells were harvested from sub-confluent cultures washed once in serum free medium and re-suspended in PBS. 1×106 cells in 15?l PBS were injected into the parenchyma of pancreas with a 27 gauge hypodermic needle as described earlier ( 34 ). Experimental Protocol Mice were randomized into the following treatment groups ( n =7): ( a ) Untreated control; ( b ) BR-DIM 5.0 mg/mice daily orally by gavage for 25 days; ( c ) Oxaliplatin - 15 mg/kg body wt., i.v., given once as a bolus; (d) BR-DIM and oxaliplatin, following the schedule as for individual treatments. All mice were killed on day-25 since the initiation of BR-DIM treatment. Body weight of mice from all the groups was recorded every fifth day after cell implantation. For imaging, 2–3 mice per group were injected with EGF-IRDye-800CW (EGFR antibody) via tail vein (1 nmol/L per mice) 72 hrs before euthanizing the animals. Imaging of live animals was done using Odyssey Infrared Imaging system under anesthesia. Upon autopsy, the pancreas was excised neatly, weighed and subsequently processed for H&E, immunohistochemical staining, and for preparation of nuclear protein extracts for EMSA and Western immunobloting. Histological Sections and Immunohistochemistry Formalin-fixed tissue sections were evaluated for tumor cell cytology, mitotic rate, growth pattern, necrosis, cystic change, and associated inflammatory cellular response. Immunohistochemical studies were performed after staining with specific primary antibodies against phospho-p65 and Ki-67 followed by 3,3?-diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining. Apoptotic cells were identified by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL) using Chemicon Apotag In Situ Apoptosis Detection kit (Chemicon, Temecula, CA) and visualized under an Olympus microscope (Olympus, Japan). Statistical analysis Data are represented as mean ± SD for the absolute values or percent of controls as indicated in the vertical axis legend of Figures 1 – 5 . The statistical significance of differential findings between experimental groups and control was determined by Student’s ‘ t’ test. P values smaller than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.  Cell culture The human pancreatic carcinoma cell lines PANC-1 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells [HPDE], COLO-357 and Panc-28 were obtained from MD Anderson Cancer Center (Houston, TX). The cell lines were maintained in continuous exponential growth by twice a week passaging in Dulbecco modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) or Keratinocyte SFM for HPDE cells (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithesburg, MD) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/ml penicillin and 10 mg/ml streptomycin. Antibodies were obtained from the following commercial sources: caspase-3, caspase -9, p-Akt, cytochrome C and cytochrome-c oxidase was purchased from Cell Signaling (Beverly, MA); anti mouse Bcl-xL, Bax, Mcl-1 and anti retinoblastoma antibody was procured from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santacruz, CA); anti PARP antibody was from Biomol Research (Plymouth, PA). Anti XIAP, cIAP(pan) and survivin was from RandD Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Anti ?-actin antibody was from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). DIM (LKT Laboratories, St Paul, MN) was dissolved in DMSO to make 20 mM stock solution. Cisplatin, oxaliplatin and gemcitabine was obtained from our Institute pharmacy.  Cell viability inhibition by MTT Assay Cells were seeded at a density of 2–3×103cells/well in 96 well micro titer culture plates. After overnight incubation, fresh medium containing different concentrations of DIM (0–60 ?M; 0.1% final concentration of DMSO; similar approach was used for BITC and the final concentration of 10?M of BITC was used) was added to each well and incubated for 72 hrs and then subjected to MTT assay as described earlier ( 33 ) with or without cytotoxic agents.  Cell viability inhibition by cytotoxic agents PANC-1, Panc-28 and Colo 357 cells were plated as described above and allowed to attach overnight. The culture medium was replaced with fresh medium containing 30?M of DIM for 24 hrs and then exposed to cytotoxic agents for an additional 72hrs. Thus, for single agent, cells were exposed to DIM for 96 hrs and to cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin for 72 hrs. The effect of pretreatment on cell viability was examined by MTT assay as described earlier ( 33 ) and synergism was calculated using CalcuSyn software (Biosoft, Ferguson, MO).  Quantification of Apoptosis The Cell Apoptosis ELISA Detection Kit (Roche, Palo Alto, CA) was used to detect apoptosis as described earlier ( 34 ).  Protein extraction and Western blot analysis The PC cells- PANC-1 were plated and allowed to attach for 36 hours. DIM was directly added to cell cultures at the indicated concentrations and incubated for 72 hrs. Cell lysates were prepared by suspending the cells in RIPA lysis buffer and subjected to routine Western blot analysis as described earlier ( 34 ).  Cytochrome c release assay Cells were plated at a density of 5×106 cells in 100 mm dish and allowed to attach overnight. DIM was added to freshly replaced medium at indicated concentrations (0–45?M). Following termination of incubation period, cells were collected, washed with ice cold PBS, lysed and processed to obtain cytosolic and mitochondria fraction for cytochrome c immunoblotting as described earlier ( 34 ).  Caspase-3 activity assay Caspase-3 activity were measured in whole-cell lysates using commercially available assay kit (RandD Assay System, Minneapolis, MN) according to manufacturer’s instruction.  DNA cell cycle analysis PANC-1 cells were seeded and treated with DIM (0–45?M) for 72 hrs. After treatments, the cells were collected by trypsinization, washed with cold PBS, fixed with 70% ethanol and stained with propidium iodide for 30min. Flow cytometric analysis was carried out using FACScan.  Electrophoretic mobility shift assay Nuclear extracts were prepared from treated samples and EMSA was performed by incubating 10?g of nuclear extract with IRDye™–700 labeled NF-?B oligonucleotide as described earlier ( 33 ). The DNA-protein complex formed was visualized by Odyssey Infrared Imaging System using Odyssey Software Release 1.1.  Experimental animals Female ICR-SCID mice were purchased from Taconic Farms (Germantown, NY). The mice were housed and maintained under sterile conditions and were used in accordance with Animal Care and Use Guidelines of Wayne State University. Mice received Lab Diet 5021 (Purina Mills, Inc., Richmond, IN).  Orthotopic implantation of tumor cells PANC-1 cells were harvested from sub-confluent cultures washed once in serum free medium and re-suspended in PBS. 1×106 cells in 15?l PBS were injected into the parenchyma of pancreas with a 27 gauge hypodermic needle as described earlier ( 34 ).  Experimental Protocol Mice were randomized into the following treatment groups ( n =7): ( a ) Untreated control; ( b ) BR-DIM 5.0 mg/mice daily orally by gavage for 25 days; ( c ) Oxaliplatin - 15 mg/kg body wt., i.v., given once as a bolus; (d) BR-DIM and oxaliplatin, following the schedule as for individual treatments. All mice were killed on day-25 since the initiation of BR-DIM treatment. Body weight of mice from all the groups was recorded every fifth day after cell implantation. For imaging, 2–3 mice per group were injected with EGF-IRDye-800CW (EGFR antibody) via tail vein (1 nmol/L per mice) 72 hrs before euthanizing the animals. Imaging of live animals was done using Odyssey Infrared Imaging system under anesthesia. Upon autopsy, the pancreas was excised neatly, weighed and subsequently processed for H&E, immunohistochemical staining, and for preparation of nuclear protein extracts for EMSA and Western immunobloting.  Histological Sections and Immunohistochemistry Formalin-fixed tissue sections were evaluated for tumor cell cytology, mitotic rate, growth pattern, necrosis, cystic change, and associated inflammatory cellular response. Immunohistochemical studies were performed after staining with specific primary antibodies against phospho-p65 and Ki-67 followed by 3,3?-diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining. Apoptotic cells were identified by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL) using Chemicon Apotag In Situ Apoptosis Detection kit (Chemicon, Temecula, CA) and visualized under an Olympus microscope (Olympus, Japan).  Statistical analysis Data are represented as mean ± SD for the absolute values or percent of controls as indicated in the vertical axis legend of Figures 1 – 5 . The statistical significance of differential findings between experimental groups and control was determined by Student’s ‘ t’ test. P values smaller than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.  RESULTS Effect of DIM on cell viability and apoptosis induction, and cell cycle arrest As shown in Fig-1A , in almost all PC cell lines, DIM suppressed viability in a dose dependent manner and had minimal effect on HPDE cells, suggesting the relatively non-toxic nature of this compound on normal cells. These results were also consistent with induction of apoptosis induced by DIM treatment ( Fig 1B and 1C ). Moreover, the sub-G1 DNA content analysis showed increased accumulation of cells in the sub-G1 phase in a dose dependent manner (data not shown). Further analysis showed that DIM treatment resulted in a significant increase of cell population in the G0-G1 phase of the cell cycle (49% vs 71% cells at 0 and 45 ?M concentrations of DIM, respectively; Fig. 1D ). The increase in cell population in the G0-G1 phase was found to be associated with a concomitant decrease in cell population in the S phase, whereas the population of cells in G2-M phase did not change significantly compared to the corresponding controls ( Fig. 1D ). Overall, these results support the notion that the observed decline in cell viability by DIM was in part due to cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis. We then investigated the status of cell survival and apoptosis related molecules in DIM treated cells using PANC-1 as representative cell type because this cell line is moderately resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs and have molecular signature similar to human pancreatic tumors harboring k-ras and p53 mutations. DIM inhibits apoptotic molecules in PANC-1 cells As shown in Fig-1C , Bcl-xL protein level was inhibited, whereas pro-apoptotic Bax protein level was markedly induced in response to DIM treatment indicating that the apoptotic effects of DIM are partly due to increased Bax/Bcl-xL protein ratio. Relative to control, Mcl-1, survivin, XIAP, cIAP (pan) and p-Akt expression was down-regulated in cells exposed to DIM for 72 hrs. These results provide convincing mechanistic evidence in support of DIM induced apoptosis in PC cells, which is consistent with increase levels of active caspase-3, caspase-9 and 85 kDa cleaved intermediate of PARP in PANC-1 cells ( Fig-1C ), suggesting that DIM-induced apoptosis is mediated, at least in part, by the mitochondrial pathway. Therefore, to confirm the involvement of mitochondrial pathway and the release of cytochrome-c, we separated cytosolic and mitochondrial fraction from PANC-1 cells and demonstrated that DIM was able to induce the release of cytochrome-c from mitochondria into cytosol in a dose dependent manner ( Fig-1C ). We next assessed the effects of conventional therapeutics alone and in combination with DIM. DIM sensitizes PC cells to multiple cytotoxic agents by reducing cell viability and promoting apoptosis We assessed the effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin alone on the viability of different PC cells by MTT assay, and we found a concentration dependent inhibition of PC cell viability (data not shown). We noted differential sensitivity of cells towards gemcitabine and oxaliplatin with Colo 357 being highly sensitive to low concentrations of gemcitabine as well as, oxaliplatin compared to other PC cells (data not shown). In our subsequent studies we found that treatment of cells with DIM or cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin alone (for 72hrs) caused > 25–50% (p<0.01) loss of PC cell viability ( Fig-2A ); however, pretreatment of cells with DIM for 24 hrs followed by treatment with the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin) for 72 hrs resulted in a significant loss of cell viability (< 65–80%; p<0.001) in all the cell lines tested. Morphologic feature characteristics of apoptosis were observed as depicted by the microphotographs ( Fig-2B ). In control culture, the cells were seen attached and reaching near confluent whereas cells tend to show slightly less proficiency in growth and viability following single regimen treatments. However, the changes tend to become more pronounced and prominent in the combination group wherein the cells appears to round off, detach and were seen floating- all of which are typical characteristics of apoptotic cell death. The attached cells appeared pleiomorphic and elongated. Next, we determined the Combination Index (CI) values for all three combination treatment groups where CI <1 indicates synergism and CI >1 indicates antagonism and CI equal to 1 indicates additive effect. Our results ( Fig-2C ) clearly demonstrated that PANC-1 cells pretreated with DIM showed synergistic loss of the cell viability when combined with cisplatin, gemcitabine and/or oxaliplatin (CI=0.74, 0.66 and 0.96 respectively). These results are of paramount interest clinically in minimizing toxic side effects of chemotherapeutic agents on normal cells. These results were also seen consistent with synergistic induction of apoptosis (~50% more; p<0.01) ( Fig-3A ). It is important to note that we did not find synergistic effects using BITC (supplemental figure-1), suggesting that DIM is superior to BITC in our experimental system. Further molecular mechanistic investigations by Western immunoblotting revealed in PANC-1 cells, pretreatment with DIM augmented PARP cleavage and the appearance of active cleaved caspase-3 ( Fig-3B ) which was consistent with spectrophotometric assay results showing significant increase in caspase-3 activity ( Fig-3C ). In agreement with our results with PARP and caspase-3 activity, we found significant up regulation of Bax and down-regulation of Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, survivin, cIAP and XIAP proteins in the combination treatment group ( Fig-3B ), indicating that DIM indeed sensitizes PC cells to the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin. Since many of the anti-apoptotic proteins are regulated by NF-?B, we assessed the role of NF-?B in our experimental system. DIM inhibits activation of NF-?B and down-regulates NF-?B activation stimulated by oxaliplatin and gemcitabine As shown in Fig-4A , DIM resulted in a concentration dependent decrease in the DNA binding activity of NF-?B in PANC-1 and Panc-28 PC cells which is consistent with the down-regulation of the transcriptional target genes of NF-?B such as Bcl-2 family of anti-apoptotic proteins, survivin and XIAP. In order to further assess the role of NF-?B, experiments were performed to determine optimal treatment schedule and dose of individual chemotherapeutic agents in stimulating basal level of NF-?B in PANC-1 cells. For this study, we exposed PANC-1 cells to 30?M DIM for 48 hrs followed by 3h of either gemcitabine (100nM), cisplatin (500nM) or oxaliplatin (63?M), prepared nuclear extracts and subjected to NF-?B DNA binding assay by EMSA. Consistent with previously published data from our laboratory ( 33 ), we found that gemcitabine and oxaliplatin treatment alone for 3hrs induced NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). Interestingly, we also found that pretreatment of cells with 30?M DIM significantly reduced chemotherapeutic agents induced activation of NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). These results demonstrate that DIM not only down-regulates the preexisting basal levels of NF-?B DNA binding activity in un-stimulated PC cells, but could also inhibit gemcitabine, cispaltin and/or oxaliplatin induced NF-?B activation, which is consistent with our hypothesis. Moreover, using PC cell line expressing phosphorylation defective I?B? (S32, 36A) cells (generous gift from Dr Paul Chiao; UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX), we confirmed the absence of NF-?B and its target genes in these cells ( Fig-4C ). We treated these cells with DIM and oxaliplatin using our protocol employing pretreatment with DIM followed by oxaliplatin treatment. As anticipated, inhibition of NF-?B signaling in these cells lead not only to a significant decrease in the expression of several of the NF-?B downstream targets ( Fig-4C ), but also exhibited loss of cell viability (>50% loss) compared to Panc 28 (containing constitutively active NF-?B) cells in the combination treatment group ( Fig-4D ). These in vitro studies prompted us to conduct in vivo testing of our hypothesis, and the results are presented below. DIM enhances <italic>in vivo</italic> therapeutic effect of oxaliplatin on primary tumor To be consistent with clinical relevance of our results, we used an absorption enhanced formulation of DIM, hence forth referred to as BR-DIM (obtained from Bio-Response Co. Boulder, CO) for our in vivo studies. Under our experimental conditions (as depicted in Fig-5A ), administration of BR-DIM by gavage caused only a minimal (20% reduction) effect on tumor weight. Additionally, relative to control group, oxaliplatin treatment alone caused 50% reduction in tumor weight ( Fig-5B ). However, under identical experimental conditions, the combination of BR-DIM and oxaliplatin showed significant decrease (p<0.001) in tumor weight relative to untreated control group. These results were consistent with imaging results ( Fig-5C ). Of interest, on autopsy, 86% of mice from the control group showed evidence of nodal metastasis. In contrast, a progressive decline in the percentage of mice harboring nodal metastasis, as well as metastatic tumor size, was prominently evident in the BR-DIM and oxaliplatin combination groups as represented in Fig-5D . Moreover, no evidence of any toxicity as inferred from body-weight loss criteria or signs of aversion to food intake or diarrhea were evident within therapeutic window. NF-?B DNA binding activity and PARP cleavage <italic>in vivo</italic> Similar to our in vitro findings, NF-?B in the nuclear extracts of tumor samples was moderately down-regulated by BR-DIM alone, but unlike in vitro situation, oxaliplatin did not revealed any overtly induced NF-?B DNA binding activity relative to control specimens. Interestingly, constitutively expressed NF-?B was seen abrogated in tumors samples obtained from mice treated with BR-DIM and oxaliplatin ( Fig-6A ). Whole tissue lysates from harvested tumors revealed down-regulation of a few important NF-?B regulated anti-apoptotic molecules such as Bcl-xL, survivin and XIAP proteins in vivo , which is consistent with our in vitro results. Tumor histology and immunohistochemistry H&E evaluation of the tumors from all four groups showed high grade carcinoma associated with tumor apoptosis and necrosis ( Fig-6C ). In the control group, the tumor was largely viable and consisted entirely of neoplastic cells with minimal intratumoral stroma. In contrast, the group receiving combined treatment there was severe tumor destruction throughout the entire tumor and it was associated with increased stromal fibrosis. Similar but only milder changes were also seen in the tumors of the group treated with B-DIM or oxaliplatin alone. The expression of phospho-p65 was significantly decreased in the combination group compared to the control ( Fig-6C ) and milder effects were seen BR-DIM or oxaliplatin alone group, which is consistent with our results on the DNA binding activity of NF-?B. Likewise, significant apoptosis was evident in the combination group with TUNEL positive apoptotic cells seen randomly distributed in tumor parenchyma along with reduced staining for Ki-67 ( Fig-6C ). Together, these results provide convincing evidence in support of the superior anti-tumor activity of the combination of BR-DIM with oxaliplatin, and these in vivo results are consistent with our in vitro findings.  RESULTS Effect of DIM on cell viability and apoptosis induction, and cell cycle arrest As shown in Fig-1A , in almost all PC cell lines, DIM suppressed viability in a dose dependent manner and had minimal effect on HPDE cells, suggesting the relatively non-toxic nature of this compound on normal cells. These results were also consistent with induction of apoptosis induced by DIM treatment ( Fig 1B and 1C ). Moreover, the sub-G1 DNA content analysis showed increased accumulation of cells in the sub-G1 phase in a dose dependent manner (data not shown). Further analysis showed that DIM treatment resulted in a significant increase of cell population in the G0-G1 phase of the cell cycle (49% vs 71% cells at 0 and 45 ?M concentrations of DIM, respectively; Fig. 1D ). The increase in cell population in the G0-G1 phase was found to be associated with a concomitant decrease in cell population in the S phase, whereas the population of cells in G2-M phase did not change significantly compared to the corresponding controls ( Fig. 1D ). Overall, these results support the notion that the observed decline in cell viability by DIM was in part due to cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis. We then investigated the status of cell survival and apoptosis related molecules in DIM treated cells using PANC-1 as representative cell type because this cell line is moderately resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs and have molecular signature similar to human pancreatic tumors harboring k-ras and p53 mutations. DIM inhibits apoptotic molecules in PANC-1 cells As shown in Fig-1C , Bcl-xL protein level was inhibited, whereas pro-apoptotic Bax protein level was markedly induced in response to DIM treatment indicating that the apoptotic effects of DIM are partly due to increased Bax/Bcl-xL protein ratio. Relative to control, Mcl-1, survivin, XIAP, cIAP (pan) and p-Akt expression was down-regulated in cells exposed to DIM for 72 hrs. These results provide convincing mechanistic evidence in support of DIM induced apoptosis in PC cells, which is consistent with increase levels of active caspase-3, caspase-9 and 85 kDa cleaved intermediate of PARP in PANC-1 cells ( Fig-1C ), suggesting that DIM-induced apoptosis is mediated, at least in part, by the mitochondrial pathway. Therefore, to confirm the involvement of mitochondrial pathway and the release of cytochrome-c, we separated cytosolic and mitochondrial fraction from PANC-1 cells and demonstrated that DIM was able to induce the release of cytochrome-c from mitochondria into cytosol in a dose dependent manner ( Fig-1C ). We next assessed the effects of conventional therapeutics alone and in combination with DIM. DIM sensitizes PC cells to multiple cytotoxic agents by reducing cell viability and promoting apoptosis We assessed the effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin alone on the viability of different PC cells by MTT assay, and we found a concentration dependent inhibition of PC cell viability (data not shown). We noted differential sensitivity of cells towards gemcitabine and oxaliplatin with Colo 357 being highly sensitive to low concentrations of gemcitabine as well as, oxaliplatin compared to other PC cells (data not shown). In our subsequent studies we found that treatment of cells with DIM or cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin alone (for 72hrs) caused > 25–50% (p<0.01) loss of PC cell viability ( Fig-2A ); however, pretreatment of cells with DIM for 24 hrs followed by treatment with the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin) for 72 hrs resulted in a significant loss of cell viability (< 65–80%; p<0.001) in all the cell lines tested. Morphologic feature characteristics of apoptosis were observed as depicted by the microphotographs ( Fig-2B ). In control culture, the cells were seen attached and reaching near confluent whereas cells tend to show slightly less proficiency in growth and viability following single regimen treatments. However, the changes tend to become more pronounced and prominent in the combination group wherein the cells appears to round off, detach and were seen floating- all of which are typical characteristics of apoptotic cell death. The attached cells appeared pleiomorphic and elongated. Next, we determined the Combination Index (CI) values for all three combination treatment groups where CI <1 indicates synergism and CI >1 indicates antagonism and CI equal to 1 indicates additive effect. Our results ( Fig-2C ) clearly demonstrated that PANC-1 cells pretreated with DIM showed synergistic loss of the cell viability when combined with cisplatin, gemcitabine and/or oxaliplatin (CI=0.74, 0.66 and 0.96 respectively). These results are of paramount interest clinically in minimizing toxic side effects of chemotherapeutic agents on normal cells. These results were also seen consistent with synergistic induction of apoptosis (~50% more; p<0.01) ( Fig-3A ). It is important to note that we did not find synergistic effects using BITC (supplemental figure-1), suggesting that DIM is superior to BITC in our experimental system. Further molecular mechanistic investigations by Western immunoblotting revealed in PANC-1 cells, pretreatment with DIM augmented PARP cleavage and the appearance of active cleaved caspase-3 ( Fig-3B ) which was consistent with spectrophotometric assay results showing significant increase in caspase-3 activity ( Fig-3C ). In agreement with our results with PARP and caspase-3 activity, we found significant up regulation of Bax and down-regulation of Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, survivin, cIAP and XIAP proteins in the combination treatment group ( Fig-3B ), indicating that DIM indeed sensitizes PC cells to the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin. Since many of the anti-apoptotic proteins are regulated by NF-?B, we assessed the role of NF-?B in our experimental system. DIM inhibits activation of NF-?B and down-regulates NF-?B activation stimulated by oxaliplatin and gemcitabine As shown in Fig-4A , DIM resulted in a concentration dependent decrease in the DNA binding activity of NF-?B in PANC-1 and Panc-28 PC cells which is consistent with the down-regulation of the transcriptional target genes of NF-?B such as Bcl-2 family of anti-apoptotic proteins, survivin and XIAP. In order to further assess the role of NF-?B, experiments were performed to determine optimal treatment schedule and dose of individual chemotherapeutic agents in stimulating basal level of NF-?B in PANC-1 cells. For this study, we exposed PANC-1 cells to 30?M DIM for 48 hrs followed by 3h of either gemcitabine (100nM), cisplatin (500nM) or oxaliplatin (63?M), prepared nuclear extracts and subjected to NF-?B DNA binding assay by EMSA. Consistent with previously published data from our laboratory ( 33 ), we found that gemcitabine and oxaliplatin treatment alone for 3hrs induced NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). Interestingly, we also found that pretreatment of cells with 30?M DIM significantly reduced chemotherapeutic agents induced activation of NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). These results demonstrate that DIM not only down-regulates the preexisting basal levels of NF-?B DNA binding activity in un-stimulated PC cells, but could also inhibit gemcitabine, cispaltin and/or oxaliplatin induced NF-?B activation, which is consistent with our hypothesis. Moreover, using PC cell line expressing phosphorylation defective I?B? (S32, 36A) cells (generous gift from Dr Paul Chiao; UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX), we confirmed the absence of NF-?B and its target genes in these cells ( Fig-4C ). We treated these cells with DIM and oxaliplatin using our protocol employing pretreatment with DIM followed by oxaliplatin treatment. As anticipated, inhibition of NF-?B signaling in these cells lead not only to a significant decrease in the expression of several of the NF-?B downstream targets ( Fig-4C ), but also exhibited loss of cell viability (>50% loss) compared to Panc 28 (containing constitutively active NF-?B) cells in the combination treatment group ( Fig-4D ). These in vitro studies prompted us to conduct in vivo testing of our hypothesis, and the results are presented below. DIM enhances <italic>in vivo</italic> therapeutic effect of oxaliplatin on primary tumor To be consistent with clinical relevance of our results, we used an absorption enhanced formulation of DIM, hence forth referred to as BR-DIM (obtained from Bio-Response Co. Boulder, CO) for our in vivo studies. Under our experimental conditions (as depicted in Fig-5A ), administration of BR-DIM by gavage caused only a minimal (20% reduction) effect on tumor weight. Additionally, relative to control group, oxaliplatin treatment alone caused 50% reduction in tumor weight ( Fig-5B ). However, under identical experimental conditions, the combination of BR-DIM and oxaliplatin showed significant decrease (p<0.001) in tumor weight relative to untreated control group. These results were consistent with imaging results ( Fig-5C ). Of interest, on autopsy, 86% of mice from the control group showed evidence of nodal metastasis. In contrast, a progressive decline in the percentage of mice harboring nodal metastasis, as well as metastatic tumor size, was prominently evident in the BR-DIM and oxaliplatin combination groups as represented in Fig-5D . Moreover, no evidence of any toxicity as inferred from body-weight loss criteria or signs of aversion to food intake or diarrhea were evident within therapeutic window. NF-?B DNA binding activity and PARP cleavage <italic>in vivo</italic> Similar to our in vitro findings, NF-?B in the nuclear extracts of tumor samples was moderately down-regulated by BR-DIM alone, but unlike in vitro situation, oxaliplatin did not revealed any overtly induced NF-?B DNA binding activity relative to control specimens. Interestingly, constitutively expressed NF-?B was seen abrogated in tumors samples obtained from mice treated with BR-DIM and oxaliplatin ( Fig-6A ). Whole tissue lysates from harvested tumors revealed down-regulation of a few important NF-?B regulated anti-apoptotic molecules such as Bcl-xL, survivin and XIAP proteins in vivo , which is consistent with our in vitro results. Tumor histology and immunohistochemistry H&E evaluation of the tumors from all four groups showed high grade carcinoma associated with tumor apoptosis and necrosis ( Fig-6C ). In the control group, the tumor was largely viable and consisted entirely of neoplastic cells with minimal intratumoral stroma. In contrast, the group receiving combined treatment there was severe tumor destruction throughout the entire tumor and it was associated with increased stromal fibrosis. Similar but only milder changes were also seen in the tumors of the group treated with B-DIM or oxaliplatin alone. The expression of phospho-p65 was significantly decreased in the combination group compared to the control ( Fig-6C ) and milder effects were seen BR-DIM or oxaliplatin alone group, which is consistent with our results on the DNA binding activity of NF-?B. Likewise, significant apoptosis was evident in the combination group with TUNEL positive apoptotic cells seen randomly distributed in tumor parenchyma along with reduced staining for Ki-67 ( Fig-6C ). Together, these results provide convincing evidence in support of the superior anti-tumor activity of the combination of BR-DIM with oxaliplatin, and these in vivo results are consistent with our in vitro findings.  Effect of DIM on cell viability and apoptosis induction, and cell cycle arrest As shown in Fig-1A , in almost all PC cell lines, DIM suppressed viability in a dose dependent manner and had minimal effect on HPDE cells, suggesting the relatively non-toxic nature of this compound on normal cells. These results were also consistent with induction of apoptosis induced by DIM treatment ( Fig 1B and 1C ). Moreover, the sub-G1 DNA content analysis showed increased accumulation of cells in the sub-G1 phase in a dose dependent manner (data not shown). Further analysis showed that DIM treatment resulted in a significant increase of cell population in the G0-G1 phase of the cell cycle (49% vs 71% cells at 0 and 45 ?M concentrations of DIM, respectively; Fig. 1D ). The increase in cell population in the G0-G1 phase was found to be associated with a concomitant decrease in cell population in the S phase, whereas the population of cells in G2-M phase did not change significantly compared to the corresponding controls ( Fig. 1D ). Overall, these results support the notion that the observed decline in cell viability by DIM was in part due to cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis. We then investigated the status of cell survival and apoptosis related molecules in DIM treated cells using PANC-1 as representative cell type because this cell line is moderately resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs and have molecular signature similar to human pancreatic tumors harboring k-ras and p53 mutations.  Effect of DIM on cell viability and apoptosis induction, and cell cycle arrest As shown in Fig-1A , in almost all PC cell lines, DIM suppressed viability in a dose dependent manner and had minimal effect on HPDE cells, suggesting the relatively non-toxic nature of this compound on normal cells. These results were also consistent with induction of apoptosis induced by DIM treatment ( Fig 1B and 1C ). Moreover, the sub-G1 DNA content analysis showed increased accumulation of cells in the sub-G1 phase in a dose dependent manner (data not shown). Further analysis showed that DIM treatment resulted in a significant increase of cell population in the G0-G1 phase of the cell cycle (49% vs 71% cells at 0 and 45 ?M concentrations of DIM, respectively; Fig. 1D ). The increase in cell population in the G0-G1 phase was found to be associated with a concomitant decrease in cell population in the S phase, whereas the population of cells in G2-M phase did not change significantly compared to the corresponding controls ( Fig. 1D ). Overall, these results support the notion that the observed decline in cell viability by DIM was in part due to cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis. We then investigated the status of cell survival and apoptosis related molecules in DIM treated cells using PANC-1 as representative cell type because this cell line is moderately resistant to chemotherapeutic drugs and have molecular signature similar to human pancreatic tumors harboring k-ras and p53 mutations.  DIM inhibits apoptotic molecules in PANC-1 cells As shown in Fig-1C , Bcl-xL protein level was inhibited, whereas pro-apoptotic Bax protein level was markedly induced in response to DIM treatment indicating that the apoptotic effects of DIM are partly due to increased Bax/Bcl-xL protein ratio. Relative to control, Mcl-1, survivin, XIAP, cIAP (pan) and p-Akt expression was down-regulated in cells exposed to DIM for 72 hrs. These results provide convincing mechanistic evidence in support of DIM induced apoptosis in PC cells, which is consistent with increase levels of active caspase-3, caspase-9 and 85 kDa cleaved intermediate of PARP in PANC-1 cells ( Fig-1C ), suggesting that DIM-induced apoptosis is mediated, at least in part, by the mitochondrial pathway. Therefore, to confirm the involvement of mitochondrial pathway and the release of cytochrome-c, we separated cytosolic and mitochondrial fraction from PANC-1 cells and demonstrated that DIM was able to induce the release of cytochrome-c from mitochondria into cytosol in a dose dependent manner ( Fig-1C ). We next assessed the effects of conventional therapeutics alone and in combination with DIM.  DIM inhibits apoptotic molecules in PANC-1 cells As shown in Fig-1C , Bcl-xL protein level was inhibited, whereas pro-apoptotic Bax protein level was markedly induced in response to DIM treatment indicating that the apoptotic effects of DIM are partly due to increased Bax/Bcl-xL protein ratio. Relative to control, Mcl-1, survivin, XIAP, cIAP (pan) and p-Akt expression was down-regulated in cells exposed to DIM for 72 hrs. These results provide convincing mechanistic evidence in support of DIM induced apoptosis in PC cells, which is consistent with increase levels of active caspase-3, caspase-9 and 85 kDa cleaved intermediate of PARP in PANC-1 cells ( Fig-1C ), suggesting that DIM-induced apoptosis is mediated, at least in part, by the mitochondrial pathway. Therefore, to confirm the involvement of mitochondrial pathway and the release of cytochrome-c, we separated cytosolic and mitochondrial fraction from PANC-1 cells and demonstrated that DIM was able to induce the release of cytochrome-c from mitochondria into cytosol in a dose dependent manner ( Fig-1C ). We next assessed the effects of conventional therapeutics alone and in combination with DIM.  DIM sensitizes PC cells to multiple cytotoxic agents by reducing cell viability and promoting apoptosis We assessed the effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin alone on the viability of different PC cells by MTT assay, and we found a concentration dependent inhibition of PC cell viability (data not shown). We noted differential sensitivity of cells towards gemcitabine and oxaliplatin with Colo 357 being highly sensitive to low concentrations of gemcitabine as well as, oxaliplatin compared to other PC cells (data not shown). In our subsequent studies we found that treatment of cells with DIM or cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin alone (for 72hrs) caused > 25–50% (p<0.01) loss of PC cell viability ( Fig-2A ); however, pretreatment of cells with DIM for 24 hrs followed by treatment with the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin) for 72 hrs resulted in a significant loss of cell viability (< 65–80%; p<0.001) in all the cell lines tested. Morphologic feature characteristics of apoptosis were observed as depicted by the microphotographs ( Fig-2B ). In control culture, the cells were seen attached and reaching near confluent whereas cells tend to show slightly less proficiency in growth and viability following single regimen treatments. However, the changes tend to become more pronounced and prominent in the combination group wherein the cells appears to round off, detach and were seen floating- all of which are typical characteristics of apoptotic cell death. The attached cells appeared pleiomorphic and elongated. Next, we determined the Combination Index (CI) values for all three combination treatment groups where CI <1 indicates synergism and CI >1 indicates antagonism and CI equal to 1 indicates additive effect. Our results ( Fig-2C ) clearly demonstrated that PANC-1 cells pretreated with DIM showed synergistic loss of the cell viability when combined with cisplatin, gemcitabine and/or oxaliplatin (CI=0.74, 0.66 and 0.96 respectively). These results are of paramount interest clinically in minimizing toxic side effects of chemotherapeutic agents on normal cells. These results were also seen consistent with synergistic induction of apoptosis (~50% more; p<0.01) ( Fig-3A ). It is important to note that we did not find synergistic effects using BITC (supplemental figure-1), suggesting that DIM is superior to BITC in our experimental system. Further molecular mechanistic investigations by Western immunoblotting revealed in PANC-1 cells, pretreatment with DIM augmented PARP cleavage and the appearance of active cleaved caspase-3 ( Fig-3B ) which was consistent with spectrophotometric assay results showing significant increase in caspase-3 activity ( Fig-3C ). In agreement with our results with PARP and caspase-3 activity, we found significant up regulation of Bax and down-regulation of Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, survivin, cIAP and XIAP proteins in the combination treatment group ( Fig-3B ), indicating that DIM indeed sensitizes PC cells to the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin. Since many of the anti-apoptotic proteins are regulated by NF-?B, we assessed the role of NF-?B in our experimental system.  DIM sensitizes PC cells to multiple cytotoxic agents by reducing cell viability and promoting apoptosis We assessed the effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin alone on the viability of different PC cells by MTT assay, and we found a concentration dependent inhibition of PC cell viability (data not shown). We noted differential sensitivity of cells towards gemcitabine and oxaliplatin with Colo 357 being highly sensitive to low concentrations of gemcitabine as well as, oxaliplatin compared to other PC cells (data not shown). In our subsequent studies we found that treatment of cells with DIM or cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin alone (for 72hrs) caused > 25–50% (p<0.01) loss of PC cell viability ( Fig-2A ); however, pretreatment of cells with DIM for 24 hrs followed by treatment with the cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin) for 72 hrs resulted in a significant loss of cell viability (< 65–80%; p<0.001) in all the cell lines tested. Morphologic feature characteristics of apoptosis were observed as depicted by the microphotographs ( Fig-2B ). In control culture, the cells were seen attached and reaching near confluent whereas cells tend to show slightly less proficiency in growth and viability following single regimen treatments. However, the changes tend to become more pronounced and prominent in the combination group wherein the cells appears to round off, detach and were seen floating- all of which are typical characteristics of apoptotic cell death. The attached cells appeared pleiomorphic and elongated. Next, we determined the Combination Index (CI) values for all three combination treatment groups where CI <1 indicates synergism and CI >1 indicates antagonism and CI equal to 1 indicates additive effect. Our results ( Fig-2C ) clearly demonstrated that PANC-1 cells pretreated with DIM showed synergistic loss of the cell viability when combined with cisplatin, gemcitabine and/or oxaliplatin (CI=0.74, 0.66 and 0.96 respectively). These results are of paramount interest clinically in minimizing toxic side effects of chemotherapeutic agents on normal cells. These results were also seen consistent with synergistic induction of apoptosis (~50% more; p<0.01) ( Fig-3A ). It is important to note that we did not find synergistic effects using BITC (supplemental figure-1), suggesting that DIM is superior to BITC in our experimental system. Further molecular mechanistic investigations by Western immunoblotting revealed in PANC-1 cells, pretreatment with DIM augmented PARP cleavage and the appearance of active cleaved caspase-3 ( Fig-3B ) which was consistent with spectrophotometric assay results showing significant increase in caspase-3 activity ( Fig-3C ). In agreement with our results with PARP and caspase-3 activity, we found significant up regulation of Bax and down-regulation of Bcl-xL, Mcl-1, survivin, cIAP and XIAP proteins in the combination treatment group ( Fig-3B ), indicating that DIM indeed sensitizes PC cells to the cytotoxic effect of cisplatin, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin. Since many of the anti-apoptotic proteins are regulated by NF-?B, we assessed the role of NF-?B in our experimental system.  DIM inhibits activation of NF-?B and down-regulates NF-?B activation stimulated by oxaliplatin and gemcitabine As shown in Fig-4A , DIM resulted in a concentration dependent decrease in the DNA binding activity of NF-?B in PANC-1 and Panc-28 PC cells which is consistent with the down-regulation of the transcriptional target genes of NF-?B such as Bcl-2 family of anti-apoptotic proteins, survivin and XIAP. In order to further assess the role of NF-?B, experiments were performed to determine optimal treatment schedule and dose of individual chemotherapeutic agents in stimulating basal level of NF-?B in PANC-1 cells. For this study, we exposed PANC-1 cells to 30?M DIM for 48 hrs followed by 3h of either gemcitabine (100nM), cisplatin (500nM) or oxaliplatin (63?M), prepared nuclear extracts and subjected to NF-?B DNA binding assay by EMSA. Consistent with previously published data from our laboratory ( 33 ), we found that gemcitabine and oxaliplatin treatment alone for 3hrs induced NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). Interestingly, we also found that pretreatment of cells with 30?M DIM significantly reduced chemotherapeutic agents induced activation of NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). These results demonstrate that DIM not only down-regulates the preexisting basal levels of NF-?B DNA binding activity in un-stimulated PC cells, but could also inhibit gemcitabine, cispaltin and/or oxaliplatin induced NF-?B activation, which is consistent with our hypothesis. Moreover, using PC cell line expressing phosphorylation defective I?B? (S32, 36A) cells (generous gift from Dr Paul Chiao; UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX), we confirmed the absence of NF-?B and its target genes in these cells ( Fig-4C ). We treated these cells with DIM and oxaliplatin using our protocol employing pretreatment with DIM followed by oxaliplatin treatment. As anticipated, inhibition of NF-?B signaling in these cells lead not only to a significant decrease in the expression of several of the NF-?B downstream targets ( Fig-4C ), but also exhibited loss of cell viability (>50% loss) compared to Panc 28 (containing constitutively active NF-?B) cells in the combination treatment group ( Fig-4D ). These in vitro studies prompted us to conduct in vivo testing of our hypothesis, and the results are presented below.  DIM inhibits activation of NF-?B and down-regulates NF-?B activation stimulated by oxaliplatin and gemcitabine As shown in Fig-4A , DIM resulted in a concentration dependent decrease in the DNA binding activity of NF-?B in PANC-1 and Panc-28 PC cells which is consistent with the down-regulation of the transcriptional target genes of NF-?B such as Bcl-2 family of anti-apoptotic proteins, survivin and XIAP. In order to further assess the role of NF-?B, experiments were performed to determine optimal treatment schedule and dose of individual chemotherapeutic agents in stimulating basal level of NF-?B in PANC-1 cells. For this study, we exposed PANC-1 cells to 30?M DIM for 48 hrs followed by 3h of either gemcitabine (100nM), cisplatin (500nM) or oxaliplatin (63?M), prepared nuclear extracts and subjected to NF-?B DNA binding assay by EMSA. Consistent with previously published data from our laboratory ( 33 ), we found that gemcitabine and oxaliplatin treatment alone for 3hrs induced NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). Interestingly, we also found that pretreatment of cells with 30?M DIM significantly reduced chemotherapeutic agents induced activation of NF-?B DNA binding activity ( Fig-4B ). These results demonstrate that DIM not only down-regulates the preexisting basal levels of NF-?B DNA binding activity in un-stimulated PC cells, but could also inhibit gemcitabine, cispaltin and/or oxaliplatin induced NF-?B activation, which is consistent with our hypothesis. Moreover, using PC cell line expressing phosphorylation defective I?B? (S32, 36A) cells (generous gift from Dr Paul Chiao; UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX), we confirmed the absence of NF-?B and its target genes in these cells ( Fig-4C ). We treated these cells with DIM and oxaliplatin using our protocol employing pretreatment with DIM followed by oxaliplatin treatment. As anticipated, inhibition of NF-?B signaling in these cells lead not only to a significant decrease in the expression of several of the NF-?B downstream targets ( Fig-4C ), but also exhibited loss of cell viability (>50% loss) compared to Panc 28 (containing constitutively active NF-?B) cells in the combination treatment group ( Fig-4D ). These in vitro studies prompted us to conduct in vivo testing of our hypothesis, and the results are presented below.  DIM enhances <italic>in vivo</italic> therapeutic effect of oxaliplatin on primary tumor To be consistent with clinical relevance of our results, we used an absorption enhanced formulation of DIM, hence forth referred to as BR-DIM (obtained from Bio-Response Co. Boulder, CO) for our in vivo studies. Under our experimental conditions (as depicted in Fig-5A ), administration of BR-DIM by gavage caused only a minimal (20% reduction) effect on tumor weight. Additionally, relative to control group, oxaliplatin treatment alone caused 50% reduction in tumor weight ( Fig-5B ). However, under identical experimental conditions, the combination of BR-DIM and oxaliplatin showed significant decrease (p<0.001) in tumor weight relative to untreated control group. These results were consistent with imaging results ( Fig-5C ). Of interest, on autopsy, 86% of mice from the control group showed evidence of nodal metastasis. In contrast, a progressive decline in the percentage of mice harboring nodal metastasis, as well as metastatic tumor size, was prominently evident in the BR-DIM and oxaliplatin combination groups as represented in Fig-5D . Moreover, no evidence of any toxicity as inferred from body-weight loss criteria or signs of aversion to food intake or diarrhea were evident within therapeutic window.  DIM enhances <italic>in vivo</italic> therapeutic effect of oxaliplatin on primary tumor To be consistent with clinical relevance of our results, we used an absorption enhanced formulation of DIM, hence forth referred to as BR-DIM (obtained from Bio-Response Co. Boulder, CO) for our in vivo studies. Under our experimental conditions (as depicted in Fig-5A ), administration of BR-DIM by gavage caused only a minimal (20% reduction) effect on tumor weight. Additionally, relative to control group, oxaliplatin treatment alone caused 50% reduction in tumor weight ( Fig-5B ). However, under identical experimental conditions, the combination of BR-DIM and oxaliplatin showed significant decrease (p<0.001) in tumor weight relative to untreated control group. These results were consistent with imaging results ( Fig-5C ). Of interest, on autopsy, 86% of mice from the control group showed evidence of nodal metastasis. In contrast, a progressive decline in the percentage of mice harboring nodal metastasis, as well as metastatic tumor size, was prominently evident in the BR-DIM and oxaliplatin combination groups as represented in Fig-5D . Moreover, no evidence of any toxicity as inferred from body-weight loss criteria or signs of aversion to food intake or diarrhea were evident within therapeutic window.  NF-?B DNA binding activity and PARP cleavage <italic>in vivo</italic> Similar to our in vitro findings, NF-?B in the nuclear extracts of tumor samples was moderately down-regulated by BR-DIM alone, but unlike in vitro situation, oxaliplatin did not revealed any overtly induced NF-?B DNA binding activity relative to control specimens. Interestingly, constitutively expressed NF-?B was seen abrogated in tumors samples obtained from mice treated with BR-DIM and oxaliplatin ( Fig-6A ). Whole tissue lysates from harvested tumors revealed down-regulation of a few important NF-?B regulated anti-apoptotic molecules such as Bcl-xL, survivin and XIAP proteins in vivo , which is consistent with our in vitro results.  NF-?B DNA binding activity and PARP cleavage <italic>in vivo</italic> Similar to our in vitro findings, NF-?B in the nuclear extracts of tumor samples was moderately down-regulated by BR-DIM alone, but unlike in vitro situation, oxaliplatin did not revealed any overtly induced NF-?B DNA binding activity relative to control specimens. Interestingly, constitutively expressed NF-?B was seen abrogated in tumors samples obtained from mice treated with BR-DIM and oxaliplatin ( Fig-6A ). Whole tissue lysates from harvested tumors revealed down-regulation of a few important NF-?B regulated anti-apoptotic molecules such as Bcl-xL, survivin and XIAP proteins in vivo , which is consistent with our in vitro results.  Tumor histology and immunohistochemistry H&E evaluation of the tumors from all four groups showed high grade carcinoma associated with tumor apoptosis and necrosis ( Fig-6C ). In the control group, the tumor was largely viable and consisted entirely of neoplastic cells with minimal intratumoral stroma. In contrast, the group receiving combined treatment there was severe tumor destruction throughout the entire tumor and it was associated with increased stromal fibrosis. Similar but only milder changes were also seen in the tumors of the group treated with B-DIM or oxaliplatin alone. The expression of phospho-p65 was significantly decreased in the combination group compared to the control ( Fig-6C ) and milder effects were seen BR-DIM or oxaliplatin alone group, which is consistent with our results on the DNA binding activity of NF-?B. Likewise, significant apoptosis was evident in the combination group with TUNEL positive apoptotic cells seen randomly distributed in tumor parenchyma along with reduced staining for Ki-67 ( Fig-6C ). Together, these results provide convincing evidence in support of the superior anti-tumor activity of the combination of BR-DIM with oxaliplatin, and these in vivo results are consistent with our in vitro findings.  Tumor histology and immunohistochemistry H&E evaluation of the tumors from all four groups showed high grade carcinoma associated with tumor apoptosis and necrosis ( Fig-6C ). In the control group, the tumor was largely viable and consisted entirely of neoplastic cells with minimal intratumoral stroma. In contrast, the group receiving combined treatment there was severe tumor destruction throughout the entire tumor and it was associated with increased stromal fibrosis. Similar but only milder changes were also seen in the tumors of the group treated with B-DIM or oxaliplatin alone. The expression of phospho-p65 was significantly decreased in the combination group compared to the control ( Fig-6C ) and milder effects were seen BR-DIM or oxaliplatin alone group, which is consistent with our results on the DNA binding activity of NF-?B. Likewise, significant apoptosis was evident in the combination group with TUNEL positive apoptotic cells seen randomly distributed in tumor parenchyma along with reduced staining for Ki-67 ( Fig-6C ). Together, these results provide convincing evidence in support of the superior anti-tumor activity of the combination of BR-DIM with oxaliplatin, and these in vivo results are consistent with our in vitro findings.  DISCUSSION Here we report for the first time that DIM could be therapeutically exploited for the treatment of PC in combination with conventional therapeutics. We found that DIM was effective as a general inducer of apoptosis in PC cells by down-regulating several anti-apoptotic proteins but had no effect on normal human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells. Moreover, DIM was effective in down-regulating Bcl-2 family proteins, as well as IAP’s and survivin in PC cells abrogating treatment resistance via inhibition of caspase cascade ( 35 , 36 ). Evidence from our laboratory and others have shown that the transcription factor, NF-?B, is constitutively active in human pancreatic tumor specimens, as well as in PC cell lines and that NF-?B is intimately involved with de novo and acquired chemo-resistant phenotype of PC cells ( 5 , 37 – 39 ). Moreover, during chemotherapy, NF-?B is transiently activated leading to chemoresistance phenotype and that the inactivation of NF-?B prior to the treatment with conventional therapeutics leads to sensitization (better cell killing) of cancer cells to conventional therapeutics as shown by our laboratory and others ( 5 , 28 , 33 , 34 , 40 ). Zhang et al recently reported that IKK inhibitor could confer sensitivity to PC cells and xenograft tumors by blocking activation of IKK/NF-?B pathway and downstream genes, which lead to enhanced effect of TNF-? on the growth of tumor cells through activation of apoptosis ( 41 ). We hypothesized that DIM at the molecular level can function as a “double edge sword” by abrogating the constitutively active DNA binding activity of NF-?B, and also by attenuating the chemotherapeutic drugs-induced activation of NF-?B. Our findings using isogenic Panc28 and Panc28 I?B?M PaCa cell line [with mutation in the two serine residues 32 and 36 of inhibitory I?B?, that blocks phosphorylation and degradation of I?B? protein and results in super repressor form of I?B? preventing nuclear translocation of NF-?B and its binding to regulatory sequences ( 42 )] convincingly showed that NF-?B activation plays a critical role in protecting the cells against apoptosis induced by cytotoxic agents, which provide direct evidence in support of our hypothesis and other published data ( 43 ). It is known that Bcl-xL, XIAP, cIAP and survivin (members of IAP proteins) are regulated by NF-?B at the transcriptional level, and also contributes to PC chemo-resistance which can be suppressed by NF-?B inhibition ( 35 , 36 , 44 – 46 ). Thus, by suppressing NF-?B, DIM induces cell growth inhibition and apoptosis which is in part due to inactivation of NF-?B and its downstream genes contributing to the reversal of chemoresistance. This phenomenon could be universal among various tumors because high expression of these proteins has also been shown to be associated with resistance to chemotherapy and poor prognosis in carcinomas of the lung, breast, ovary and esophagus ( 47 , 48 ). Survivin has been validated as a therapeutic target because of its dual function in inhibiting apoptosis and regulation of mitosis in concert with different cell cycle regulators ( 49 ). Recently, siRNA directed against survivin and NF-?B p65/relA leading to enhanced chemo-sensitivity of PC cells to gemcitabine has been reported ( 39 , 50 ) and these results are consistent with our current findings. Interestingly, our in vitro results were recapitulated in vivo using oxaliplatin as a test agent and we believe that similar phenomenon may exist with many other conventional therapeutics. Our data clearly show that the down-regulation of NF-?B and its downstream targets such as Bcl-xL, survivin and XIAP is responsible for the enhanced anti-tumor activity of the combination treatment in our orthotopic pancreatic tumor model, which support our in vivo imaging results and compliment pancreatic tumor weight at autopsy. Immunohistochemistry of tumor samples showed significantly reduced phospho-p65 immunostaining in combination group and increased apoptosis as documented by increased TUNEL staining and less immunoreactivity towards Ki67, indicative of reduced proliferation of cells in tumors treated with BR-DIM and oxaliplatin. These in vivo results were also consistent with our molecular studies in vitro , which clearly provide strong support in favor of our hypothesis that NF-?B is an important target in overcoming de novo and acquired chemo-resistance in PC, which could be easily achieved by our non-toxic strategy by utilizing B-DIM. In conclusion, we have presented evidence showing that pancreatic cancer cells with de novo and acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs such as, gemcitabine, cisplatin and oxaliplatin could be reversed by DIM pre-treatment and that this beneficial effect is in part due to inactivation of NF-?B and its downstream genes. Our in vitro findings together with our in vivo results provide confidence in support of further development of DIM (a non-toxic natural agent) as an adjunct to conventional therapeutics in future clinical trial for improving the treatment outcome of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.  DISCUSSION Here we report for the first time that DIM could be therapeutically exploited for the treatment of PC in combination with conventional therapeutics. We found that DIM was effective as a general inducer of apoptosis in PC cells by down-regulating several anti-apoptotic proteins but had no effect on normal human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells. Moreover, DIM was effective in down-regulating Bcl-2 family proteins, as well as IAP’s and survivin in PC cells abrogating treatment resistance via inhibition of caspase cascade ( 35 , 36 ). Evidence from our laboratory and others have shown that the transcription factor, NF-?B, is constitutively active in human pancreatic tumor specimens, as well as in PC cell lines and that NF-?B is intimately involved with de novo and acquired chemo-resistant phenotype of PC cells ( 5 , 37 – 39 ). Moreover, during chemotherapy, NF-?B is transiently activated leading to chemoresistance phenotype and that the inactivation of NF-?B prior to the treatment with conventional therapeutics leads to sensitization (better cell killing) of cancer cells to conventional therapeutics as shown by our laboratory and others ( 5 , 28 , 33 , 34 , 40 ). Zhang et al recently reported that IKK inhibitor could confer sensitivity to PC cells and xenograft tumors by blocking activation of IKK/NF-?B pathway and downstream genes, which lead to enhanced effect of TNF-? on the growth of tumor cells through activation of apoptosis ( 41 ). We hypothesized that DIM at the molecular level can function as a “double edge sword” by abrogating the constitutively active DNA binding activity of NF-?B, and also by attenuating the chemotherapeutic drugs-induced activation of NF-?B. Our findings using isogenic Panc28 and Panc28 I?B?M PaCa cell line [with mutation in the two serine residues 32 and 36 of inhibitory I?B?, that blocks phosphorylation and degradation of I?B? protein and results in super repressor form of I?B? preventing nuclear translocation of NF-?B and its binding to regulatory sequences ( 42 )] convincingly showed that NF-?B activation plays a critical role in protecting the cells against apoptosis induced by cytotoxic agents, which provide direct evidence in support of our hypothesis and other published data ( 43 ). It is known that Bcl-xL, XIAP, cIAP and survivin (members of IAP proteins) are regulated by NF-?B at the transcriptional level, and also contributes to PC chemo-resistance which can be suppressed by NF-?B inhibition ( 35 , 36 , 44 – 46 ). Thus, by suppressing NF-?B, DIM induces cell growth inhibition and apoptosis which is in part due to inactivation of NF-?B and its downstream genes contributing to the reversal of chemoresistance. This phenomenon could be universal among various tumors because high expression of these proteins has also been shown to be associated with resistance to chemotherapy and poor prognosis in carcinomas of the lung, breast, ovary and esophagus ( 47 , 48 ). Survivin has been validated as a therapeutic target because of its dual function in inhibiting apoptosis and regulation of mitosis in concert with different cell cycle regulators ( 49 ). Recently, siRNA directed against survivin and NF-?B p65/relA leading to enhanced chemo-sensitivity of PC cells to gemcitabine has been reported ( 39 , 50 ) and these results are consistent with our current findings. Interestingly, our in vitro results were recapitulated in vivo using oxaliplatin as a test agent and we believe that similar phenomenon may exist with many other conventional therapeutics. Our data clearly show that the down-regulation of NF-?B and its downstream targets such as Bcl-xL, survivin and XIAP is responsible for the enhanced anti-tumor activity of the combination treatment in our orthotopic pancreatic tumor model, which support our in vivo imaging results and compliment pancreatic tumor weight at autopsy. Immunohistochemistry of tumor samples showed significantly reduced phospho-p65 immunostaining in combination group and increased apoptosis as documented by increased TUNEL staining and less immunoreactivity towards Ki67, indicative of reduced proliferation of cells in tumors treated with BR-DIM and oxaliplatin. These in vivo results were also consistent with our molecular studies in vitro , which clearly provide strong support in favor of our hypothesis that NF-?B is an important target in overcoming de novo and acquired chemo-resistance in PC, which could be easily achieved by our non-toxic strategy by utilizing B-DIM. In conclusion, we have presented evidence showing that pancreatic cancer cells with de novo and acquired resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs such as, gemcitabine, cisplatin and oxaliplatin could be reversed by DIM pre-treatment and that this beneficial effect is in part due to inactivation of NF-?B and its downstream genes. Our in vitro findings together with our in vivo results provide confidence in support of further development of DIM (a non-toxic natural agent) as an adjunct to conventional therapeutics in future clinical trial for improving the treatment outcome of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.  Figures Fig 1 Evaluation of cell viability and apoptosis induced by DIM treatment (72 hrs) to PANC-1, Panc-28, Colo-357 and human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (HPDE) by MTT (A) or Histone DNA ELISA for apoptosis (B) * p<0.01; ** p< 0.001, relative to control. C- Western blot depicting alterations in the expression of apoptosis related proteins in whole cell lysates, and the release of cytochrome c (M-mitochondria; C-cytosolic) prepared from PANC-1 cells after treatment with different concentrations of DIM (0–45 ?M) for 72hrs. ?-actin protein was used as loading control and the signal was quantified as presented. D- Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry and % distribution of cells in G0/G1, G2/M or S phases of cell cycle. Figure 2 Fig 2A. Chemosensitization by DIM pre-exposure (30?M DIM for 24 hrs) of PC cells (PANC-1, Panc 28 and Colo 357 cells) followed by co-incubation with cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin for additional 72 hrs. Viable cells were evaluated by MTT * p<0.01; ** p< 0.001, relative to control. B- Photomicrograph of PANC-1 cells morphology following exposure to only DIM or combination treatment. C- Isobologram depicting synergy between combinations of DIM-cisplatin, DIM-gemcitabine and DIM-oxaliplatin in PANC-1 cells. Concentrations of cisplatin, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin and DIM are reflected on x- and y-axes respectively; Figure 3 Fig 3A. Sensitization of PC cells (PANC-1, Panc-28 and Colo 357 cells) to apoptosis as determined by Histone-DNA ELISA. Increased apoptotic response was evident in the combination group relative to untreated control or individual treatment groups (* p<0.01; ** p< 0.001, relative to control). B- Western blot analysis of anti-apoptotic and pro-survival molecules in whole cell lysates of PANC-1 PC cells exposed to either only DIM or cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs either single or in combination. C- Caspase-3 activity in cell lysates derived from PANC-1 PC cells under the conditions of pre-exposure to DIM as described above. A significant increase in caspase-3 activity over that of control and relative to individual drugs are evident (*p< 0.001). Figure 4 Fig 4A. Gel Shift Assay showing DIM induced down-regulation of NF-?B DNA binding activity in the nuclear extract of PANC-1 and Panc-28 cells treated with increasing concentrations of DIM (0–45?M) for 48hrs. B- NF-?B DNA binding activity in the nuclear extract of PANC-1 cells in the presence and/or absence of DIM, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin and the combinations as detailed under Materials and Methods. C- Comparative NF-?B DNA binding activity in nuclear extracts from Panc-28 and Panc28I?B?M cells and western blot showing down-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins. D- Comparative chemosensitization effect of DIM and oxaliplatin in Panc-28 and Panc28I?B?M cells showing greater loss of cell viability in Panc28I?B?M cells lacking activated NF-?B. Figure 5 Fig 5A. Schematic representation of in vivo experimental design. B- Isolated pancreatic tumor weight showing greater in vivo therapeutic efficacy between BR-DIM and oxaliplatin treatment based on tumor weight relative to untreated control group (*p<0.05;** p<0.01; ***p<0.001). C- Comparative IR fluorescence imaging of orthotropic tumors (left panel) in mice demonstrating therapeutic benefit of BR-DIM pretreatment and oxaliplatin. Less fluorescent intensity of the IRDye-800CW EGF-targeting agent in the B-DIM pretreated group was found which parallels with reduced tumor size seen after sacrificing the animals. Right panel represents quantification of the imaging data using Odyssey software (*p<0.05; **p<0.01). D- Comparative metastatic pancreatic tumor frequency and tumor size distribution between different groups of mice treated with either BR-DIM, oxaliplatin alone or their combinations. Figure 6 Fig 6A. Gel shift assay for NF-?B on 2–3 randomly selected primary pancreatic tumor tissues form each experimental group showing loss of NF-?B in combination treatment group. B- Western blots analysis for survivin, Bcl-xL and XIAP and PARP in primary pancreatic tumors harvested from mice of different treatment groups showing loss of NF-?B related anti apoptotic proteins and induced PARP cleavage. C– H&E and Immunohistochemical demonstration of phospho-p65, apoptosis (TUNEL) and Ki-67 protein in tissues harvested from tumor bearing mouse.  Figures Fig 1 Evaluation of cell viability and apoptosis induced by DIM treatment (72 hrs) to PANC-1, Panc-28, Colo-357 and human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (HPDE) by MTT (A) or Histone DNA ELISA for apoptosis (B) * p<0.01; ** p< 0.001, relative to control. C- Western blot depicting alterations in the expression of apoptosis related proteins in whole cell lysates, and the release of cytochrome c (M-mitochondria; C-cytosolic) prepared from PANC-1 cells after treatment with different concentrations of DIM (0–45 ?M) for 72hrs. ?-actin protein was used as loading control and the signal was quantified as presented. D- Cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry and % distribution of cells in G0/G1, G2/M or S phases of cell cycle. Figure 2 Fig 2A. Chemosensitization by DIM pre-exposure (30?M DIM for 24 hrs) of PC cells (PANC-1, Panc 28 and Colo 357 cells) followed by co-incubation with cisplatin, gemcitabine or oxaliplatin for additional 72 hrs. Viable cells were evaluated by MTT * p<0.01; ** p< 0.001, relative to control. B- Photomicrograph of PANC-1 cells morphology following exposure to only DIM or combination treatment. C- Isobologram depicting synergy between combinations of DIM-cisplatin, DIM-gemcitabine and DIM-oxaliplatin in PANC-1 cells. Concentrations of cisplatin, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin and DIM are reflected on x- and y-axes respectively; Figure 3 Fig 3A. Sensitization of PC cells (PANC-1, Panc-28 and Colo 357 cells) to apoptosis as determined by Histone-DNA ELISA. Increased apoptotic response was evident in the combination group relative to untreated control or individual treatment groups (* p<0.01; ** p< 0.001, relative to control). B- Western blot analysis of anti-apoptotic and pro-survival molecules in whole cell lysates of PANC-1 PC cells exposed to either only DIM or cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs either single or in combination. C- Caspase-3 activity in cell lysates derived from PANC-1 PC cells under the conditions of pre-exposure to DIM as described above. A significant increase in caspase-3 activity over that of control and relative to individual drugs are evident (*p< 0.001). Figure 4 Fig 4A. Gel Shift Assay showing DIM induced down-regulation of NF-?B DNA binding activity in the nuclear extract of PANC-1 and Panc-28 cells treated with increasing concentrations of DIM (0–45?M) for 48hrs. B- NF-?B DNA binding activity in the nuclear extract of PANC-1 cells in the presence and/or absence of DIM, gemcitabine, oxaliplatin and the combinations as detailed under Materials and Methods. C- Comparative NF-?B DNA binding activity in nuclear extracts from Panc-28 and Panc28I?B?M cells and western blot showing down-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins. D- Comparative chemosensitization effect of DIM and oxaliplatin in Panc-28 and Panc28I?B?M cells showing greater loss of cell viability in Panc28I?B?M cells lacking activated NF-?B. Figure 5 Fig 5A. Schematic representation of in vivo experimental design. B- Isolated pancreatic tumor weight showing greater in vivo therapeutic efficacy between BR-DIM and oxaliplatin treatment based on tumor weight relative to untreated control group (*p<0.05;** p<0.01; ***p<0.001). C- Comparative IR fluorescence imaging of orthotropic tumors (left panel) in mice demonstrating therapeutic benefit of BR-DIM pretreatment and oxaliplatin. Less fluorescent intensity of the IRDye-800CW EGF-targeting agent in the B-DIM pretreated group was found which parallels with reduced tumor size seen after sacrificing the animals. Right panel represents quantification of the imaging data using Odyssey software (*p<0.05; **p<0.01). D- Comparative metastatic pancreatic tumor frequency and tumor size distribution between different groups of mice treated with either BR-DIM, oxaliplatin alone or their combinations. Figure 6 Fig 6A. Gel shift assay for NF-?B on 2–3 randomly selected primary pancreatic tumor tissues form each experimental group showing loss of NF-?B in combination treatment group. B- Western blots analysis for survivin, Bcl-xL and XIAP and PARP in primary pancreatic tumors harvested from mice of different treatment groups showing loss of NF-?B related anti apoptotic proteins and induced PARP cleavage. C– H&E and Immunohistochemical demonstration of phospho-p65, apoptosis (TUNEL) and Ki-67 protein in tissues harvested from tumor bearing mouse. 