Indoor UV tanning and skin cancer: health risks and opportunities Purpose of review Skin cancer incidence is higher than that of any other human malignancy, and yet one of its root causes (ultraviolet radiation) is perhaps better understood than any other human carcinogen. The roles of ultraviolet radiation exposure and indoor tanning behaviors on skin cancer risk are explored here. Recent findings Studies from the past several years have shown a significant association between ever-use of an indoor tanning facility and an increased risk of basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and melanoma. The association between indoor tanning and skin cancer is particularly strong among those who first used a tanning facility in early adulthood. Elevated vitamin D levels have been suggested to protect against various internal malignancies and other disease states, but sources of vitamin D that do not require UV exposure are easily available. Summary Although additional research is needed to understand fully the relationship between UV and skin cancer, it is already clear that indoor tanning bed use represents an avoidable risk factor for melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer – both of which may be lethal. Acting upon this information provides a unique opportunity for protecting the public health.  Conclusions Despite claims by the tanning industry, recent evidence supports an association between indoor tanning and increased risk of skin cancers, including BCC, SCC, and melanoma. While association studies have correlated vitamin D levels with protection against various internal malignancies and other disease states, acquiring vitamin D by cutaneous UV exposure is not necessary, and non-carcinogenic sources, such as dietary supplementation, are to be preferred. Moreover prospective randomized trials are needed (and some are underway) to directly test the role(s) of vitamin D supplements at varied doses relative to a variety of cancer endpoints. Given the high prevalence of indoor and outdoor tanning, especially among younger individuals, it is a public health imperative to educate the general population about associated risks and set in place opportunities to utilize this information to more effectively prevent skin cancer.  Figures Figure 1 Schematic of molecular steps in the tanning and UV-carcinogenesis pathways. DNA damage appears to be a common/proximal intermediate in both pathways. Figure 2 Relative risk of melanoma associated with early first exposure to indoor tanning: estimates of 7 studies and summary estimate. Reprinted with permission [ 14** ]. 