Signaling inputs to progesterone receptor gene regulation and promoter selectivity Progesterone receptors (PR) select and control genetic programs in the breast during normal mammary gland development, and progestin-driven processes contribute to the initiation and/or progression of breast cancer. Throughout the mammalian life span, progesterone exerts varying biological consequences on the mammary epithelial compartment, from brief proliferative spurts that occur with each luteal phase of the menstrual cycle to the massive expansion of the pregnant gland in preparation for lactation. These processes, while important developmentally, can become deregulated in breast cancer, thereby contributing to unchecked proliferation, increased survival, and invasive behaviors. Recently, our lab has focused on the molecular mechanisms, including phosphorylation events, by which PRs select specific target genes in response to progestins and other mitogenic hormonal signals (i.e. EGF, heregulin). Herein, we discuss the actions of cytoplasmic signaling molecules such as c-Src and mitogen-activated protein kinases as key mediators of PR promoter selectivity.  5. Conclusions Collectively, the available data indicate that phosphorylation of steroid hormone receptors serves to shuttle subsets of the pool of differentially modified receptor species in the cell to different promoters instead of the previous notion of fine tuning global receptor activity at “uniform” (i.e. model reporter gene) promoters. This is to suggest that receptors phosphorylated on Ser345 bind Sp1 and localize to promoters such as p21 or EGFR, while receptors phosphorylated on Ser294 may be shuttled more efficiently to separate promoters including that of HB-EGF ( Fig. 2 ). Still other promoters are insensitive to these modifications, such as MUC1, SGK, and Tissue Factor. In order to determine the specific transcriptional consequences of phosphorylation at these endogenous regulatory sites we must move away from experiments using generic Hormone Response Element (HRE) reporters and examine endogenous gene targets for changes in subsets of hormone responsive genes. For example, liganded S345A PR-B mutant receptors are comparable to wt PR-B receptors in 2xPRE-luciferase reporter assays, while unresponsive to progestins on a subset of non-classical progestin responsive genes (i.e. Sp1-containing endogenous promoter contexts). Alternatively, when stably expressed in breast cancer cells, S294A PR-B receptors are weak transcription factors on transiently introduced 2xPRE-luciferase constructs, yet these mutant receptors can activate transcription from the endogenous SGK promoter (unpublished observation). Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of PR promoter selectivity provides a mechanism for cells to integrate a variety of external signals and select gene programs accordingly. In this manner, phospho-PRs act as sensors for growth factor-initiated pathways and couple them to hormonal controls. For example, in breast cancer models, progesterone alone elicits a weaker growth response in soft agar relative to progesterone plus EGF; the effects of EGF in this assay are abolished by mutation of PR Ser294 ( Daniel et al., 2007b ). Thus, PR is functioning as a node of integration for EGFR signaling. Progesterone-initiated rapid signaling events, growth factor signaling inputs, and PR mediated genomic actions presumably converge to produce precisely timed proliferation in the mammary gland. Any and all of these pathways can be corrupted in breast cancer. Targeting them collectively using selective protein kinase inhibitors and antiprogestins is likely to be a productive strategy. 