Housekeeping genes in prostate tumorigenesis Housekeeping (HK) genes are involved in basic cellular functions and tend to be constitutively expressed across various tissues and conditions. A number of studies have analyzed the value of HK genes as an internal standard for assessing gene expression, but the role of HK genes in cancer development has never been specifically addressed. In this study, we sought to evaluate the expression of HK genes during prostate tumorigenesis. We performed a meta-analysis of gene expression during the transition from normal prostate (NP) to localized prostate cancer (LPC) ( i.e ., NP>LPC) and from localized to metastatic prostate cancer (MPC) ( i.e ., LPC>MPC). We found that HK genes are more likely to be differentially expressed during prostate tumorigenesis than is the average gene in the human genome, suggesting that prostate tumorigenesis is driven by modulation of the expression of HK genes. Cell-cycle genes and proliferation markers were up-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. We also found that the genes encoding ribosomal proteins were up-regulated in the NP>LPC and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. The expression of heat shock proteins was up-regulated during the LPC>MPC transition, suggesting that in its advanced stages, prostate tumor is under cellular stress. The results of these analyses suggest that during prostate tumorigenesis, there is a period when the tumor is under cellular stress and therefore may be the most vulnerable and responsive to treatment.  Introduction Although most genes are constitutively expressed in only a subset of tissues, some genes are required for the maintenance of basal cellular functions and tend to be constitutively expressed across various human tissues and conditions. These genes are called housekeeping (HK) genes 1 - 3 . Several sets of HK genes have been proposed 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 . Results from a number of studies suggest that modulation of the expression of HK genes is associated with cancer. For example, cytochromes are associated with the risk and progression of pancreatic cancer 6 , 7 , and translation initiation factors play a role in the development of colonic and esophageal cancers 8 , 9 . In addition, abnormal expression of ribosomal proteins was reported to be a hallmark of colorectal cancer 10 . Although these and other results suggest that abnormal expression of the HK genes plays an important role in carcinogenesis, a systematic assessment of their role in cancer development had not been yet conducted. We therefore performed a meta-analysis of publicly available gene expression data to evaluate the expression of HK genes during prostate cancer progression. Our results revealed an association between modulation of expression of HK genes and tumor progression and also suggest that the development of prostate cancer is driven by modulated expression of HK genes.  Material and methods HK genes We used 3 lists of HK genes for our meta-analysis. The first list comprises genes showing constant expression in various human tissues 4 . Because that study was reported in Trends in Genetics , we called this set of HK genes TG_HK. The second list was obtained by using a naïve Bayes classifier with specific functional characteristics of HK genes 1 ; we called this set of HK genes NB_HK. The third list of genes came from an article by de Jonge et al . 2 . The authors identified a set of 15 genes encoding for ribosomal proteins as the most stably expressed across multiple cell types and different experimental conditions. Thus we called this third set of HK genes 15_HK. These 3 lists overlap substantially. We found that 124 (22%) of the HK genes were the same in the TG_HK and NB_HK lists. And among the 15 most stably expressed genes from the de Jonge et al . paper 2 , 6 were also reported in the TG_HK list and 14, in the NB_HK list. Gene expression datasets The list of the gene expression datasets we used in this study is shown in Table I . Datasets were retrieved from the Oncomine database 11 , accessed December 15, 2008. We used 18 datasets in total: 11 for the transition from normal prostate (NP) to localized prostate cancer (LPC) and 7 for the transition from LPC to metastatic prostate cancer (MPC). Meta-analysis To estimate the overall statistical significance based on the statistical significance of the individual tests, we used an extension of Stouffer's method 12 . This approach is based on estimating the standard normal deviation, Z . The individual probability, p , is first converted to a Z score, and the Z scores are summed up across studies. This sum is divided by the square root of the number of tests (k). The sum of normal deviates is itself a normal deviate and can be back-transformed into an overall p ; the probability level associated with the sum of Z yields an overall level of significance. The advantage of this method lies in its increased power: if, for example, several tests consistently favored the research question but failed to reach the level of significance because of small sample size, the overall test would more easily become significant. This approach is similar to the approach recently proposed by Ochsner et al. 13 . The selection of the method of meta-analysis for our study was dictated by the available data: for the majority of the datasets the raw gene expression data were not available, while t-tests and corresponding p values were easily accessible for individual probes. Distribution of the genes by pathways We used the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) 14 to assess the distribution of the differentially expressed genes across the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways 15 , 16 . DAVID tests the null hypothesis that the genes are uniformly distributed across the pathways. The p values characterize the statistical evidence for the clustering of the genes by the pathways; the lower the p value, the stronger the statistical evidence that the genes tend to cluster in a specific pathway. Student's t-test was used to compare mean expression values between primary tumors with various Gleason scores.  HK genes We used 3 lists of HK genes for our meta-analysis. The first list comprises genes showing constant expression in various human tissues 4 . Because that study was reported in Trends in Genetics , we called this set of HK genes TG_HK. The second list was obtained by using a naïve Bayes classifier with specific functional characteristics of HK genes 1 ; we called this set of HK genes NB_HK. The third list of genes came from an article by de Jonge et al . 2 . The authors identified a set of 15 genes encoding for ribosomal proteins as the most stably expressed across multiple cell types and different experimental conditions. Thus we called this third set of HK genes 15_HK. These 3 lists overlap substantially. We found that 124 (22%) of the HK genes were the same in the TG_HK and NB_HK lists. And among the 15 most stably expressed genes from the de Jonge et al . paper 2 , 6 were also reported in the TG_HK list and 14, in the NB_HK list.  Gene expression datasets The list of the gene expression datasets we used in this study is shown in Table I . Datasets were retrieved from the Oncomine database 11 , accessed December 15, 2008. We used 18 datasets in total: 11 for the transition from normal prostate (NP) to localized prostate cancer (LPC) and 7 for the transition from LPC to metastatic prostate cancer (MPC).  Meta-analysis To estimate the overall statistical significance based on the statistical significance of the individual tests, we used an extension of Stouffer's method 12 . This approach is based on estimating the standard normal deviation, Z . The individual probability, p , is first converted to a Z score, and the Z scores are summed up across studies. This sum is divided by the square root of the number of tests (k). The sum of normal deviates is itself a normal deviate and can be back-transformed into an overall p ; the probability level associated with the sum of Z yields an overall level of significance. The advantage of this method lies in its increased power: if, for example, several tests consistently favored the research question but failed to reach the level of significance because of small sample size, the overall test would more easily become significant. This approach is similar to the approach recently proposed by Ochsner et al. 13 . The selection of the method of meta-analysis for our study was dictated by the available data: for the majority of the datasets the raw gene expression data were not available, while t-tests and corresponding p values were easily accessible for individual probes.  Distribution of the genes by pathways We used the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) 14 to assess the distribution of the differentially expressed genes across the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways 15 , 16 . DAVID tests the null hypothesis that the genes are uniformly distributed across the pathways. The p values characterize the statistical evidence for the clustering of the genes by the pathways; the lower the p value, the stronger the statistical evidence that the genes tend to cluster in a specific pathway. Student's t-test was used to compare mean expression values between primary tumors with various Gleason scores.  Results Proportions of the up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions We estimated the proportion of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Genes with global p values of ?10?6 were considered to be differentially expressed. We chose this threshold as being a conservative correction for multiple testing with 19,582 as the total number of genes in the NP>LPC transition and 17,902 as the total number in the LPC>MPC transition. Table II shows the numbers of up- and down-regulated genes. We found that 2,415 (12.3%) of the genes were differentially expressed in the NP>LPC transition. In the LPC>MPC transition, the percentage of differentially expressed genes was lower: 1,574 genes (8.8%). Significant genes in the NP>LPC transition were largely up-regulated—55% of the differentially expressed genes—whereas in the LPC>MPC transition, the significant genes were largely down-regulated—67% of all significant genes. HK genes are more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up- or down-regulated On the basis of what we know about the expression of the HK genes, we expected them to be relatively stably expressed in prostate tumorigenesis. However, the results of our analysis revealed the opposite; the HK genes had a higher proportion of differentially expressed genes than the average gene in the human genome: 173/563 = 0.31 vs. 2,394/17,859 = 0.13 (?2 = 135.1, df =1, p << 0.001) for TG_HK genes ( Fig. 1 ). The results were similar for the 3 lists of HK genes. We found that in the NP>LPC transition, HK genes were more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up-regulated: 122/563 = 0.22 vs.1,319/17,859 = 0.07 (?2 = 152.5, df =1, p << 0.001). In the LPC>MPC transition, HK genes were more likely to be down-regulated than the average gene in the human genome: 65/563 = 0.12 vs. 1,052/17,859 = 0.06 (?2 = 29.7, df =1, p << 0.001). Different functional categories of HK genes may have different expression patterns in prostate tumor progression To look at the expression of the HK genes in more detail, we stratified them into 8 categories: 1) ribosomal proteins, 2) cell communication genes, 3) protein expression (translation) genes, 4) metabolism genes, 5) genes associated with transcription (gene expression), 6) cell structure and motility genes, 7) defense genes, and 8) cell division genes. This stratification was done according to Haverty et al . 3 . (The lists of the genes in each category are in the Supporting Information.) Table III shows the proportions of up- and down-regulated genes for each category. For most of the functional categories, the expression patterns ( i.e ., the direction and number of differentially expressed genes) were similar in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. HK genes encoding for ribosomal proteins, however, had extremely different patterns of gene expression: in the NP>LPC transition, all ribosomal genes were up-regulated, but in the LPC>MPC transition, all differentially expressed ribosomal genes were down-regulated. We also found that the expression pattern of the genes involved in cell communication differed in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Cell communication genes were preferentially up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. Gleason score and the expression of ribosomal genes To pinpoint the time when the expression of ribosomal genes changes from up- to down-regulation, we analyzed their expression in clinically localized cancers with different Gleason scores. We used gene expression data from 3 studies: Luo 17 , Singh et al . 18 , and Welsh et al. 19 . First, we found that the ribosomal genes are expressed at a higher level than the average gene in the human genome is, which is consistent with their housekeeping role. We also found that expression of the ribosomal genes increased as the Gleason sum score increased from 5 (2 + 3) to 8 (4 + 4) ( Fig. 2 ). The average expression level of the ribosomal genes significantly dropped, however, as the Gleason sum score increased from 8 (4 + 4) to 9 (4 + 5) ( t = 2.7, df =14, p = 0.02), suggesting that the turning point from up- to down-regulation lies between Gleason score 8 (4 + 4) and 9 (4 + 5). Clustering of the differentially expressed genes in KEGG pathways According to the changes in their expression during the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions, we subdivided all genes into 8 groups: 1) genes up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition, with no difference in the expression level in the LPC>MPC transition, 2) down-regulated in NP>LPC, with no difference in LPC>MPC, 3) up-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 4) down-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 5) up-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC, 6) up- regulated in NP>LPC and down-regulated in LPC>MPC, 7) down-regulated in NP>LPC and up-regulated in LPC>MPC, and 8) down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC. We then analyzed the distribution of the genes in each category by KEGG pathways. Table IV shows the results of the analysis with p values after Benjamini corrections (DAVID's adjustment on multiple testing) 14 . We found that the genes that were significant in only 1 of the transitions ( i.e., the first 4 groups) showed no significant clustering by pathway. However, the genes significant in both transitions showed strong clustering. More often than one would expect, the genes up-regulated in both transitions fell in the cell cycle pathway. The cell cycle genes BUB1B, MAD2L1, CDC2, PTTG1, E2F3, CDC6, CCNA2, ORC2L, MCM4, MDM2, CCNE2, GSK3B, CCNB2, BUB1, CDK4, CCNB1, and PRKDC include several cycling and cycling-dependent kinases, suggesting that the proliferation rate increases during prostate tumorigenesis. The genes that were down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions were clustered in the focal-adhesion and actin cytoskeleton–regulation pathways. These genes include the integrins and cadherins ITGA2, ITGA5, ITGA7, ITGA8, ITGB1, ITGB8, CDH3, and CDH19 . Expression of cell proliferation markers To predict the cell proliferation rate, we estimated the expression of 13 cell proliferation markers: TOP2A, MKI67, PLK1, MCM7, CENPF, MCM6, PCNA, FEN1, MCM2, WT1, CLSPN, CCND1, and MIB1. There is published evidence that the expression of all these markers positively correlates with the proliferation rate 20 - 32 . We found that in the NP>LPC transition, all of the proliferation markers except MCM6 were up-regulated, and in the LPC>MPC transition, all proliferation markers, including MCM6 , were up-regulated ( Table V ). This suggests that the cell proliferation rate increases during prostate tumor progression. Heat shock genes Numerous studies demonstrated that stress changes the expression of multiple genes, with most being down-regulated. 33 , 34 Because gene expression is mostly suppressed in the LPC>MPC transition, one can suppose that the prostate tumor is under stress during this time. We know that increased expression of the heat shock genes indicates cellular stress 35 - 37 . We therefore assessed the expression of heat shock proteins in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. The 34 heat shock genes were retrieved from the NCBI database (Supporting Information). We found that in the NP>LPC transition, 16 heat shock genes were differentially expressed: 9 (56%) were up-regulated, and 7 (44%) were down-regulated. These proportions are very similar to the overall proportions of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC transition: 55% and 45%, respectively. In the LPC>MPC transition, 14 genes were differentially expressed; 10 of them (71%) were up-regulated. The excess of up-regulated heat shock genes was statistically significant (?2 = 4.3, df = 1, p = 0.01), suggesting that during the transition from localized to metastatic prostate cancer, the tumor cells are under stress.  Results Proportions of the up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions We estimated the proportion of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Genes with global p values of ?10?6 were considered to be differentially expressed. We chose this threshold as being a conservative correction for multiple testing with 19,582 as the total number of genes in the NP>LPC transition and 17,902 as the total number in the LPC>MPC transition. Table II shows the numbers of up- and down-regulated genes. We found that 2,415 (12.3%) of the genes were differentially expressed in the NP>LPC transition. In the LPC>MPC transition, the percentage of differentially expressed genes was lower: 1,574 genes (8.8%). Significant genes in the NP>LPC transition were largely up-regulated—55% of the differentially expressed genes—whereas in the LPC>MPC transition, the significant genes were largely down-regulated—67% of all significant genes. HK genes are more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up- or down-regulated On the basis of what we know about the expression of the HK genes, we expected them to be relatively stably expressed in prostate tumorigenesis. However, the results of our analysis revealed the opposite; the HK genes had a higher proportion of differentially expressed genes than the average gene in the human genome: 173/563 = 0.31 vs. 2,394/17,859 = 0.13 (?2 = 135.1, df =1, p << 0.001) for TG_HK genes ( Fig. 1 ). The results were similar for the 3 lists of HK genes. We found that in the NP>LPC transition, HK genes were more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up-regulated: 122/563 = 0.22 vs.1,319/17,859 = 0.07 (?2 = 152.5, df =1, p << 0.001). In the LPC>MPC transition, HK genes were more likely to be down-regulated than the average gene in the human genome: 65/563 = 0.12 vs. 1,052/17,859 = 0.06 (?2 = 29.7, df =1, p << 0.001). Different functional categories of HK genes may have different expression patterns in prostate tumor progression To look at the expression of the HK genes in more detail, we stratified them into 8 categories: 1) ribosomal proteins, 2) cell communication genes, 3) protein expression (translation) genes, 4) metabolism genes, 5) genes associated with transcription (gene expression), 6) cell structure and motility genes, 7) defense genes, and 8) cell division genes. This stratification was done according to Haverty et al . 3 . (The lists of the genes in each category are in the Supporting Information.) Table III shows the proportions of up- and down-regulated genes for each category. For most of the functional categories, the expression patterns ( i.e ., the direction and number of differentially expressed genes) were similar in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. HK genes encoding for ribosomal proteins, however, had extremely different patterns of gene expression: in the NP>LPC transition, all ribosomal genes were up-regulated, but in the LPC>MPC transition, all differentially expressed ribosomal genes were down-regulated. We also found that the expression pattern of the genes involved in cell communication differed in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Cell communication genes were preferentially up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. Gleason score and the expression of ribosomal genes To pinpoint the time when the expression of ribosomal genes changes from up- to down-regulation, we analyzed their expression in clinically localized cancers with different Gleason scores. We used gene expression data from 3 studies: Luo 17 , Singh et al . 18 , and Welsh et al. 19 . First, we found that the ribosomal genes are expressed at a higher level than the average gene in the human genome is, which is consistent with their housekeeping role. We also found that expression of the ribosomal genes increased as the Gleason sum score increased from 5 (2 + 3) to 8 (4 + 4) ( Fig. 2 ). The average expression level of the ribosomal genes significantly dropped, however, as the Gleason sum score increased from 8 (4 + 4) to 9 (4 + 5) ( t = 2.7, df =14, p = 0.02), suggesting that the turning point from up- to down-regulation lies between Gleason score 8 (4 + 4) and 9 (4 + 5). Clustering of the differentially expressed genes in KEGG pathways According to the changes in their expression during the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions, we subdivided all genes into 8 groups: 1) genes up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition, with no difference in the expression level in the LPC>MPC transition, 2) down-regulated in NP>LPC, with no difference in LPC>MPC, 3) up-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 4) down-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 5) up-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC, 6) up- regulated in NP>LPC and down-regulated in LPC>MPC, 7) down-regulated in NP>LPC and up-regulated in LPC>MPC, and 8) down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC. We then analyzed the distribution of the genes in each category by KEGG pathways. Table IV shows the results of the analysis with p values after Benjamini corrections (DAVID's adjustment on multiple testing) 14 . We found that the genes that were significant in only 1 of the transitions ( i.e., the first 4 groups) showed no significant clustering by pathway. However, the genes significant in both transitions showed strong clustering. More often than one would expect, the genes up-regulated in both transitions fell in the cell cycle pathway. The cell cycle genes BUB1B, MAD2L1, CDC2, PTTG1, E2F3, CDC6, CCNA2, ORC2L, MCM4, MDM2, CCNE2, GSK3B, CCNB2, BUB1, CDK4, CCNB1, and PRKDC include several cycling and cycling-dependent kinases, suggesting that the proliferation rate increases during prostate tumorigenesis. The genes that were down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions were clustered in the focal-adhesion and actin cytoskeleton–regulation pathways. These genes include the integrins and cadherins ITGA2, ITGA5, ITGA7, ITGA8, ITGB1, ITGB8, CDH3, and CDH19 . Expression of cell proliferation markers To predict the cell proliferation rate, we estimated the expression of 13 cell proliferation markers: TOP2A, MKI67, PLK1, MCM7, CENPF, MCM6, PCNA, FEN1, MCM2, WT1, CLSPN, CCND1, and MIB1. There is published evidence that the expression of all these markers positively correlates with the proliferation rate 20 - 32 . We found that in the NP>LPC transition, all of the proliferation markers except MCM6 were up-regulated, and in the LPC>MPC transition, all proliferation markers, including MCM6 , were up-regulated ( Table V ). This suggests that the cell proliferation rate increases during prostate tumor progression. Heat shock genes Numerous studies demonstrated that stress changes the expression of multiple genes, with most being down-regulated. 33 , 34 Because gene expression is mostly suppressed in the LPC>MPC transition, one can suppose that the prostate tumor is under stress during this time. We know that increased expression of the heat shock genes indicates cellular stress 35 - 37 . We therefore assessed the expression of heat shock proteins in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. The 34 heat shock genes were retrieved from the NCBI database (Supporting Information). We found that in the NP>LPC transition, 16 heat shock genes were differentially expressed: 9 (56%) were up-regulated, and 7 (44%) were down-regulated. These proportions are very similar to the overall proportions of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC transition: 55% and 45%, respectively. In the LPC>MPC transition, 14 genes were differentially expressed; 10 of them (71%) were up-regulated. The excess of up-regulated heat shock genes was statistically significant (?2 = 4.3, df = 1, p = 0.01), suggesting that during the transition from localized to metastatic prostate cancer, the tumor cells are under stress.  Proportions of the up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions We estimated the proportion of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Genes with global p values of ?10?6 were considered to be differentially expressed. We chose this threshold as being a conservative correction for multiple testing with 19,582 as the total number of genes in the NP>LPC transition and 17,902 as the total number in the LPC>MPC transition. Table II shows the numbers of up- and down-regulated genes. We found that 2,415 (12.3%) of the genes were differentially expressed in the NP>LPC transition. In the LPC>MPC transition, the percentage of differentially expressed genes was lower: 1,574 genes (8.8%). Significant genes in the NP>LPC transition were largely up-regulated—55% of the differentially expressed genes—whereas in the LPC>MPC transition, the significant genes were largely down-regulated—67% of all significant genes.  Proportions of the up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions We estimated the proportion of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Genes with global p values of ?10?6 were considered to be differentially expressed. We chose this threshold as being a conservative correction for multiple testing with 19,582 as the total number of genes in the NP>LPC transition and 17,902 as the total number in the LPC>MPC transition. Table II shows the numbers of up- and down-regulated genes. We found that 2,415 (12.3%) of the genes were differentially expressed in the NP>LPC transition. In the LPC>MPC transition, the percentage of differentially expressed genes was lower: 1,574 genes (8.8%). Significant genes in the NP>LPC transition were largely up-regulated—55% of the differentially expressed genes—whereas in the LPC>MPC transition, the significant genes were largely down-regulated—67% of all significant genes.  HK genes are more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up- or down-regulated On the basis of what we know about the expression of the HK genes, we expected them to be relatively stably expressed in prostate tumorigenesis. However, the results of our analysis revealed the opposite; the HK genes had a higher proportion of differentially expressed genes than the average gene in the human genome: 173/563 = 0.31 vs. 2,394/17,859 = 0.13 (?2 = 135.1, df =1, p << 0.001) for TG_HK genes ( Fig. 1 ). The results were similar for the 3 lists of HK genes. We found that in the NP>LPC transition, HK genes were more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up-regulated: 122/563 = 0.22 vs.1,319/17,859 = 0.07 (?2 = 152.5, df =1, p << 0.001). In the LPC>MPC transition, HK genes were more likely to be down-regulated than the average gene in the human genome: 65/563 = 0.12 vs. 1,052/17,859 = 0.06 (?2 = 29.7, df =1, p << 0.001).  HK genes are more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up- or down-regulated On the basis of what we know about the expression of the HK genes, we expected them to be relatively stably expressed in prostate tumorigenesis. However, the results of our analysis revealed the opposite; the HK genes had a higher proportion of differentially expressed genes than the average gene in the human genome: 173/563 = 0.31 vs. 2,394/17,859 = 0.13 (?2 = 135.1, df =1, p << 0.001) for TG_HK genes ( Fig. 1 ). The results were similar for the 3 lists of HK genes. We found that in the NP>LPC transition, HK genes were more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be up-regulated: 122/563 = 0.22 vs.1,319/17,859 = 0.07 (?2 = 152.5, df =1, p << 0.001). In the LPC>MPC transition, HK genes were more likely to be down-regulated than the average gene in the human genome: 65/563 = 0.12 vs. 1,052/17,859 = 0.06 (?2 = 29.7, df =1, p << 0.001).  Different functional categories of HK genes may have different expression patterns in prostate tumor progression To look at the expression of the HK genes in more detail, we stratified them into 8 categories: 1) ribosomal proteins, 2) cell communication genes, 3) protein expression (translation) genes, 4) metabolism genes, 5) genes associated with transcription (gene expression), 6) cell structure and motility genes, 7) defense genes, and 8) cell division genes. This stratification was done according to Haverty et al . 3 . (The lists of the genes in each category are in the Supporting Information.) Table III shows the proportions of up- and down-regulated genes for each category. For most of the functional categories, the expression patterns ( i.e ., the direction and number of differentially expressed genes) were similar in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. HK genes encoding for ribosomal proteins, however, had extremely different patterns of gene expression: in the NP>LPC transition, all ribosomal genes were up-regulated, but in the LPC>MPC transition, all differentially expressed ribosomal genes were down-regulated. We also found that the expression pattern of the genes involved in cell communication differed in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Cell communication genes were preferentially up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition.  Different functional categories of HK genes may have different expression patterns in prostate tumor progression To look at the expression of the HK genes in more detail, we stratified them into 8 categories: 1) ribosomal proteins, 2) cell communication genes, 3) protein expression (translation) genes, 4) metabolism genes, 5) genes associated with transcription (gene expression), 6) cell structure and motility genes, 7) defense genes, and 8) cell division genes. This stratification was done according to Haverty et al . 3 . (The lists of the genes in each category are in the Supporting Information.) Table III shows the proportions of up- and down-regulated genes for each category. For most of the functional categories, the expression patterns ( i.e ., the direction and number of differentially expressed genes) were similar in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. HK genes encoding for ribosomal proteins, however, had extremely different patterns of gene expression: in the NP>LPC transition, all ribosomal genes were up-regulated, but in the LPC>MPC transition, all differentially expressed ribosomal genes were down-regulated. We also found that the expression pattern of the genes involved in cell communication differed in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. Cell communication genes were preferentially up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition.  Gleason score and the expression of ribosomal genes To pinpoint the time when the expression of ribosomal genes changes from up- to down-regulation, we analyzed their expression in clinically localized cancers with different Gleason scores. We used gene expression data from 3 studies: Luo 17 , Singh et al . 18 , and Welsh et al. 19 . First, we found that the ribosomal genes are expressed at a higher level than the average gene in the human genome is, which is consistent with their housekeeping role. We also found that expression of the ribosomal genes increased as the Gleason sum score increased from 5 (2 + 3) to 8 (4 + 4) ( Fig. 2 ). The average expression level of the ribosomal genes significantly dropped, however, as the Gleason sum score increased from 8 (4 + 4) to 9 (4 + 5) ( t = 2.7, df =14, p = 0.02), suggesting that the turning point from up- to down-regulation lies between Gleason score 8 (4 + 4) and 9 (4 + 5).  Gleason score and the expression of ribosomal genes To pinpoint the time when the expression of ribosomal genes changes from up- to down-regulation, we analyzed their expression in clinically localized cancers with different Gleason scores. We used gene expression data from 3 studies: Luo 17 , Singh et al . 18 , and Welsh et al. 19 . First, we found that the ribosomal genes are expressed at a higher level than the average gene in the human genome is, which is consistent with their housekeeping role. We also found that expression of the ribosomal genes increased as the Gleason sum score increased from 5 (2 + 3) to 8 (4 + 4) ( Fig. 2 ). The average expression level of the ribosomal genes significantly dropped, however, as the Gleason sum score increased from 8 (4 + 4) to 9 (4 + 5) ( t = 2.7, df =14, p = 0.02), suggesting that the turning point from up- to down-regulation lies between Gleason score 8 (4 + 4) and 9 (4 + 5).  Clustering of the differentially expressed genes in KEGG pathways According to the changes in their expression during the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions, we subdivided all genes into 8 groups: 1) genes up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition, with no difference in the expression level in the LPC>MPC transition, 2) down-regulated in NP>LPC, with no difference in LPC>MPC, 3) up-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 4) down-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 5) up-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC, 6) up- regulated in NP>LPC and down-regulated in LPC>MPC, 7) down-regulated in NP>LPC and up-regulated in LPC>MPC, and 8) down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC. We then analyzed the distribution of the genes in each category by KEGG pathways. Table IV shows the results of the analysis with p values after Benjamini corrections (DAVID's adjustment on multiple testing) 14 . We found that the genes that were significant in only 1 of the transitions ( i.e., the first 4 groups) showed no significant clustering by pathway. However, the genes significant in both transitions showed strong clustering. More often than one would expect, the genes up-regulated in both transitions fell in the cell cycle pathway. The cell cycle genes BUB1B, MAD2L1, CDC2, PTTG1, E2F3, CDC6, CCNA2, ORC2L, MCM4, MDM2, CCNE2, GSK3B, CCNB2, BUB1, CDK4, CCNB1, and PRKDC include several cycling and cycling-dependent kinases, suggesting that the proliferation rate increases during prostate tumorigenesis. The genes that were down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions were clustered in the focal-adhesion and actin cytoskeleton–regulation pathways. These genes include the integrins and cadherins ITGA2, ITGA5, ITGA7, ITGA8, ITGB1, ITGB8, CDH3, and CDH19 .  Clustering of the differentially expressed genes in KEGG pathways According to the changes in their expression during the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions, we subdivided all genes into 8 groups: 1) genes up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition, with no difference in the expression level in the LPC>MPC transition, 2) down-regulated in NP>LPC, with no difference in LPC>MPC, 3) up-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 4) down-regulated in LPC>MPC, with no difference in NP>LPC, 5) up-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC, 6) up- regulated in NP>LPC and down-regulated in LPC>MPC, 7) down-regulated in NP>LPC and up-regulated in LPC>MPC, and 8) down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC. We then analyzed the distribution of the genes in each category by KEGG pathways. Table IV shows the results of the analysis with p values after Benjamini corrections (DAVID's adjustment on multiple testing) 14 . We found that the genes that were significant in only 1 of the transitions ( i.e., the first 4 groups) showed no significant clustering by pathway. However, the genes significant in both transitions showed strong clustering. More often than one would expect, the genes up-regulated in both transitions fell in the cell cycle pathway. The cell cycle genes BUB1B, MAD2L1, CDC2, PTTG1, E2F3, CDC6, CCNA2, ORC2L, MCM4, MDM2, CCNE2, GSK3B, CCNB2, BUB1, CDK4, CCNB1, and PRKDC include several cycling and cycling-dependent kinases, suggesting that the proliferation rate increases during prostate tumorigenesis. The genes that were down-regulated in both NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions were clustered in the focal-adhesion and actin cytoskeleton–regulation pathways. These genes include the integrins and cadherins ITGA2, ITGA5, ITGA7, ITGA8, ITGB1, ITGB8, CDH3, and CDH19 .  Expression of cell proliferation markers To predict the cell proliferation rate, we estimated the expression of 13 cell proliferation markers: TOP2A, MKI67, PLK1, MCM7, CENPF, MCM6, PCNA, FEN1, MCM2, WT1, CLSPN, CCND1, and MIB1. There is published evidence that the expression of all these markers positively correlates with the proliferation rate 20 - 32 . We found that in the NP>LPC transition, all of the proliferation markers except MCM6 were up-regulated, and in the LPC>MPC transition, all proliferation markers, including MCM6 , were up-regulated ( Table V ). This suggests that the cell proliferation rate increases during prostate tumor progression.  Expression of cell proliferation markers To predict the cell proliferation rate, we estimated the expression of 13 cell proliferation markers: TOP2A, MKI67, PLK1, MCM7, CENPF, MCM6, PCNA, FEN1, MCM2, WT1, CLSPN, CCND1, and MIB1. There is published evidence that the expression of all these markers positively correlates with the proliferation rate 20 - 32 . We found that in the NP>LPC transition, all of the proliferation markers except MCM6 were up-regulated, and in the LPC>MPC transition, all proliferation markers, including MCM6 , were up-regulated ( Table V ). This suggests that the cell proliferation rate increases during prostate tumor progression.  Heat shock genes Numerous studies demonstrated that stress changes the expression of multiple genes, with most being down-regulated. 33 , 34 Because gene expression is mostly suppressed in the LPC>MPC transition, one can suppose that the prostate tumor is under stress during this time. We know that increased expression of the heat shock genes indicates cellular stress 35 - 37 . We therefore assessed the expression of heat shock proteins in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. The 34 heat shock genes were retrieved from the NCBI database (Supporting Information). We found that in the NP>LPC transition, 16 heat shock genes were differentially expressed: 9 (56%) were up-regulated, and 7 (44%) were down-regulated. These proportions are very similar to the overall proportions of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC transition: 55% and 45%, respectively. In the LPC>MPC transition, 14 genes were differentially expressed; 10 of them (71%) were up-regulated. The excess of up-regulated heat shock genes was statistically significant (?2 = 4.3, df = 1, p = 0.01), suggesting that during the transition from localized to metastatic prostate cancer, the tumor cells are under stress.  Heat shock genes Numerous studies demonstrated that stress changes the expression of multiple genes, with most being down-regulated. 33 , 34 Because gene expression is mostly suppressed in the LPC>MPC transition, one can suppose that the prostate tumor is under stress during this time. We know that increased expression of the heat shock genes indicates cellular stress 35 - 37 . We therefore assessed the expression of heat shock proteins in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. The 34 heat shock genes were retrieved from the NCBI database (Supporting Information). We found that in the NP>LPC transition, 16 heat shock genes were differentially expressed: 9 (56%) were up-regulated, and 7 (44%) were down-regulated. These proportions are very similar to the overall proportions of up- and down-regulated genes in the NP>LPC transition: 55% and 45%, respectively. In the LPC>MPC transition, 14 genes were differentially expressed; 10 of them (71%) were up-regulated. The excess of up-regulated heat shock genes was statistically significant (?2 = 4.3, df = 1, p = 0.01), suggesting that during the transition from localized to metastatic prostate cancer, the tumor cells are under stress.  Discussion We found that HK genes are more likely than non–HK genes to be differentially expressed in the NP>LPC or LPC>MPC transition ( Fig. 1 ). Because the HK genes are involved in essential cellular functions, it is unlikely that their differential expression is the result of a ripple effect induced by other genes in driving tumor development. We believe that modulation of the expression of HK genes is a driving force behind prostate tumorigenesis, and it is their differential expression that may induce a ripple effect on multiple downstream targets. This suggests the need to interpret the results of gene expression profiling with caution because the modulated expression of a given gene might be a consequence of the ripple effect induced by other genes rather than being directly related to the phenotype. We found that the genes tended to be up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. The difference may be driven by overall changes in translation and transcription during prostate tumorigenesis. We also found that ribosomal proteins are up-regulated in the NP>LPC and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition: all 30 significant genes were up-regulated in NP>LPC, and all 14 significant genes were down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. Our analysis suggested that the cell proliferation rate increases during prostate tumor progression: the cell proliferation markers were up-regulated in both the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. We also noted that the genes that were up-regulated in the transitions are clustered at the KEGG cell cycle pathway. Many of the cell cycle genes encoded for cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases, suggesting that prostate tumor progression is associated with an increased proliferation rate 38 , 39 . Cell proliferation requires an increased level of transcription and translation, 2 processes that provide building blocks for new cells. In the NP>LPC transition, expression of general transcription factors and ribosomal proteins was increased, with most of the genes differentially expressed in NP>LPC transition being up-regulated. We found, however, that despite the increased proliferation rate, transcription (expression level) and translation (biogenesis of ribosomes) were shut down in the LPC>MPC transition. This is counterintuitive because elevated cell proliferation requires an increase in the biogenesis of ribosomes 40 - 42 . Global suppression of gene expression in the advanced stages of prostate cancer may be a result of the increasing cell proliferation, which surpasses the ability of the tumor vascular system to provide oxygen. We found that expression of 2 of 3 hypoxia-inducible factors, HIF3A and HIF1AN , was significantly increased in the LPC>MPC transition, with p values 0.04 and 0.005, respectively, whereas no difference was found in the NP>LPC transition. Hypoxia and shortages of nutrients and growth factors can induce a stress reaction in advanced prostate tumors. As expected, we found that the expression of stress proteins, which are associated with inhibition of transcription and translation 43 - 45 , is up-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. Of note, genes that were down-regulated in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions clustered into the cell adhesion– and actin cytoskeleton–regulatory pathways. These 2 pathways are mechanistically connected 46 - 48 . The reports of a number of studies suggested that modulation of cell adhesion plays an important role in the progression and metastasis of prostate cancer 49 - 51 . Figure 3 summarizes our findings on the changes in transcription and/or translation, proliferation rate, and cellular stress during prostate tumorigenesis. On the basis of these findings, one can expect that an advanced tumor is under cellular stress and might be more vulnerable to environmental insults. Since translation is down-regulated at this stage, one can expect that its further suppression can kill tumor cells while causing little or no harm to normal cells with a normal proliferation rate. Currently the available chemotherapies used to treat advanced prostate cancer target DNA replication by introducing chemical links between DNA strands or by blocking DNA replication. Our results suggest that suppression of translation, alone or in combination with suppression of DNA replication, may be beneficial. It is interesting that the results from several studies suggest that inhibition of translation has an anticancer effect. For example, it was demonstrated that the anticancer effect of eicosapentaenoic acid is associated with inhibited initiation of translation 52 . It has also been demonstrated that the anticancer effect of the tumor suppressor Pdcd4 is mediated through inhibition of translation 53 . These findings suggest that inhibition of translation at a time when the tumor is under cellular stress, with already down-regulated transcription and translation, may improve survival and response to treatment. In conclusion, during prostate tumorigenesis, HK genes are more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be differentially expressed, suggesting that modulation of basic cellular functions drives cancer development. The level of transcription and translation increases during the initial stages of prostate tumorigeneses and decreases during the transition from localized to metastatic prostate cancer. During this stage, prostate cancer is under cellular stress and therefore might be more sensitive to treatment.  Discussion We found that HK genes are more likely than non–HK genes to be differentially expressed in the NP>LPC or LPC>MPC transition ( Fig. 1 ). Because the HK genes are involved in essential cellular functions, it is unlikely that their differential expression is the result of a ripple effect induced by other genes in driving tumor development. We believe that modulation of the expression of HK genes is a driving force behind prostate tumorigenesis, and it is their differential expression that may induce a ripple effect on multiple downstream targets. This suggests the need to interpret the results of gene expression profiling with caution because the modulated expression of a given gene might be a consequence of the ripple effect induced by other genes rather than being directly related to the phenotype. We found that the genes tended to be up-regulated in the NP>LPC transition and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. The difference may be driven by overall changes in translation and transcription during prostate tumorigenesis. We also found that ribosomal proteins are up-regulated in the NP>LPC and down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition: all 30 significant genes were up-regulated in NP>LPC, and all 14 significant genes were down-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. Our analysis suggested that the cell proliferation rate increases during prostate tumor progression: the cell proliferation markers were up-regulated in both the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions. We also noted that the genes that were up-regulated in the transitions are clustered at the KEGG cell cycle pathway. Many of the cell cycle genes encoded for cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases, suggesting that prostate tumor progression is associated with an increased proliferation rate 38 , 39 . Cell proliferation requires an increased level of transcription and translation, 2 processes that provide building blocks for new cells. In the NP>LPC transition, expression of general transcription factors and ribosomal proteins was increased, with most of the genes differentially expressed in NP>LPC transition being up-regulated. We found, however, that despite the increased proliferation rate, transcription (expression level) and translation (biogenesis of ribosomes) were shut down in the LPC>MPC transition. This is counterintuitive because elevated cell proliferation requires an increase in the biogenesis of ribosomes 40 - 42 . Global suppression of gene expression in the advanced stages of prostate cancer may be a result of the increasing cell proliferation, which surpasses the ability of the tumor vascular system to provide oxygen. We found that expression of 2 of 3 hypoxia-inducible factors, HIF3A and HIF1AN , was significantly increased in the LPC>MPC transition, with p values 0.04 and 0.005, respectively, whereas no difference was found in the NP>LPC transition. Hypoxia and shortages of nutrients and growth factors can induce a stress reaction in advanced prostate tumors. As expected, we found that the expression of stress proteins, which are associated with inhibition of transcription and translation 43 - 45 , is up-regulated in the LPC>MPC transition. Of note, genes that were down-regulated in the NP>LPC and LPC>MPC transitions clustered into the cell adhesion– and actin cytoskeleton–regulatory pathways. These 2 pathways are mechanistically connected 46 - 48 . The reports of a number of studies suggested that modulation of cell adhesion plays an important role in the progression and metastasis of prostate cancer 49 - 51 . Figure 3 summarizes our findings on the changes in transcription and/or translation, proliferation rate, and cellular stress during prostate tumorigenesis. On the basis of these findings, one can expect that an advanced tumor is under cellular stress and might be more vulnerable to environmental insults. Since translation is down-regulated at this stage, one can expect that its further suppression can kill tumor cells while causing little or no harm to normal cells with a normal proliferation rate. Currently the available chemotherapies used to treat advanced prostate cancer target DNA replication by introducing chemical links between DNA strands or by blocking DNA replication. Our results suggest that suppression of translation, alone or in combination with suppression of DNA replication, may be beneficial. It is interesting that the results from several studies suggest that inhibition of translation has an anticancer effect. For example, it was demonstrated that the anticancer effect of eicosapentaenoic acid is associated with inhibited initiation of translation 52 . It has also been demonstrated that the anticancer effect of the tumor suppressor Pdcd4 is mediated through inhibition of translation 53 . These findings suggest that inhibition of translation at a time when the tumor is under cellular stress, with already down-regulated transcription and translation, may improve survival and response to treatment. In conclusion, during prostate tumorigenesis, HK genes are more likely than the average gene in the human genome to be differentially expressed, suggesting that modulation of basic cellular functions drives cancer development. The level of transcription and translation increases during the initial stages of prostate tumorigeneses and decreases during the transition from localized to metastatic prostate cancer. During this stage, prostate cancer is under cellular stress and therefore might be more sensitive to treatment. 