Temporal Sampling Requirements for Reference Region Modeling of DCE-MRI Data in Human Breast Cancer Purpose To assess the temporal sampling requirements needed for quantitative analysis of dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) data with a reference region (RR) model in human breast cancer. Materials and Methods Simulations were used to study errors in pharmacokinetic parameters ( K trans and v e ) estimated by the RR model using six DCE-MRI acquisitions over a range of pharmacokinetic parameter values, arterial input functions, and temporal samplings. DCE-MRI data were acquired on 12 breast cancer patients and parameters were estimated using the native resolution data (16.4 second) and compared to downsampled 32.8 second and 65.6 second data. Results Simulations show that, in the majority of parameter combinations, the RR model results in an error less than 20% in the extracted parameters with temporal sampling as poor as 35.6 seconds. The experimental results show a high correlation between K trans and v e estimates from data acquired at 16.4 second temporal resolution compared to the downsampled 32.8 second data: the slope of the regression line was 1.025 (95% CI: 1.021, 1.029), Pearson's correlation r = 0.943 (CI: 0.940, 0.945) for K trans , and 1.023 (CI: 1.021. 1.025), r = 0.979 (CI: 0.978, 0.980) for v e . For the 64 second temporal resolution data the results were: 0.890 (CI: 0.894, 0.905), r = 0.8645, (CI: 0.858, 0.871) for K trans , and 1.041 (CI:1.039, 1.043), r = 0.970 (CI:0.968, 0.971) for v e . Conclusion RR analysis allows for a significant reduction in temporal sampling requirements and this lends itself to analyze DCE-MRI data acquired in practical situations.  Introduction Dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) involves the acquisition of MR images before and after an intravenous injection of a contrast agent (CA). By fitting DCE-MRI data to a model, physiological parameters such as the volume transfer constant ( K trans ) and extravascular extracellular volume fraction ( v e ) can be extracted ( 1 – 3 ) on a region of interest or voxel-by-voxel basis. Such analyses have been used to assess a variety of cancers and provide important additional information. For example, diagnoses of breast cancer by DCE-MRI have shown high sensitivity (77–100%), but moderate specificity (26–97%) ( 4 – 8 , reviewed in 9 ). In monitoring treatment response in breast cancer, some investigators have shown that changes in tumor size as measured by DCE-MRI correlates significantly with residual disease at time of surgery (e.g., 10 – 13 ). Others have shown that changes in tumor volume as measured by DCE-MRI after one cycle of therapy correlate significantly with pathologic response (e.g., 14 , 15 ). A fundamental issue in the acquisition of DCE-MRI data is selecting a balance between spatial and temporal resolution. Some investigators elect to obtain images at a very high temporal resolution in order to perform quantitative analysis so that K trans and v e (and other parameters) can be estimated accurately (see, e.g., 16 , 17 ). Conversely, others have shown that high spatial resolution data is imperative to provide clinically relevant data for the diagnosis of breast diseases ( 18 , 19 ) and to reduce effects of partial volume averaging of parameters. Such studies typically return qualitative or semi-quantitative parameters as current methods of DCE-MRI data analysis generally require rapid data acquisitions (i.e., high temporal resolution), something that is not possible in high spatial resolution scans. One reason that high temporal resolution data is needed for DCE-MRI data analysis is that the current approaches require knowledge of the time rate of change of the concentration of the contrast agent in the blood pool, the so-called arterial input function or “AIF”. As this concentration changes very rapidly in time, high temporal resolution is required in order to characterize this curve adequately using the image sets ( 20 , 21 ). There are other methods to characterize the AIF, including blood sampling and simply assuming its form ( 2 ). However, to obtain the AIF on an individual patient basis, using the image sets themselves is a very common, practical, approach. Several studies have been performed that report the effects of temporal resolution on the accuracy of extracted pharmacokinetic parameters. For example, Henderson et al ( 22 ) concluded that the AIF must be sampled every second while the tissue of interest (i.e., the tumor) time courses need to be sampled only every 16 seconds, otherwise large errors are produced in both accuracy and precision of the parameters extracted. In clinical imaging situations the AIF and tissue response function are acquired in the same set of images so using a temporal resolution suited to characterize the AIF would greatly limit the spatial resolution. Similarly, Roberts et al ( 23 ) determined that sampling of an AIF resulting from a single bolus injection at a temporal sampling rate less than once per nine seconds leads to large and unpredictable errors. Ideally, a method that can provide data for accurate, quantitative analysis at high spatial resolution is desired. Reference region (RR) models have been introduced for the analysis of DCE-MRI data ( 24 – 26 ). Such models calibrate signal intensity changes in a region of interest (e.g., a tumor) to that in a well-characterized reference region (e.g., healthy muscle). Such models do not necessarily require explicit characterization of the AIF. As the enhancement kinetics of an appropriately chosen reference region are considerably slower than that of the AIF, high temporal resolution data is no longer required, thereby allowing for images to be acquired with both higher spatial resolution and/or a higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Several such models have recently been presented ( 25 – 29 ). Recent studies with a RR model have reported both reasonable correlation with direct AIF measurement analysis ( 30 ) as well as reasonable repeatability ( 31 ) and reproducibility ( 32 ). Using both simulations and clinical data from a breast cancer study, we study the temporal sampling requirements for a quantitative RR analysis of DCE-MRI data. The simulations test the ability to return accurate K trans and v e values over a range of relevant DCE-MRI breast data acquisition protocols which have different temporal resolutions. We then use the RR model to analyze DCE-MRI breast data acquired with 16.4 sec temporal resolution and compare the results of K trans and v e maps obtained when analyzing the native temporal resolution data to those obtained when the data is temporally downsampled to 32.8 sec and 65.6 sec. The results are encouraging in that the approach allows for reasonable accuracy in quantitative measurements at high spatial resolution using data sets that can be acquired clinically. The method is not without its drawbacks, however, and these are enumerated in the Discussion section along with suggestions on how these shortcomings can be addressed.  Materials and Methods Simulations were used to study errors in pharmacokinetic parameters ( K trans and v e ) estimated by the RR model using six DCE-MRI acquisitions over a range of pharmacokinetic parameter values, arterial input functions, and temporal samplings. DCE-MRI data were acquired on 12 breast cancer patients and parameters were estimated using the native resolution data (16.4 second) and compared to downsampled 32.8 second and 65.6 second data.  Results Simulations show that, in the majority of parameter combinations, the RR model results in an error less than 20% in the extracted parameters with temporal sampling as poor as 35.6 seconds. The experimental results show a high correlation between K trans and v e estimates from data acquired at 16.4 second temporal resolution compared to the downsampled 32.8 second data: the slope of the regression line was 1.025 (95% CI: 1.021, 1.029), Pearson's correlation r = 0.943 (CI: 0.940, 0.945) for K trans , and 1.023 (CI: 1.021. 1.025), r = 0.979 (CI: 0.978, 0.980) for v e . For the 64 second temporal resolution data the results were: 0.890 (CI: 0.894, 0.905), r = 0.8645, (CI: 0.858, 0.871) for K trans , and 1.041 (CI:1.039, 1.043), r = 0.970 (CI:0.968, 0.971) for v e .  Conclusion RR analysis allows for a significant reduction in temporal sampling requirements and this lends itself to analyze DCE-MRI data acquired in practical situations.  Materials and Methods Theory The RR method establishes a relationship between the concentration of contrast agent (CA) in the tissue of interest ( C TOI ) and the RR ( C RR ) that is independent of the concentration in the blood plasma, C p While details are presented elsewhere ( 26 ; for more advanced RR models see 27 – 29 ), the main result of the theory is Eq. [1] : [1] C T O I ( T ) = R • C R R ( T ) + R • [ ( K t r a n s , R R / v e , R R ) ? ( K t r a n s , T O I / v e , T O I ) ] • ? 0 T C R R ( t ) · exp ? ( ( ? K t r a n s , T O I / v e , T O I ) · ( T ? t ) ) d t , where K trans,RR and K trans,TOI are K trans for the RR and TOI, respectively; v e,RR and v e,TOI are v e for the RR and TOI, respectively; and R ? K trans,TOI/K trans,RR . A relation that calibrates C TOI to the longitudinal relaxation rate, R 1,TOI , is required and this is typically taken to be Eq. [2] : [2] R 1 , T O I ( t ) = r 1 • C T O I ( t ) + R 10 , T O I , where r 1 is the longitudinal relaxivity of the CA, and R 10 is the native longitudinal relaxation rate of the tissue before CA administration. Using Eq. [1] and Eq. [2] , we can derive Eq. [3] : [3] R 1 , TOI ( T ) = R • ( R 1 , R R ( T ) ? R 10 , R R ) + R • [ ( K trans , R R / v e , R R ) ? ( K trans , TOI / v e , TOI ) ] • ? 0 T ( R 1 , R R ( t ) ? R 10 , R R ) · exp ( ( ? K trans , TOI / v e , TOI ) · ( T ? t ) ) d t + R 10 , TOI , where R 10,TOI and R 10,RR are the TOI and RR R 1 values before contrast administration, respectively. It is important to note that Eq. [3] does not account for the effects of slower water exchange ( Eq. [2] is a “fast exchange limit” relation; 33 , 34 ) or the effects of a blood volume component ( 35 ); these limitations are revisited in the Discussion. Moreover, the shape of the AIF is assumed to be the same for both regions. Simulations To evaluate the RR method, we simulated AIF, RR, and TOI CA curves over a range of parameters and timings. First, three AIF time courses were generated using Eq. [4] : [4] C p ( t ) = A • t B • exp ? ( ? t • C ) + D • [ 1 ? exp ? ( ? t • E ) ] • exp ? ( ? t • F ) . Three parameters combinations were selected; the first was A = 30.0 mM•min?1, B = 1.0, C = 4.0 min?1, D = 0.65 mM, E = 5.0 min?1, F = 0.04 min?1; the second was A = 120.0 mM•min?1, B = 3.0, C = 4.34 min?1, D = 0.8 mM, E = 1.0 min?1, F = 0.07 min?1; and the third was A = 55.0 mM•min?1, B = 5.5, C = 3.975 min?1, C = 0.8 mM, D = 1.0 min?1, E = 0.07 min?1. These parameters were chosen to match, approximately, the three AIFs described in Henderson et al ( 22 ; these AIFs are intended to simulate injection durations of 10 s, 40 s, and 80 s, respectively) and are presented in Figure 1a . The time courses were discretized at 0.1 second temporal resolution and generated for six minutes. The resulting AIFs were discretized with 0.1 second temporal resolution and use to convert to C RR and C TOI curves via Eq. [5] : [5] C n ( T ) = K t r a n s ? 0 T C p ( t ) exp ? ( ? ( K t r a n s , n / v e , n ) · ( T ? t ) ) d t , where n = RR or TOI. For the RR parameter values, K trans = 0.15 min?1 and v e = 0.12, which are very reasonable for human muscle tissue ( 36 , 37 ); the resulting C RR time courses are presented in Figure 1b . In order to study the ability of the RR model to return accurate and precise estimates of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI , a range of TOI parameter combinations were explored; namely, all combinations of K trans,TOI = 0.5 min?1, 1.0 min?1, 1.5 min?1, and v e,TOI = 0.3, 0.5, 0.7. These TOI values represent a range of parameter values measured in human breast cancers and reported in the literature (e.g., 38 – 41 ). For each combination of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI , the 0.1 second temporal resolution data were downsampled to match one of the six different (reasonable) DCE-MRI breast acquisition protocols summarized in Table 1 . Gaussian noise was added to each time course in accordance with the SNR ratio listed in the Table. SNR was determined by first measuring the SNR for a single voxel time course in the data acquisition method employed in the experimental studies described below and then scaled by the relative SNR for each of the six protocols (calculated by accounting for changes in sequence parameters such as sampling bandwidth, voxel size, TR , and TE , along with assumed values of breast T 1/T 2 at 3T of 650/50ms). (Note that the SNR of the RR is higher than the SNR of the TOI by a factor of ten. This is because the SNR of the TOI represents a single voxel, whereas the RR time course is always taken from a large region of interest that contains many hundreds of voxels.) After noise was added, the resulting C TOI and C RR time courses were fit by Eq. [1] and the process was repeated 1000 times to establish means and standard deviations for each parameter pair and for each simulated acquisition protocol. The entire process was repeated for each of the three AIFs and for each of the six acquisition schemes presented in Table 1 . Data Acquisition Twelve patients with locally advanced breast cancer, stages IIA to IIIB, were enrolled in the study. Patients signed a protocol-specific consent that was approved by our Institutional Review Board. Each patient underwent DCE-MRI on a Philips 3.0 T Achieva MR scanner (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) prior to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. A 4-channel receive double-breast coil covering both breasts was used for all imaging (In vivo Inc., Gainesville, FL). Data for a T 1 map were acquired employing ten 3D gradient echo sequences with different flip angles with a TR\TE of 7.9\1.3 ms and flip angles of 2–20 degrees in 2 degree increments. It should be noted that this method of T1 mapping can be highly sensitive to B 1 inhomogeneities. The acquisition matrix was 192×192×25 (full-breast) over a field of view (FOV) of (22 cm)2 with slice thickness of 5 mm, NEX = 2, and SENSE = 2. A catheter placed within an antecubital vein delivered 0.1 mmol/kg of the contrast agent Magnevist over 20 seconds (followed by a saline flush) for the DCE study. The dynamic scans used identical parameters and a flip angle of 20°. By setting the SENSE factor to two, each 20-slice set was collected in 16.4 seconds yielding 25 time points in just under seven minutes. Data Analysis Pre-contrast T 1 values, T 10 , values were computed from the multi-flip angle data by fitting to Eq. [6] : [6] S = S 0 • [ sin ? ? • ( 1 ? exp ? ( ? T R / T 1 ) ) / ( 1 ? exp ? ( ? T R / T 1 ) • cos ? ? ) ] , where ? is the flip angle, S 0 is a constant describing the scanner gain and proton density, and we have assumed that TE<<T 2 * . Voxels for which Eq. [6] could not fit the data were set to zero and not included in the analysis. For each patient, there are many slices displaying a large section of the pectoralis major muscle within the image FOV. As a significant fraction of this muscle is present in nearly all breast MRI exams, it is an attractive candidate for a reference region; indeed, DCE-MRI analysis of this muscle has been previously reported ( 42 ). Then, a large region of interest was manually drawn on this muscle to produce a relatively high SNR RR time course. This time course was then fit with an empirical model of the form [7] R 1 , R R ( t ) = A • t B • exp ? ( ? t • C ) + D • t E • exp ? ( ? t • F ) + R 10 , R R , where A–F are free parameters. It is important to note that the value of these parameters are not of immediate interest in this effort; the only purpose here is to obtain a smoothed version of the R 1,RR curve in which to drive the analysis afforded by Eq. [3] . The central slice of the tumor was always selected for analysis on a voxel-by-voxel basis via Eq. [3] (with K trans,RR and v e,RR fixed at 0.15 min?1 and 0.12, respectively) to yield estimates of K trans,TOI , and v e,TOI . The values for K trans,RR and v e,RR are quite reasonable and are taken from the literature ( 36 , 37 ). We will revisit the assignment of reference region parameter values in the Discussion section below. Two additional analyses were performed: one with the data temporally downsampled to 32.8 sec and another with the data temporally downsampled to 65.6 sec. Note that by downsampling the data (by replacing each two consecutive data points with their average) we are increasing the SNR of the time course. We also note that this is a rather simplistic way in which to downsample data. That is, averaging the signal from every two or three time points may not produce the same signal values as if the acquisition were acquired at slower sampling rates. However, since actually acquiring data at three different temporal resolution would require three scanning sessions within a short amount of time, the approach here is a practical necessity even if theoretically simplistic. For each patient, the K trans,TOI results from the 16.4 second data was first regressed on the K trans,TOI results from the 32.8 second data, and then on the 65.6 second data. An analogous study was performed for the v e,TOI data. The regression slope and the Pearson correlation coefficient were tabulated for all patients in which the analysis could be performed. A summary of these values across the population studied was determined by a weighted average of each individual measure where the weights are taken as the inverse of the individual variances. In particular, for the slope the variance was computed via Eq. [8]: ? i = l n ( Y ? Y ¯ ) 2 / ( n ? 1 ) / ? i = l n x 2 , where ? is the fitted value of Y in the regression model, X is the independent variable, and n is the number of data points. For the Pearson's r we use the transformation r' = ln((1+ r )/(1? r )), where the variance of r' is 1/( n ?3). Once the confidence interval is established for r' , it is transformed back to the original scale r . This approach yields a point estimate of the mean and the confidence interval (CI). All curve fitting routines employed a standard gradient-expansion, nonlinear, least-squares algorithm ( 43 ) written in the Interactive Data Language (RSI, Boulder, CO). Voxels for which the fitting algorithm did not converge, or converged to unphysical values (e.g., K trans,TOI > 5.0 min?1, v e,TOI > 1.0, or any negative value) were set equal to zero and not included in the analysis.  Theory The RR method establishes a relationship between the concentration of contrast agent (CA) in the tissue of interest ( C TOI ) and the RR ( C RR ) that is independent of the concentration in the blood plasma, C p While details are presented elsewhere ( 26 ; for more advanced RR models see 27 – 29 ), the main result of the theory is Eq. [1] : [1] C T O I ( T ) = R • C R R ( T ) + R • [ ( K t r a n s , R R / v e , R R ) ? ( K t r a n s , T O I / v e , T O I ) ] • ? 0 T C R R ( t ) · exp ? ( ( ? K t r a n s , T O I / v e , T O I ) · ( T ? t ) ) d t , where K trans,RR and K trans,TOI are K trans for the RR and TOI, respectively; v e,RR and v e,TOI are v e for the RR and TOI, respectively; and R ? K trans,TOI/K trans,RR . A relation that calibrates C TOI to the longitudinal relaxation rate, R 1,TOI , is required and this is typically taken to be Eq. [2] : [2] R 1 , T O I ( t ) = r 1 • C T O I ( t ) + R 10 , T O I , where r 1 is the longitudinal relaxivity of the CA, and R 10 is the native longitudinal relaxation rate of the tissue before CA administration. Using Eq. [1] and Eq. [2] , we can derive Eq. [3] : [3] R 1 , TOI ( T ) = R • ( R 1 , R R ( T ) ? R 10 , R R ) + R • [ ( K trans , R R / v e , R R ) ? ( K trans , TOI / v e , TOI ) ] • ? 0 T ( R 1 , R R ( t ) ? R 10 , R R ) · exp ( ( ? K trans , TOI / v e , TOI ) · ( T ? t ) ) d t + R 10 , TOI , where R 10,TOI and R 10,RR are the TOI and RR R 1 values before contrast administration, respectively. It is important to note that Eq. [3] does not account for the effects of slower water exchange ( Eq. [2] is a “fast exchange limit” relation; 33 , 34 ) or the effects of a blood volume component ( 35 ); these limitations are revisited in the Discussion. Moreover, the shape of the AIF is assumed to be the same for both regions.  Simulations To evaluate the RR method, we simulated AIF, RR, and TOI CA curves over a range of parameters and timings. First, three AIF time courses were generated using Eq. [4] : [4] C p ( t ) = A • t B • exp ? ( ? t • C ) + D • [ 1 ? exp ? ( ? t • E ) ] • exp ? ( ? t • F ) . Three parameters combinations were selected; the first was A = 30.0 mM•min?1, B = 1.0, C = 4.0 min?1, D = 0.65 mM, E = 5.0 min?1, F = 0.04 min?1; the second was A = 120.0 mM•min?1, B = 3.0, C = 4.34 min?1, D = 0.8 mM, E = 1.0 min?1, F = 0.07 min?1; and the third was A = 55.0 mM•min?1, B = 5.5, C = 3.975 min?1, C = 0.8 mM, D = 1.0 min?1, E = 0.07 min?1. These parameters were chosen to match, approximately, the three AIFs described in Henderson et al ( 22 ; these AIFs are intended to simulate injection durations of 10 s, 40 s, and 80 s, respectively) and are presented in Figure 1a . The time courses were discretized at 0.1 second temporal resolution and generated for six minutes. The resulting AIFs were discretized with 0.1 second temporal resolution and use to convert to C RR and C TOI curves via Eq. [5] : [5] C n ( T ) = K t r a n s ? 0 T C p ( t ) exp ? ( ? ( K t r a n s , n / v e , n ) · ( T ? t ) ) d t , where n = RR or TOI. For the RR parameter values, K trans = 0.15 min?1 and v e = 0.12, which are very reasonable for human muscle tissue ( 36 , 37 ); the resulting C RR time courses are presented in Figure 1b . In order to study the ability of the RR model to return accurate and precise estimates of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI , a range of TOI parameter combinations were explored; namely, all combinations of K trans,TOI = 0.5 min?1, 1.0 min?1, 1.5 min?1, and v e,TOI = 0.3, 0.5, 0.7. These TOI values represent a range of parameter values measured in human breast cancers and reported in the literature (e.g., 38 – 41 ). For each combination of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI , the 0.1 second temporal resolution data were downsampled to match one of the six different (reasonable) DCE-MRI breast acquisition protocols summarized in Table 1 . Gaussian noise was added to each time course in accordance with the SNR ratio listed in the Table. SNR was determined by first measuring the SNR for a single voxel time course in the data acquisition method employed in the experimental studies described below and then scaled by the relative SNR for each of the six protocols (calculated by accounting for changes in sequence parameters such as sampling bandwidth, voxel size, TR , and TE , along with assumed values of breast T 1/T 2 at 3T of 650/50ms). (Note that the SNR of the RR is higher than the SNR of the TOI by a factor of ten. This is because the SNR of the TOI represents a single voxel, whereas the RR time course is always taken from a large region of interest that contains many hundreds of voxels.) After noise was added, the resulting C TOI and C RR time courses were fit by Eq. [1] and the process was repeated 1000 times to establish means and standard deviations for each parameter pair and for each simulated acquisition protocol. The entire process was repeated for each of the three AIFs and for each of the six acquisition schemes presented in Table 1 .  Data Acquisition Twelve patients with locally advanced breast cancer, stages IIA to IIIB, were enrolled in the study. Patients signed a protocol-specific consent that was approved by our Institutional Review Board. Each patient underwent DCE-MRI on a Philips 3.0 T Achieva MR scanner (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) prior to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. A 4-channel receive double-breast coil covering both breasts was used for all imaging (In vivo Inc., Gainesville, FL). Data for a T 1 map were acquired employing ten 3D gradient echo sequences with different flip angles with a TR\TE of 7.9\1.3 ms and flip angles of 2–20 degrees in 2 degree increments. It should be noted that this method of T1 mapping can be highly sensitive to B 1 inhomogeneities. The acquisition matrix was 192×192×25 (full-breast) over a field of view (FOV) of (22 cm)2 with slice thickness of 5 mm, NEX = 2, and SENSE = 2. A catheter placed within an antecubital vein delivered 0.1 mmol/kg of the contrast agent Magnevist over 20 seconds (followed by a saline flush) for the DCE study. The dynamic scans used identical parameters and a flip angle of 20°. By setting the SENSE factor to two, each 20-slice set was collected in 16.4 seconds yielding 25 time points in just under seven minutes.  Data Analysis Pre-contrast T 1 values, T 10 , values were computed from the multi-flip angle data by fitting to Eq. [6] : [6] S = S 0 • [ sin ? ? • ( 1 ? exp ? ( ? T R / T 1 ) ) / ( 1 ? exp ? ( ? T R / T 1 ) • cos ? ? ) ] , where ? is the flip angle, S 0 is a constant describing the scanner gain and proton density, and we have assumed that TE<<T 2 * . Voxels for which Eq. [6] could not fit the data were set to zero and not included in the analysis. For each patient, there are many slices displaying a large section of the pectoralis major muscle within the image FOV. As a significant fraction of this muscle is present in nearly all breast MRI exams, it is an attractive candidate for a reference region; indeed, DCE-MRI analysis of this muscle has been previously reported ( 42 ). Then, a large region of interest was manually drawn on this muscle to produce a relatively high SNR RR time course. This time course was then fit with an empirical model of the form [7] R 1 , R R ( t ) = A • t B • exp ? ( ? t • C ) + D • t E • exp ? ( ? t • F ) + R 10 , R R , where A–F are free parameters. It is important to note that the value of these parameters are not of immediate interest in this effort; the only purpose here is to obtain a smoothed version of the R 1,RR curve in which to drive the analysis afforded by Eq. [3] . The central slice of the tumor was always selected for analysis on a voxel-by-voxel basis via Eq. [3] (with K trans,RR and v e,RR fixed at 0.15 min?1 and 0.12, respectively) to yield estimates of K trans,TOI , and v e,TOI . The values for K trans,RR and v e,RR are quite reasonable and are taken from the literature ( 36 , 37 ). We will revisit the assignment of reference region parameter values in the Discussion section below. Two additional analyses were performed: one with the data temporally downsampled to 32.8 sec and another with the data temporally downsampled to 65.6 sec. Note that by downsampling the data (by replacing each two consecutive data points with their average) we are increasing the SNR of the time course. We also note that this is a rather simplistic way in which to downsample data. That is, averaging the signal from every two or three time points may not produce the same signal values as if the acquisition were acquired at slower sampling rates. However, since actually acquiring data at three different temporal resolution would require three scanning sessions within a short amount of time, the approach here is a practical necessity even if theoretically simplistic. For each patient, the K trans,TOI results from the 16.4 second data was first regressed on the K trans,TOI results from the 32.8 second data, and then on the 65.6 second data. An analogous study was performed for the v e,TOI data. The regression slope and the Pearson correlation coefficient were tabulated for all patients in which the analysis could be performed. A summary of these values across the population studied was determined by a weighted average of each individual measure where the weights are taken as the inverse of the individual variances. In particular, for the slope the variance was computed via Eq. [8]: ? i = l n ( Y ? Y ¯ ) 2 / ( n ? 1 ) / ? i = l n x 2 , where ? is the fitted value of Y in the regression model, X is the independent variable, and n is the number of data points. For the Pearson's r we use the transformation r' = ln((1+ r )/(1? r )), where the variance of r' is 1/( n ?3). Once the confidence interval is established for r' , it is transformed back to the original scale r . This approach yields a point estimate of the mean and the confidence interval (CI). All curve fitting routines employed a standard gradient-expansion, nonlinear, least-squares algorithm ( 43 ) written in the Interactive Data Language (RSI, Boulder, CO). Voxels for which the fitting algorithm did not converge, or converged to unphysical values (e.g., K trans,TOI > 5.0 min?1, v e,TOI > 1.0, or any negative value) were set equal to zero and not included in the analysis.  Results Simulations Figure 2 presents both the error and precision in the RR model’s estimates of K trans,TOI over a range of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI input values as a function of temporal resolution and the three AIFs. The top row (panels a, b, and c) presents plots for v e,TOI fixed at 0.3, while K trans,TOI is cycled through 0.5 min?1, 1.0 min?1, and 1.5 min?1; the middle (panels d, e, and f) and bottom (panels g, h, and i) rows presents the same for v e = 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. For each temporal resolution (which results from the acquisition protocols described in Table 1 ) there are three data points which correspond to the three AIFs used to generate the C TOI and C RR curves that are analyzed by Eq. [1] . The accuracy and precision of the returned values are well within +/? 20% (the solid horizontal lines) for temporal resolutions up to 16.5 s and (with the exception of the K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combination of 1.5 min?1 and 0.3 (panel c)), this is also true for temporal resolutions up to 35.6 sec. Furthermore, most parameter combinations yield errors that are within +/? 10% (the dashed horizontal lines) of the true value for temporal resolutions up to 29.0 sec. There is even modest accuracy for the 55.2 sec temporal resolution data for most parameter combinations with the exception, again, of the K trans,TOI = 1.5 min?1 and v e,TOI = 0.3 combination. It is only those parameter combinations for which there is a very large K trans,TOI and a relatively small v e,TOI value for which the RR model has difficulty returning accurate estimates. In such cases, there is a systematic underestimation of the true K trans,TOI value at the coarser temporal resolutions. This is reasonable because a large K trans,TOI value coupled with a small v e,TOI will yield a time course that rapidly enhances and then rapidly returns to baseline. Such a curve will be difficult to characterize with low temporal sampling. It is also important to note that the accuracy and precision, for a given temporal resolution, is relatively independent of the AIF used to generate the data (though this is true only for the AIFs used in this study and may not be generalizable). In general, the precision is reasonable (within +/?15% of the mean in all cases) up to a temporal resolution of 29.0 s while it starts to diminish (+/? 30–65%) for several parameter combinations at the coarsest temporal resolution. Figure 3 present the analogous results for v e,TOI . In these panels, the dashed horizontal errors bars represent the +/?10% error marks, while the solid horizontal lines represent the +/? 20% error marks. The extravascular extracellular volume fraction presents as a very stable parameter exhibiting both high accuracy and precision for all K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combinations across all temporal resolutions. While there is, however, a systematic overestimation of v e,TOI at the coarser temporal resolutions (35.6 and 55.2 sec) it never results in errors greater than 20% for any AIF or parameter combination. Clinical Data DCE-MRI data from twelve patients with locally advanced breast cancer were analyzed in this study. One patient did not present with a RR that significantly enhanced and therefore the analysis could not be performed. Over the remaining 11 patient, the RR model fit 79.89% +/? 0.08% of the enhancing voxels at the native temporal resolution, and 79.95% +/? 0.08% and 79.44% +/? 0.08% at the 32 second and 64 second temporal resolutions, respectively. Figure 4 presents the results of fitting three individual voxels (one rapidly enhancing, one moderately enhancing, and one weakly enhancing) selected from a sample patient (number 7) with increasingly coarser temporal resolution as indicated in the legends of each frame; the top row is the native 16.4 sec data while the middle and bottom rows present the downsampled 32.8 sec and 65.6 sec data. For each row, the first column (panels a, d, and g) depicts a rapidly enhancing voxel while the second (panels b, e, and f) and third (panels c, f, and i) columns depict moderately and weaker enhancing voxels, respectively. The inset windows within each frame of the first column present the RR data taken from the pectoralis major and the best fit of that curve as provided by Eq. [7] that was used in the subsequent fit to Eq. [3] to obtain estimates of K trans,TOI and v e, TOI . The solid line in each frame is the best fit curve provided by Eq. [3] . Observe that for the highly enhancing voxel (far left column) the 16.4 sec and 32.8 sec fits provide comparable values but the 65.6 sec data underestimates the value returned by the 16.4 sec data by 16.4%. This error is reduced in the moderately and slowly enhancing voxels of columns two and three where all analysis of the three temporal resolutions yields nearly identical results. These single voxels are presented to illustrate the points observed in the simulations; namely, that for only the most enhancing voxels is there a systematic underestimation of the parameter values obtained at the coarsest temporal resolution. Of course, these are only individual voxels and the trend over the whole tumor, as well as across all patients, is of greater importance. Figure 5 presents the K trans parametric maps overlaid on the anatomical sagittal cross sections of the central slice of the tumor for four patients (numbers 2, 4, 6, and 9; indicated on the lower left portion of the first frame in each row). Each row of the figure depicts one patient and each column presents the results of the parametric maps associated with the 16.4 sec (panels a, d, g, and j), 32.8 sec (panels b, e, h, and k), and 65.6 sec (panels c, f, i, and l) temporal resolution data, respectively. It is clear that the parametric maps associated with the 65.6 second temporal resolution data display many voxels with lower absolute values than the 16.4 sec or 32.8 sec data; this is perhaps most noticeable in patient 9. However, in general, the pattern and distribution of voxel values is quite similar between all temporal resolutions within a particular data set and this is particularly true for the 16.4 and 32.8 sec data sets. Figure 6 presents the analogous v e parametric maps and they are nearly identical across all temporal resolutions as would be expected from the results of the simulations. (These results are made more precise by the individual regressions of Figure 7 and Figure 8 and Table 2 .) These four patients represent a cross-section of the quality of the results of the study. Patients 2 and 4 represent quite average results (as tabulated in Table 2 below), while patient 6 shows an excellent relationship between all temporal resolutions and patient 9 shows a poor relationship. In order to make the parametric maps more quantitative, Figures 7a and 7b depict scatter plots of the K trans values returned from the 16.4 sec data (denoted by K trans,16 ) plotted versus the 32.8 (denoted by K trans,32 ) and 65.6 (denoted by K trans,64 ) sec data, respectively, for patient 10—the patient that provided some of the strongest correlations of the study. Similarly, panels c and d present data for v e . The solid line in each panel represents the regression line which is labeled along with the Pearson correlation coefficient. For patient 10 the slopes are 1.02 and 1.01 with r > 0.99 for both K trans cases, while the slopes are 0.89 for r > 0.94 for both v e cases. Figure 8 presents the data from patient 9 who showed some of the weakest correlations of the study; the slopes are 0.84 ( r = 0.78) and 0.60 ( r = 0.60) for 16.4 versus 32.8 data and the 16.4 versus 65.6 data, respectively. The v e results are better, with the slope being 1.01 ( r > 0.95) for both cases. As a major advantage of acquiring slower temporal resolution data is to allow for greater tissue coverage, Figure 9 displays the RR K trans maps for five central slices (one slice per column) obtained from another patient. Each row corresponds to one temporal sampling rate, and a visual inspection displays similar trends between the three rows as displayed in the single slice data of Figure 5 . In particular, note how the voxels with the highest K trans values in the 16.4 sec analysis begin to be underestimated in the 65.6 sec analysis (see the ring enhancement in columns two, three, and four). Table 2 summarizes the K trans results across all 12 patients that were studied. Overall, the weighted average of the slope between K trans,16 and K trans,32 is 1.025 (95% CI: 1.021, 1.029) with the Pearson's correlation r = 0.943 (CI: 0.940, 0.945). Ten patients had positive results (with slopes near the ideal of one), one patient (number 6) had a poor result (slope = 0.69), and one patient (number 8) did not exhibit enhancement within the RR. The slope reduces to 0.900 (CI: 0.894, 0.905), with r = 0.865, (CI: 0.858, 0.871) for the comparison between K trans,16 and K trans,64 . In this case, eight patients present encouraging results, while three patients (numbers 6, 9, and 11) present less promising results. The dip in the average slope indicates that the K trans,64 values are systematically underestimating the K trans value as estimated by the K trans,16 data just as was seen in the simulations (panels c and f of Figure 2 ). Table 3 presents the analogous data for v e and overall the v e values are quite stable with an average slope of 1.023 (CI: 1.021, 1.025), r = 0.979 (CI: 0.978, 0.980) and 1.041 (CI: 1.039, 1.043), r = 0.970 (CI: 0.968, 0.971) for v e,16 versus v e,32 and the v e,16 versus v e,64 , respectively.  Results Simulations Figure 2 presents both the error and precision in the RR model’s estimates of K trans,TOI over a range of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI input values as a function of temporal resolution and the three AIFs. The top row (panels a, b, and c) presents plots for v e,TOI fixed at 0.3, while K trans,TOI is cycled through 0.5 min?1, 1.0 min?1, and 1.5 min?1; the middle (panels d, e, and f) and bottom (panels g, h, and i) rows presents the same for v e = 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. For each temporal resolution (which results from the acquisition protocols described in Table 1 ) there are three data points which correspond to the three AIFs used to generate the C TOI and C RR curves that are analyzed by Eq. [1] . The accuracy and precision of the returned values are well within +/? 20% (the solid horizontal lines) for temporal resolutions up to 16.5 s and (with the exception of the K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combination of 1.5 min?1 and 0.3 (panel c)), this is also true for temporal resolutions up to 35.6 sec. Furthermore, most parameter combinations yield errors that are within +/? 10% (the dashed horizontal lines) of the true value for temporal resolutions up to 29.0 sec. There is even modest accuracy for the 55.2 sec temporal resolution data for most parameter combinations with the exception, again, of the K trans,TOI = 1.5 min?1 and v e,TOI = 0.3 combination. It is only those parameter combinations for which there is a very large K trans,TOI and a relatively small v e,TOI value for which the RR model has difficulty returning accurate estimates. In such cases, there is a systematic underestimation of the true K trans,TOI value at the coarser temporal resolutions. This is reasonable because a large K trans,TOI value coupled with a small v e,TOI will yield a time course that rapidly enhances and then rapidly returns to baseline. Such a curve will be difficult to characterize with low temporal sampling. It is also important to note that the accuracy and precision, for a given temporal resolution, is relatively independent of the AIF used to generate the data (though this is true only for the AIFs used in this study and may not be generalizable). In general, the precision is reasonable (within +/?15% of the mean in all cases) up to a temporal resolution of 29.0 s while it starts to diminish (+/? 30–65%) for several parameter combinations at the coarsest temporal resolution. Figure 3 present the analogous results for v e,TOI . In these panels, the dashed horizontal errors bars represent the +/?10% error marks, while the solid horizontal lines represent the +/? 20% error marks. The extravascular extracellular volume fraction presents as a very stable parameter exhibiting both high accuracy and precision for all K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combinations across all temporal resolutions. While there is, however, a systematic overestimation of v e,TOI at the coarser temporal resolutions (35.6 and 55.2 sec) it never results in errors greater than 20% for any AIF or parameter combination. Clinical Data DCE-MRI data from twelve patients with locally advanced breast cancer were analyzed in this study. One patient did not present with a RR that significantly enhanced and therefore the analysis could not be performed. Over the remaining 11 patient, the RR model fit 79.89% +/? 0.08% of the enhancing voxels at the native temporal resolution, and 79.95% +/? 0.08% and 79.44% +/? 0.08% at the 32 second and 64 second temporal resolutions, respectively. Figure 4 presents the results of fitting three individual voxels (one rapidly enhancing, one moderately enhancing, and one weakly enhancing) selected from a sample patient (number 7) with increasingly coarser temporal resolution as indicated in the legends of each frame; the top row is the native 16.4 sec data while the middle and bottom rows present the downsampled 32.8 sec and 65.6 sec data. For each row, the first column (panels a, d, and g) depicts a rapidly enhancing voxel while the second (panels b, e, and f) and third (panels c, f, and i) columns depict moderately and weaker enhancing voxels, respectively. The inset windows within each frame of the first column present the RR data taken from the pectoralis major and the best fit of that curve as provided by Eq. [7] that was used in the subsequent fit to Eq. [3] to obtain estimates of K trans,TOI and v e, TOI . The solid line in each frame is the best fit curve provided by Eq. [3] . Observe that for the highly enhancing voxel (far left column) the 16.4 sec and 32.8 sec fits provide comparable values but the 65.6 sec data underestimates the value returned by the 16.4 sec data by 16.4%. This error is reduced in the moderately and slowly enhancing voxels of columns two and three where all analysis of the three temporal resolutions yields nearly identical results. These single voxels are presented to illustrate the points observed in the simulations; namely, that for only the most enhancing voxels is there a systematic underestimation of the parameter values obtained at the coarsest temporal resolution. Of course, these are only individual voxels and the trend over the whole tumor, as well as across all patients, is of greater importance. Figure 5 presents the K trans parametric maps overlaid on the anatomical sagittal cross sections of the central slice of the tumor for four patients (numbers 2, 4, 6, and 9; indicated on the lower left portion of the first frame in each row). Each row of the figure depicts one patient and each column presents the results of the parametric maps associated with the 16.4 sec (panels a, d, g, and j), 32.8 sec (panels b, e, h, and k), and 65.6 sec (panels c, f, i, and l) temporal resolution data, respectively. It is clear that the parametric maps associated with the 65.6 second temporal resolution data display many voxels with lower absolute values than the 16.4 sec or 32.8 sec data; this is perhaps most noticeable in patient 9. However, in general, the pattern and distribution of voxel values is quite similar between all temporal resolutions within a particular data set and this is particularly true for the 16.4 and 32.8 sec data sets. Figure 6 presents the analogous v e parametric maps and they are nearly identical across all temporal resolutions as would be expected from the results of the simulations. (These results are made more precise by the individual regressions of Figure 7 and Figure 8 and Table 2 .) These four patients represent a cross-section of the quality of the results of the study. Patients 2 and 4 represent quite average results (as tabulated in Table 2 below), while patient 6 shows an excellent relationship between all temporal resolutions and patient 9 shows a poor relationship. In order to make the parametric maps more quantitative, Figures 7a and 7b depict scatter plots of the K trans values returned from the 16.4 sec data (denoted by K trans,16 ) plotted versus the 32.8 (denoted by K trans,32 ) and 65.6 (denoted by K trans,64 ) sec data, respectively, for patient 10—the patient that provided some of the strongest correlations of the study. Similarly, panels c and d present data for v e . The solid line in each panel represents the regression line which is labeled along with the Pearson correlation coefficient. For patient 10 the slopes are 1.02 and 1.01 with r > 0.99 for both K trans cases, while the slopes are 0.89 for r > 0.94 for both v e cases. Figure 8 presents the data from patient 9 who showed some of the weakest correlations of the study; the slopes are 0.84 ( r = 0.78) and 0.60 ( r = 0.60) for 16.4 versus 32.8 data and the 16.4 versus 65.6 data, respectively. The v e results are better, with the slope being 1.01 ( r > 0.95) for both cases. As a major advantage of acquiring slower temporal resolution data is to allow for greater tissue coverage, Figure 9 displays the RR K trans maps for five central slices (one slice per column) obtained from another patient. Each row corresponds to one temporal sampling rate, and a visual inspection displays similar trends between the three rows as displayed in the single slice data of Figure 5 . In particular, note how the voxels with the highest K trans values in the 16.4 sec analysis begin to be underestimated in the 65.6 sec analysis (see the ring enhancement in columns two, three, and four). Table 2 summarizes the K trans results across all 12 patients that were studied. Overall, the weighted average of the slope between K trans,16 and K trans,32 is 1.025 (95% CI: 1.021, 1.029) with the Pearson's correlation r = 0.943 (CI: 0.940, 0.945). Ten patients had positive results (with slopes near the ideal of one), one patient (number 6) had a poor result (slope = 0.69), and one patient (number 8) did not exhibit enhancement within the RR. The slope reduces to 0.900 (CI: 0.894, 0.905), with r = 0.865, (CI: 0.858, 0.871) for the comparison between K trans,16 and K trans,64 . In this case, eight patients present encouraging results, while three patients (numbers 6, 9, and 11) present less promising results. The dip in the average slope indicates that the K trans,64 values are systematically underestimating the K trans value as estimated by the K trans,16 data just as was seen in the simulations (panels c and f of Figure 2 ). Table 3 presents the analogous data for v e and overall the v e values are quite stable with an average slope of 1.023 (CI: 1.021, 1.025), r = 0.979 (CI: 0.978, 0.980) and 1.041 (CI: 1.039, 1.043), r = 0.970 (CI: 0.968, 0.971) for v e,16 versus v e,32 and the v e,16 versus v e,64 , respectively.  Simulations Figure 2 presents both the error and precision in the RR model’s estimates of K trans,TOI over a range of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI input values as a function of temporal resolution and the three AIFs. The top row (panels a, b, and c) presents plots for v e,TOI fixed at 0.3, while K trans,TOI is cycled through 0.5 min?1, 1.0 min?1, and 1.5 min?1; the middle (panels d, e, and f) and bottom (panels g, h, and i) rows presents the same for v e = 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. For each temporal resolution (which results from the acquisition protocols described in Table 1 ) there are three data points which correspond to the three AIFs used to generate the C TOI and C RR curves that are analyzed by Eq. [1] . The accuracy and precision of the returned values are well within +/? 20% (the solid horizontal lines) for temporal resolutions up to 16.5 s and (with the exception of the K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combination of 1.5 min?1 and 0.3 (panel c)), this is also true for temporal resolutions up to 35.6 sec. Furthermore, most parameter combinations yield errors that are within +/? 10% (the dashed horizontal lines) of the true value for temporal resolutions up to 29.0 sec. There is even modest accuracy for the 55.2 sec temporal resolution data for most parameter combinations with the exception, again, of the K trans,TOI = 1.5 min?1 and v e,TOI = 0.3 combination. It is only those parameter combinations for which there is a very large K trans,TOI and a relatively small v e,TOI value for which the RR model has difficulty returning accurate estimates. In such cases, there is a systematic underestimation of the true K trans,TOI value at the coarser temporal resolutions. This is reasonable because a large K trans,TOI value coupled with a small v e,TOI will yield a time course that rapidly enhances and then rapidly returns to baseline. Such a curve will be difficult to characterize with low temporal sampling. It is also important to note that the accuracy and precision, for a given temporal resolution, is relatively independent of the AIF used to generate the data (though this is true only for the AIFs used in this study and may not be generalizable). In general, the precision is reasonable (within +/?15% of the mean in all cases) up to a temporal resolution of 29.0 s while it starts to diminish (+/? 30–65%) for several parameter combinations at the coarsest temporal resolution. Figure 3 present the analogous results for v e,TOI . In these panels, the dashed horizontal errors bars represent the +/?10% error marks, while the solid horizontal lines represent the +/? 20% error marks. The extravascular extracellular volume fraction presents as a very stable parameter exhibiting both high accuracy and precision for all K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combinations across all temporal resolutions. While there is, however, a systematic overestimation of v e,TOI at the coarser temporal resolutions (35.6 and 55.2 sec) it never results in errors greater than 20% for any AIF or parameter combination.  Simulations Figure 2 presents both the error and precision in the RR model’s estimates of K trans,TOI over a range of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI input values as a function of temporal resolution and the three AIFs. The top row (panels a, b, and c) presents plots for v e,TOI fixed at 0.3, while K trans,TOI is cycled through 0.5 min?1, 1.0 min?1, and 1.5 min?1; the middle (panels d, e, and f) and bottom (panels g, h, and i) rows presents the same for v e = 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. For each temporal resolution (which results from the acquisition protocols described in Table 1 ) there are three data points which correspond to the three AIFs used to generate the C TOI and C RR curves that are analyzed by Eq. [1] . The accuracy and precision of the returned values are well within +/? 20% (the solid horizontal lines) for temporal resolutions up to 16.5 s and (with the exception of the K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combination of 1.5 min?1 and 0.3 (panel c)), this is also true for temporal resolutions up to 35.6 sec. Furthermore, most parameter combinations yield errors that are within +/? 10% (the dashed horizontal lines) of the true value for temporal resolutions up to 29.0 sec. There is even modest accuracy for the 55.2 sec temporal resolution data for most parameter combinations with the exception, again, of the K trans,TOI = 1.5 min?1 and v e,TOI = 0.3 combination. It is only those parameter combinations for which there is a very large K trans,TOI and a relatively small v e,TOI value for which the RR model has difficulty returning accurate estimates. In such cases, there is a systematic underestimation of the true K trans,TOI value at the coarser temporal resolutions. This is reasonable because a large K trans,TOI value coupled with a small v e,TOI will yield a time course that rapidly enhances and then rapidly returns to baseline. Such a curve will be difficult to characterize with low temporal sampling. It is also important to note that the accuracy and precision, for a given temporal resolution, is relatively independent of the AIF used to generate the data (though this is true only for the AIFs used in this study and may not be generalizable). In general, the precision is reasonable (within +/?15% of the mean in all cases) up to a temporal resolution of 29.0 s while it starts to diminish (+/? 30–65%) for several parameter combinations at the coarsest temporal resolution. Figure 3 present the analogous results for v e,TOI . In these panels, the dashed horizontal errors bars represent the +/?10% error marks, while the solid horizontal lines represent the +/? 20% error marks. The extravascular extracellular volume fraction presents as a very stable parameter exhibiting both high accuracy and precision for all K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combinations across all temporal resolutions. While there is, however, a systematic overestimation of v e,TOI at the coarser temporal resolutions (35.6 and 55.2 sec) it never results in errors greater than 20% for any AIF or parameter combination.  Clinical Data DCE-MRI data from twelve patients with locally advanced breast cancer were analyzed in this study. One patient did not present with a RR that significantly enhanced and therefore the analysis could not be performed. Over the remaining 11 patient, the RR model fit 79.89% +/? 0.08% of the enhancing voxels at the native temporal resolution, and 79.95% +/? 0.08% and 79.44% +/? 0.08% at the 32 second and 64 second temporal resolutions, respectively. Figure 4 presents the results of fitting three individual voxels (one rapidly enhancing, one moderately enhancing, and one weakly enhancing) selected from a sample patient (number 7) with increasingly coarser temporal resolution as indicated in the legends of each frame; the top row is the native 16.4 sec data while the middle and bottom rows present the downsampled 32.8 sec and 65.6 sec data. For each row, the first column (panels a, d, and g) depicts a rapidly enhancing voxel while the second (panels b, e, and f) and third (panels c, f, and i) columns depict moderately and weaker enhancing voxels, respectively. The inset windows within each frame of the first column present the RR data taken from the pectoralis major and the best fit of that curve as provided by Eq. [7] that was used in the subsequent fit to Eq. [3] to obtain estimates of K trans,TOI and v e, TOI . The solid line in each frame is the best fit curve provided by Eq. [3] . Observe that for the highly enhancing voxel (far left column) the 16.4 sec and 32.8 sec fits provide comparable values but the 65.6 sec data underestimates the value returned by the 16.4 sec data by 16.4%. This error is reduced in the moderately and slowly enhancing voxels of columns two and three where all analysis of the three temporal resolutions yields nearly identical results. These single voxels are presented to illustrate the points observed in the simulations; namely, that for only the most enhancing voxels is there a systematic underestimation of the parameter values obtained at the coarsest temporal resolution. Of course, these are only individual voxels and the trend over the whole tumor, as well as across all patients, is of greater importance. Figure 5 presents the K trans parametric maps overlaid on the anatomical sagittal cross sections of the central slice of the tumor for four patients (numbers 2, 4, 6, and 9; indicated on the lower left portion of the first frame in each row). Each row of the figure depicts one patient and each column presents the results of the parametric maps associated with the 16.4 sec (panels a, d, g, and j), 32.8 sec (panels b, e, h, and k), and 65.6 sec (panels c, f, i, and l) temporal resolution data, respectively. It is clear that the parametric maps associated with the 65.6 second temporal resolution data display many voxels with lower absolute values than the 16.4 sec or 32.8 sec data; this is perhaps most noticeable in patient 9. However, in general, the pattern and distribution of voxel values is quite similar between all temporal resolutions within a particular data set and this is particularly true for the 16.4 and 32.8 sec data sets. Figure 6 presents the analogous v e parametric maps and they are nearly identical across all temporal resolutions as would be expected from the results of the simulations. (These results are made more precise by the individual regressions of Figure 7 and Figure 8 and Table 2 .) These four patients represent a cross-section of the quality of the results of the study. Patients 2 and 4 represent quite average results (as tabulated in Table 2 below), while patient 6 shows an excellent relationship between all temporal resolutions and patient 9 shows a poor relationship. In order to make the parametric maps more quantitative, Figures 7a and 7b depict scatter plots of the K trans values returned from the 16.4 sec data (denoted by K trans,16 ) plotted versus the 32.8 (denoted by K trans,32 ) and 65.6 (denoted by K trans,64 ) sec data, respectively, for patient 10—the patient that provided some of the strongest correlations of the study. Similarly, panels c and d present data for v e . The solid line in each panel represents the regression line which is labeled along with the Pearson correlation coefficient. For patient 10 the slopes are 1.02 and 1.01 with r > 0.99 for both K trans cases, while the slopes are 0.89 for r > 0.94 for both v e cases. Figure 8 presents the data from patient 9 who showed some of the weakest correlations of the study; the slopes are 0.84 ( r = 0.78) and 0.60 ( r = 0.60) for 16.4 versus 32.8 data and the 16.4 versus 65.6 data, respectively. The v e results are better, with the slope being 1.01 ( r > 0.95) for both cases. As a major advantage of acquiring slower temporal resolution data is to allow for greater tissue coverage, Figure 9 displays the RR K trans maps for five central slices (one slice per column) obtained from another patient. Each row corresponds to one temporal sampling rate, and a visual inspection displays similar trends between the three rows as displayed in the single slice data of Figure 5 . In particular, note how the voxels with the highest K trans values in the 16.4 sec analysis begin to be underestimated in the 65.6 sec analysis (see the ring enhancement in columns two, three, and four). Table 2 summarizes the K trans results across all 12 patients that were studied. Overall, the weighted average of the slope between K trans,16 and K trans,32 is 1.025 (95% CI: 1.021, 1.029) with the Pearson's correlation r = 0.943 (CI: 0.940, 0.945). Ten patients had positive results (with slopes near the ideal of one), one patient (number 6) had a poor result (slope = 0.69), and one patient (number 8) did not exhibit enhancement within the RR. The slope reduces to 0.900 (CI: 0.894, 0.905), with r = 0.865, (CI: 0.858, 0.871) for the comparison between K trans,16 and K trans,64 . In this case, eight patients present encouraging results, while three patients (numbers 6, 9, and 11) present less promising results. The dip in the average slope indicates that the K trans,64 values are systematically underestimating the K trans value as estimated by the K trans,16 data just as was seen in the simulations (panels c and f of Figure 2 ). Table 3 presents the analogous data for v e and overall the v e values are quite stable with an average slope of 1.023 (CI: 1.021, 1.025), r = 0.979 (CI: 0.978, 0.980) and 1.041 (CI: 1.039, 1.043), r = 0.970 (CI: 0.968, 0.971) for v e,16 versus v e,32 and the v e,16 versus v e,64 , respectively.  Clinical Data DCE-MRI data from twelve patients with locally advanced breast cancer were analyzed in this study. One patient did not present with a RR that significantly enhanced and therefore the analysis could not be performed. Over the remaining 11 patient, the RR model fit 79.89% +/? 0.08% of the enhancing voxels at the native temporal resolution, and 79.95% +/? 0.08% and 79.44% +/? 0.08% at the 32 second and 64 second temporal resolutions, respectively. Figure 4 presents the results of fitting three individual voxels (one rapidly enhancing, one moderately enhancing, and one weakly enhancing) selected from a sample patient (number 7) with increasingly coarser temporal resolution as indicated in the legends of each frame; the top row is the native 16.4 sec data while the middle and bottom rows present the downsampled 32.8 sec and 65.6 sec data. For each row, the first column (panels a, d, and g) depicts a rapidly enhancing voxel while the second (panels b, e, and f) and third (panels c, f, and i) columns depict moderately and weaker enhancing voxels, respectively. The inset windows within each frame of the first column present the RR data taken from the pectoralis major and the best fit of that curve as provided by Eq. [7] that was used in the subsequent fit to Eq. [3] to obtain estimates of K trans,TOI and v e, TOI . The solid line in each frame is the best fit curve provided by Eq. [3] . Observe that for the highly enhancing voxel (far left column) the 16.4 sec and 32.8 sec fits provide comparable values but the 65.6 sec data underestimates the value returned by the 16.4 sec data by 16.4%. This error is reduced in the moderately and slowly enhancing voxels of columns two and three where all analysis of the three temporal resolutions yields nearly identical results. These single voxels are presented to illustrate the points observed in the simulations; namely, that for only the most enhancing voxels is there a systematic underestimation of the parameter values obtained at the coarsest temporal resolution. Of course, these are only individual voxels and the trend over the whole tumor, as well as across all patients, is of greater importance. Figure 5 presents the K trans parametric maps overlaid on the anatomical sagittal cross sections of the central slice of the tumor for four patients (numbers 2, 4, 6, and 9; indicated on the lower left portion of the first frame in each row). Each row of the figure depicts one patient and each column presents the results of the parametric maps associated with the 16.4 sec (panels a, d, g, and j), 32.8 sec (panels b, e, h, and k), and 65.6 sec (panels c, f, i, and l) temporal resolution data, respectively. It is clear that the parametric maps associated with the 65.6 second temporal resolution data display many voxels with lower absolute values than the 16.4 sec or 32.8 sec data; this is perhaps most noticeable in patient 9. However, in general, the pattern and distribution of voxel values is quite similar between all temporal resolutions within a particular data set and this is particularly true for the 16.4 and 32.8 sec data sets. Figure 6 presents the analogous v e parametric maps and they are nearly identical across all temporal resolutions as would be expected from the results of the simulations. (These results are made more precise by the individual regressions of Figure 7 and Figure 8 and Table 2 .) These four patients represent a cross-section of the quality of the results of the study. Patients 2 and 4 represent quite average results (as tabulated in Table 2 below), while patient 6 shows an excellent relationship between all temporal resolutions and patient 9 shows a poor relationship. In order to make the parametric maps more quantitative, Figures 7a and 7b depict scatter plots of the K trans values returned from the 16.4 sec data (denoted by K trans,16 ) plotted versus the 32.8 (denoted by K trans,32 ) and 65.6 (denoted by K trans,64 ) sec data, respectively, for patient 10—the patient that provided some of the strongest correlations of the study. Similarly, panels c and d present data for v e . The solid line in each panel represents the regression line which is labeled along with the Pearson correlation coefficient. For patient 10 the slopes are 1.02 and 1.01 with r > 0.99 for both K trans cases, while the slopes are 0.89 for r > 0.94 for both v e cases. Figure 8 presents the data from patient 9 who showed some of the weakest correlations of the study; the slopes are 0.84 ( r = 0.78) and 0.60 ( r = 0.60) for 16.4 versus 32.8 data and the 16.4 versus 65.6 data, respectively. The v e results are better, with the slope being 1.01 ( r > 0.95) for both cases. As a major advantage of acquiring slower temporal resolution data is to allow for greater tissue coverage, Figure 9 displays the RR K trans maps for five central slices (one slice per column) obtained from another patient. Each row corresponds to one temporal sampling rate, and a visual inspection displays similar trends between the three rows as displayed in the single slice data of Figure 5 . In particular, note how the voxels with the highest K trans values in the 16.4 sec analysis begin to be underestimated in the 65.6 sec analysis (see the ring enhancement in columns two, three, and four). Table 2 summarizes the K trans results across all 12 patients that were studied. Overall, the weighted average of the slope between K trans,16 and K trans,32 is 1.025 (95% CI: 1.021, 1.029) with the Pearson's correlation r = 0.943 (CI: 0.940, 0.945). Ten patients had positive results (with slopes near the ideal of one), one patient (number 6) had a poor result (slope = 0.69), and one patient (number 8) did not exhibit enhancement within the RR. The slope reduces to 0.900 (CI: 0.894, 0.905), with r = 0.865, (CI: 0.858, 0.871) for the comparison between K trans,16 and K trans,64 . In this case, eight patients present encouraging results, while three patients (numbers 6, 9, and 11) present less promising results. The dip in the average slope indicates that the K trans,64 values are systematically underestimating the K trans value as estimated by the K trans,16 data just as was seen in the simulations (panels c and f of Figure 2 ). Table 3 presents the analogous data for v e and overall the v e values are quite stable with an average slope of 1.023 (CI: 1.021, 1.025), r = 0.979 (CI: 0.978, 0.980) and 1.041 (CI: 1.039, 1.043), r = 0.970 (CI: 0.968, 0.971) for v e,16 versus v e,32 and the v e,16 versus v e,64 , respectively.  Discussion When designing a DCE-MRI data acquisition protocol for breast studies (or, indeed, for any target of interest), a balance between spatial and temporal resolution must be determined. When high spatial resolution data are acquired, this necessarily increases the acquisition time per image and thus limits the temporal sampling of the arterial input function and the tissue response curves, which consequently decreases the accuracy of quantitative analyses of DCE time courses using conventional methods. Indeed, many efforts have considered the temporal sampling requirements in order to perform accurate pharmacokinetic modeling when the AIF is required (see, e.g., 20 – 22 ) and those studies indicate that the temporal sampling should not exceed nine seconds. (We have not repeated the analysis whereby temporal sampling of AIF is decreased as this has been studied many times previously. In those studies, the maximum temporal sampling interval is significantly shorter than what is presented in this effort.) Unfortunately, that temporal resolution greatly limits the spatial resolution and/or SNR at which the images can be acquired and this limits the clinical application of such data. Furthermore, in practice, the acquisition protocol may be determined by clinical demands and this frequently means only high spatial resolution and low temporal resolution data can be obtained. Reference region models are an attractive option for attacking this problem as time courses selected from, say, muscle tissue, change much more gradually than those in the blood stream (i.e., the AIF time courses). As RR models calibrate the changes in the tissue of interest (e.g., a tumor) relative to those in the RR rather than those in the blood, high temporal resolution is less important. The simulations we have presented here show that quantitative characterization of tumor pharmacokinetics can be achieved with high accuracy and precision with temporal sampling as coarse as approximately 35 seconds except for the most extreme cases which combine a high K trans value with a low v e value (panels c and f of Figure 2 ). The results of the experimental studies indicate that analyzing data with a temporal resolution of 32.8 seconds yields results that are very similar to those provided by analyzing data with a temporal resolution of 16.4 seconds; analyzing data with a temporal resolution of 65.6 leads to a systematic underestimation (by approximately 15% as indicated by the average slope presented in Table 2 ) of K trans values. This temporal sampling requirement is significantly less than those recommended with a standard DCE-MRI analysis ( 22 , 23 ). However, the method presented here is certainly not without its limitations which we now consider. The first limitation to observe is that there may not be significant SNR (or enhancement) in the RR in order to be able to perform the analysis as was seen in patient 8 in this current study. If an adequate RR curve is not available then the analysis presented here cannot be performed. Further studies in a larger number of patients are required to see how often this occurs. A larger patient data set is also needed to assess the reproducibility of RR time courses drawn from the pectoralis majoris muscle A second potential limitation is that the method requires an assumption on the values of K trans,RR and v e,RR . (We note that the method also assumes the AIF feeding the TOI is the same as that feeding the RR, but this is a similar assumption taken in nearly all DCE-MRI analysis; namely, that wherever the AIF is measured, even if it is quite distant from the tumor location, it is the same one that is feeding the TOI.) The assumption of v e,RR of 0.12 is not unreasonable and many studies have placed v e of muscle at approximately 0.10 ( 36 , 37 , 44 ). However, the assumption of K trans for muscle of 0.15 min?1 is potentially problematic as there is most likely some variation in this value. For example, Padhani, et al ( 36 , 37 ) showed a large variation depending on muscle location and this variation can lead to systematic errors in the estimates of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI ( 26 ). Previous evidence has been presented that the K trans,RR value need not be assigned ( 30 ), but further work on this approach is required for its application in breast cancer. Other groups have also presented reference region models for which this may not be a problem; in particular, the multiple reference region model of Yang, et al ( 27 ) is a promising technique that may alleviate this shortcoming. A third limitation is that the model does not take into account the effects of a plasma term or the effects of water exchange; both of which are almost certainly present in the data presented here. While there are RR models that account for these terms independently (see references 28 and 29 for RR models that incorporate water exchange effects and blood plasma, respectively) adding parameters will most likely reduce the precision with which such estimates can be made, and these issues need to be systematically investigated. It is important to note here that there are a variety of methods available for analyzing DCE-MRI data and these range from empirical descriptions of curve shape ( 45 ) to full three site exchange models ( 46 ). The model presented here is based on the original Kety description and as such is somewhat simplistic. However, the goal here is to show that reference region models, by not explicitly characterizing the AIF, can return estimates of the relevant pharmacokinetic parameters over a range of temporal samplings in human breast cancer. It is anticipated that additional advances in reference region modeling will be required to make the approach presented here more rigorous. An important study to perform would be actual measure the AIF in breast cancer patients and then perform a direct comparison between an AIF driven analysis and a RR analysis. Such a comparison has been made in the small animal setting, but it (to the best of our knowledge) has yet to be performed in breast cancer patients. Thus, the present study does cannot compare the RR results to a gold standard—though it can assess what the temporal sampling requirements are. In conclusion, while the reference region approach is not without its limitations, the results presented here indicate that, it can maintain parameter accuracy and precision within acceptable limits when coarser temporal samplings are required, at least in the special case of breast cancer. This suggests the RR model is a reasonable alternative for analyzing breast cancer DCE-MRI data sets obtained with coarse temporal resolution and for which no AIF is readily available. In this way, it provides a practical method to analyze clinical DCE-MRI data sets.  Discussion When designing a DCE-MRI data acquisition protocol for breast studies (or, indeed, for any target of interest), a balance between spatial and temporal resolution must be determined. When high spatial resolution data are acquired, this necessarily increases the acquisition time per image and thus limits the temporal sampling of the arterial input function and the tissue response curves, which consequently decreases the accuracy of quantitative analyses of DCE time courses using conventional methods. Indeed, many efforts have considered the temporal sampling requirements in order to perform accurate pharmacokinetic modeling when the AIF is required (see, e.g., 20 – 22 ) and those studies indicate that the temporal sampling should not exceed nine seconds. (We have not repeated the analysis whereby temporal sampling of AIF is decreased as this has been studied many times previously. In those studies, the maximum temporal sampling interval is significantly shorter than what is presented in this effort.) Unfortunately, that temporal resolution greatly limits the spatial resolution and/or SNR at which the images can be acquired and this limits the clinical application of such data. Furthermore, in practice, the acquisition protocol may be determined by clinical demands and this frequently means only high spatial resolution and low temporal resolution data can be obtained. Reference region models are an attractive option for attacking this problem as time courses selected from, say, muscle tissue, change much more gradually than those in the blood stream (i.e., the AIF time courses). As RR models calibrate the changes in the tissue of interest (e.g., a tumor) relative to those in the RR rather than those in the blood, high temporal resolution is less important. The simulations we have presented here show that quantitative characterization of tumor pharmacokinetics can be achieved with high accuracy and precision with temporal sampling as coarse as approximately 35 seconds except for the most extreme cases which combine a high K trans value with a low v e value (panels c and f of Figure 2 ). The results of the experimental studies indicate that analyzing data with a temporal resolution of 32.8 seconds yields results that are very similar to those provided by analyzing data with a temporal resolution of 16.4 seconds; analyzing data with a temporal resolution of 65.6 leads to a systematic underestimation (by approximately 15% as indicated by the average slope presented in Table 2 ) of K trans values. This temporal sampling requirement is significantly less than those recommended with a standard DCE-MRI analysis ( 22 , 23 ). However, the method presented here is certainly not without its limitations which we now consider. The first limitation to observe is that there may not be significant SNR (or enhancement) in the RR in order to be able to perform the analysis as was seen in patient 8 in this current study. If an adequate RR curve is not available then the analysis presented here cannot be performed. Further studies in a larger number of patients are required to see how often this occurs. A larger patient data set is also needed to assess the reproducibility of RR time courses drawn from the pectoralis majoris muscle A second potential limitation is that the method requires an assumption on the values of K trans,RR and v e,RR . (We note that the method also assumes the AIF feeding the TOI is the same as that feeding the RR, but this is a similar assumption taken in nearly all DCE-MRI analysis; namely, that wherever the AIF is measured, even if it is quite distant from the tumor location, it is the same one that is feeding the TOI.) The assumption of v e,RR of 0.12 is not unreasonable and many studies have placed v e of muscle at approximately 0.10 ( 36 , 37 , 44 ). However, the assumption of K trans for muscle of 0.15 min?1 is potentially problematic as there is most likely some variation in this value. For example, Padhani, et al ( 36 , 37 ) showed a large variation depending on muscle location and this variation can lead to systematic errors in the estimates of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI ( 26 ). Previous evidence has been presented that the K trans,RR value need not be assigned ( 30 ), but further work on this approach is required for its application in breast cancer. Other groups have also presented reference region models for which this may not be a problem; in particular, the multiple reference region model of Yang, et al ( 27 ) is a promising technique that may alleviate this shortcoming. A third limitation is that the model does not take into account the effects of a plasma term or the effects of water exchange; both of which are almost certainly present in the data presented here. While there are RR models that account for these terms independently (see references 28 and 29 for RR models that incorporate water exchange effects and blood plasma, respectively) adding parameters will most likely reduce the precision with which such estimates can be made, and these issues need to be systematically investigated. It is important to note here that there are a variety of methods available for analyzing DCE-MRI data and these range from empirical descriptions of curve shape ( 45 ) to full three site exchange models ( 46 ). The model presented here is based on the original Kety description and as such is somewhat simplistic. However, the goal here is to show that reference region models, by not explicitly characterizing the AIF, can return estimates of the relevant pharmacokinetic parameters over a range of temporal samplings in human breast cancer. It is anticipated that additional advances in reference region modeling will be required to make the approach presented here more rigorous. An important study to perform would be actual measure the AIF in breast cancer patients and then perform a direct comparison between an AIF driven analysis and a RR analysis. Such a comparison has been made in the small animal setting, but it (to the best of our knowledge) has yet to be performed in breast cancer patients. Thus, the present study does cannot compare the RR results to a gold standard—though it can assess what the temporal sampling requirements are. In conclusion, while the reference region approach is not without its limitations, the results presented here indicate that, it can maintain parameter accuracy and precision within acceptable limits when coarser temporal samplings are required, at least in the special case of breast cancer. This suggests the RR model is a reasonable alternative for analyzing breast cancer DCE-MRI data sets obtained with coarse temporal resolution and for which no AIF is readily available. In this way, it provides a practical method to analyze clinical DCE-MRI data sets.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Panel displays the three arterial input functions (AIF) curves used in the simulations; these curves are designed to represent different contrast agent injection durations as described in Henderson et al ( 22 ). By setting K trans,RR and v e,RR to 0.15 min?1 and 0.12, respectively, these three AIFs give rise to the three reference region (RR) time courses observed in panel b. These three time courses are used to drive Eq. [1] in the simulations. Figure 2 The nine panels present the error and precision in the RR model’s estimates of K trans,TOI over a range of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI input values as a function of temporal resolution and the three AIFs depicted in Figure 1 . The accuracy and precision of the returned values are well within +/? 20% (solid horizontal lines) for temporal resolutions up to 16.5 s and, with the exception of the K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combination of 1.5 min?1 and 0.3 (panel c), is also true for temporal resolutions up to 35.6 sec. It is only those parameter combinations for which there is a very large K trans,TOI and a relatively small v e,TOI value for which the RR model has difficulty returning accurate estimates. In such cases, there is a systematic underestimation of the true K trans,TOI value at the coarser temporal resolutions. In general, the precision is within +/?15% of the mean up to a temporal resolution of 29.0 s. Figure 3 These nine panels present the results for v e and are analogous to the Figure 2 K trans results. Here, the dashed and solid horizontal bars represent the +/?5 % and +/? 15% error marks, respectively. The v e parameter is very stable as judged by both high accuracy and precision for all nearly all K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combinations with errors never greater than 20% for any AIF or parameter combination. Figure 4 The results of fitting three individual voxels selected from patient number 7 with increasingly coarser temporal resolution. The inset windows within each frame of the first column present the RR data taken from the pectoralis majoris and the best fit of that curve as provided by Eq. [7] that was used in the subsequent Eq. [3] fit to obtain estimates of K trans,TOI and v e, TOI . Observe that the highly enhancing voxel (far left column) presents the greatest discrepancy between the three data sets, and that the error is reduced in the moderately and slowly enhancing voxels of columns two and three. The scatter plots of Figure 7 and Figure 8 present a more complete picture of individual patients Figure 5 The K trans maps overlain on anatomical sagittal cross sections of the central slice of the tumor for four patients (numbers 2, 4, 6, and 9). Each row of the figure depicts one patient and each column presents the results of the parametric maps associated with the 16.4 sec (panels a, d, g, and j), 32.8 sec (b, e, h, and k), and 65.6 sec (c, f, i, and l) temporal resolution data, respectively. The parametric maps constructed from the 65.6 sec data display many voxels with lower absolute values than the 16.4 sec or 32.8 sec data. However, the pattern and distribution of parameter values is similar between all temporal resolutions within a particular data set. Figure 6 These panels present the results for v e and are analogous to the Figure 5 K trans results. As predicted by the simulations, there is great similarity amongst the different temporal resolution analyses. This indicates that accurate ve parameters can be obtained with quite coarse temporal resolution. Figure 7 Panels a and b depicts scatter plots of K trans values returned from the 16.4 sec data (denoted by K trans,16 ) are plotted versus the 32.8 ( K trans,32 ) and 65.6 (denoted by K trans,64 ) sec data, respectively, for patient 10. Similarly, panels c and d present data for v e . For this patient the slopes are 1.02 and 1.01 with r > 0.99 for both K trans cases, while the slopes are 0.89 for r > 0.94 for both v e cases. These K trans results were some of the strongest in the study. Figure 8 Panels a and b present the analogous Figure 7 data for Patient nine which presented some of the weakest K trans results of the study; the slopes are 0.84 ( r = 0.78) and 0.60 ( r = 0.60) for 16.4 versus 32.8 data and the 16.4 versus 65.6 data, respectively. The v e results are quite better with the slope being 1.01 ( r > 0.95) for both cases. Figure 9 K trans maps for five central slices (one slice per column) obtained from another patient. Each row corresponds to one temporal sampling rate, and a visual inspection displays similar trends between the three rows. Table 1 The six data acquisition schemes that were employed in the simulation studies. spat. res. (mm) acq. matrix temp. res. (sec) SNR TOI SNR RR # points 2×2×5 128×128×20 10.5 59.95 599.50 35 1.6×1.6×5 160×160×20 13.4 43.08 430.76 27 1.33×1.33×5 192×192×20 16.4 33.00 330.00 22 1×1×4 256×256×25 29.0 19.55 195.47 13 1×1×3 256×256×33 35.6 16.57 165.66 11 1×1×2 256×256×50 55.2 13.63 136.29 7 Table 2 K trans results the analysis of the acquired and downsampled temporal resolution data K trans,16 vs K trans,32 K trans,16 vs K trans,64 patient pearson slope pearson slope 1 0.970 1.256 0.932 0.991 2 0.962 1.006 0.934 0.811 3 0.956 0.910 0.858 0.866 4 0.875 0.918 0.710 0.799 5 0.913 1.058 0.863 0.999 6 0.921 0.690 0.640 0.377 7 0.813 0.975 0.792 0.740 8 minimal RR enhancement 9 0.784 0.842 0.636 0.596 10 0.999 1.019 0.996 1.007 11 0.915 0.878 0.667 0.588 12 0.817 1.182 0.874 1.606 weighted mean 0.943 1.025 0.865 0.900 95 % CI (0.940, 0.945) (1.021, 1.029) (0.858, 0.871) (0.894, 0.905) Table 3 The v e analogue of Table 2 v e,16 vs v e,32 v e,16 vs v e,64 patient pearson slope pearson slope 1 0.994 1.029 0.991 1.047 2 0.893 0.949 0.899 0.963 3 0.988 1.015 0.978 1.038 4 0.934 1.048 0.891 1.090 5 0.958 0.967 0.940 0.970 6 0.925 0.999 0.861 0.987 7 0.986 1.014 0.964 1.050 8 minimal RR enhancement 9 0.956 1.011 0.955 1.011 10 0.957 0.887 0.948 0.888 11 0.967 1.058 0.976 1.051 12 0.991 1.021 0.981 1.097 weighted mean 0.979 1.020 0.970 1.040 95 % CI (0.978, 0.980) (1.021, 1.025) (0.968, 0.971) (1.039, 1.043)  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Panel displays the three arterial input functions (AIF) curves used in the simulations; these curves are designed to represent different contrast agent injection durations as described in Henderson et al ( 22 ). By setting K trans,RR and v e,RR to 0.15 min?1 and 0.12, respectively, these three AIFs give rise to the three reference region (RR) time courses observed in panel b. These three time courses are used to drive Eq. [1] in the simulations. Figure 2 The nine panels present the error and precision in the RR model’s estimates of K trans,TOI over a range of K trans,TOI and v e,TOI input values as a function of temporal resolution and the three AIFs depicted in Figure 1 . The accuracy and precision of the returned values are well within +/? 20% (solid horizontal lines) for temporal resolutions up to 16.5 s and, with the exception of the K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combination of 1.5 min?1 and 0.3 (panel c), is also true for temporal resolutions up to 35.6 sec. It is only those parameter combinations for which there is a very large K trans,TOI and a relatively small v e,TOI value for which the RR model has difficulty returning accurate estimates. In such cases, there is a systematic underestimation of the true K trans,TOI value at the coarser temporal resolutions. In general, the precision is within +/?15% of the mean up to a temporal resolution of 29.0 s. Figure 3 These nine panels present the results for v e and are analogous to the Figure 2 K trans results. Here, the dashed and solid horizontal bars represent the +/?5 % and +/? 15% error marks, respectively. The v e parameter is very stable as judged by both high accuracy and precision for all nearly all K trans,TOI and v e,TOI combinations with errors never greater than 20% for any AIF or parameter combination. Figure 4 The results of fitting three individual voxels selected from patient number 7 with increasingly coarser temporal resolution. The inset windows within each frame of the first column present the RR data taken from the pectoralis majoris and the best fit of that curve as provided by Eq. [7] that was used in the subsequent Eq. [3] fit to obtain estimates of K trans,TOI and v e, TOI . Observe that the highly enhancing voxel (far left column) presents the greatest discrepancy between the three data sets, and that the error is reduced in the moderately and slowly enhancing voxels of columns two and three. The scatter plots of Figure 7 and Figure 8 present a more complete picture of individual patients Figure 5 The K trans maps overlain on anatomical sagittal cross sections of the central slice of the tumor for four patients (numbers 2, 4, 6, and 9). Each row of the figure depicts one patient and each column presents the results of the parametric maps associated with the 16.4 sec (panels a, d, g, and j), 32.8 sec (b, e, h, and k), and 65.6 sec (c, f, i, and l) temporal resolution data, respectively. The parametric maps constructed from the 65.6 sec data display many voxels with lower absolute values than the 16.4 sec or 32.8 sec data. However, the pattern and distribution of parameter values is similar between all temporal resolutions within a particular data set. Figure 6 These panels present the results for v e and are analogous to the Figure 5 K trans results. As predicted by the simulations, there is great similarity amongst the different temporal resolution analyses. This indicates that accurate ve parameters can be obtained with quite coarse temporal resolution. Figure 7 Panels a and b depicts scatter plots of K trans values returned from the 16.4 sec data (denoted by K trans,16 ) are plotted versus the 32.8 ( K trans,32 ) and 65.6 (denoted by K trans,64 ) sec data, respectively, for patient 10. Similarly, panels c and d present data for v e . For this patient the slopes are 1.02 and 1.01 with r > 0.99 for both K trans cases, while the slopes are 0.89 for r > 0.94 for both v e cases. These K trans results were some of the strongest in the study. Figure 8 Panels a and b present the analogous Figure 7 data for Patient nine which presented some of the weakest K trans results of the study; the slopes are 0.84 ( r = 0.78) and 0.60 ( r = 0.60) for 16.4 versus 32.8 data and the 16.4 versus 65.6 data, respectively. The v e results are quite better with the slope being 1.01 ( r > 0.95) for both cases. Figure 9 K trans maps for five central slices (one slice per column) obtained from another patient. Each row corresponds to one temporal sampling rate, and a visual inspection displays similar trends between the three rows. Table 1 The six data acquisition schemes that were employed in the simulation studies. spat. res. (mm) acq. matrix temp. res. (sec) SNR TOI SNR RR # points 2×2×5 128×128×20 10.5 59.95 599.50 35 1.6×1.6×5 160×160×20 13.4 43.08 430.76 27 1.33×1.33×5 192×192×20 16.4 33.00 330.00 22 1×1×4 256×256×25 29.0 19.55 195.47 13 1×1×3 256×256×33 35.6 16.57 165.66 11 1×1×2 256×256×50 55.2 13.63 136.29 7 Table 2 K trans results the analysis of the acquired and downsampled temporal resolution data K trans,16 vs K trans,32 K trans,16 vs K trans,64 patient pearson slope pearson slope 1 0.970 1.256 0.932 0.991 2 0.962 1.006 0.934 0.811 3 0.956 0.910 0.858 0.866 4 0.875 0.918 0.710 0.799 5 0.913 1.058 0.863 0.999 6 0.921 0.690 0.640 0.377 7 0.813 0.975 0.792 0.740 8 minimal RR enhancement 9 0.784 0.842 0.636 0.596 10 0.999 1.019 0.996 1.007 11 0.915 0.878 0.667 0.588 12 0.817 1.182 0.874 1.606 weighted mean 0.943 1.025 0.865 0.900 95 % CI (0.940, 0.945) (1.021, 1.029) (0.858, 0.871) (0.894, 0.905) Table 3 The v e analogue of Table 2 v e,16 vs v e,32 v e,16 vs v e,64 patient pearson slope pearson slope 1 0.994 1.029 0.991 1.047 2 0.893 0.949 0.899 0.963 3 0.988 1.015 0.978 1.038 4 0.934 1.048 0.891 1.090 5 0.958 0.967 0.940 0.970 6 0.925 0.999 0.861 0.987 7 0.986 1.014 0.964 1.050 8 minimal RR enhancement 9 0.956 1.011 0.955 1.011 10 0.957 0.887 0.948 0.888 11 0.967 1.058 0.976 1.051 12 0.991 1.021 0.981 1.097 weighted mean 0.979 1.020 0.970 1.040 95 % CI (0.978, 0.980) (1.021, 1.025) (0.968, 0.971) (1.039, 1.043) 