NCCN Task Force Report: Bone Health in Cancer Care Bone health and maintenance of bone integrity are important components of comprehensive cancer care in both early and late stages of disease. Risk factors for osteoporosis are increased in patients with cancer, including women with chemotherapy-induced ovarian failure, those treated with aromatase inhibitors for breast cancer, men receiving androgen-deprivation therapy for prostate cancer, and patients undergoing glucocorticoid therapy. The skeleton is a common site of metastatic cancer recurrence, and skeletal-related events are the cause of significant morbidity. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) convened a multidisciplinary task force on Bone Health in Cancer Care to discuss the progress made in identifying effective screening and therapeutic options for management of treatment-related bone loss; understanding the factors that result in bone metastases; managing skeletal metastases; and evolving strategies to reduce bone recurrences. This report summarizes presentations made at the meeting.  Role of Adjuvant Bisphosphonates in Reducing Recurrence Breast Cancer Preclinical in vitro studies have shown that bisphosphonates inhibit the adhesion of breast cancer cells to extracellular bone matrix, inhibit tumor cell invasion, 140 – 143 and induce apoptosis via the ras pathway in human breast cancer cells. 144 In an animal study, pretreatment of nude mice with bisphosphonates before inoculation of tumor cells reduced the development of osteolytic lesions. 145 Taken together, these studies suggest that bisphosphonates may inhibit critical steps in the development of bone metastases in addition to inhibiting resorption. Three randomized trials in early stage breast cancer investigated whether oral clodronate can prevent bone metastases and improve survival; 2 of the 3 showed a survival benefit. In a large (n = 1069) placebo-controlled trial, breast cancer patients receiving standard systemic therapies were randomized to receive oral clodronate (1600 mg, daily) or placebo for 2 years as adjuvant treatment. 146 This trial reported a reduced risk of bone metastases with clodronate of 51 versus 73 events (HR, 0.69; P = .04) at 5 years, and 19 versus 35 events (HR, 0.55; P = .048) during the 2 years on treatment. Survival at 5 years, the preplanned study end point, favored the clodronate group with a hazard rate of uncertain significance because of multiple analyses (for all patients: HR, = 0.77; P = 0.048). The most recent report includes survival data with long-term follow-up that showed a continued separation of the survival curves between years 5 and 10. 146 In a second smaller, randomized, open-label study, 302 women with breast cancer and micrometastases detected in a bone marrow aspirate at diagnosis were randomized to receive either clodronate (1,600 mg, daily) or no bisphosphonate for 2 years. Additionally, patients received standard adjuvant systemic therapy. Patients who received clodronate had a 50% reduction in the incidence of bone metastases ( P = .003), and a significantly longer bone metastasis-free survival ( P < .001). Distant metastases were detected in 21 of 157 patients (13%) who received clodronate compared with 42 of 145 patients (29%) in the control group ( P < .001). 147 A later analysis at 8.5 years’ follow-up continued to confirm a significant improvement in overall survival for clodronate patients, although the significance in disease-free survival no longer persisted. 148 In a third small randomized, open-label study investigating 3 years of adjuvant clodronate therapy in 299 patients with lymph node-positive breast cancer, the results showed no reduction in bone metastases in the clodronate-treated arm, although bone as a first site of relapse was less frequent in the clodronate group than in the control arm (14% vs. 30%). However, a worrisome increase in visceral metastases and reduction in overall survival at 5 years was seen for patients receiving clodronate. 149 A possible explanation for these adverse outcomes is an imbalance in hormone-negative cases between the arms of the study, with significantly more PR-negative (45% vs. 31%; P = .03) and a trend towards more ER-negative (35% vs. 23%) tumors in the clodronate group. This difference was potentially exacerbated by the practice in this trial of assigning endocrine therapy alone to all postmenopausal women and chemotherapy alone to all premenopausal women, regardless of ER/PR status. The negative impact of clodronate on overall survival appears to be neutralized when the imbalance in hormone receptor negativity is corrected. Even without correction, the survival detriment no longer showed significance at 10 years. A meta-analysis using the 5-year data from these 3 adjuvant clodronate trials did not show a statistically significant difference in overall or bone metastasis-free survival when the data were pooled. 150 A marked heterogeneity among the trials in part explains the wide confidence interval around the HR (HR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.31–1.82). A recent study investigating the adjuvant use of zoledronic acid reported an improvement in disease-free survival, in addition to favorable effects on BMD. 102 The ABCSG-12 trial enrolled 1,800 premenopausal women with ER-positive breast cancer. All patients received ovarian suppression for 3 years with a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogue, goserelin. Patients were randomized in a 2 by 2 design to receive tamoxifen versus anastrozole, and zoledronic acid (4 mg, every 6 months) or not. At the first efficacy analysis, reported after 137 events (70 distant relapses) with approximately 60 months follow-up, no difference in outcome was seen with respect to the endocrine therapy randomization. However, the authors found a statistically significant improvement in disease-free survival for patients who received zoledronic acid (HR, 0.64; P = .01), with a similar trend toward improved overall survival (HR, 0.60; P = .10). The absolute benefit in disease-free survival was 3.2%. Although ABCSG-12 clearly provides additional support for the metastasis-suppressing potential of adjuvant bisphosphonates, this study enrolled only a narrow subset of breast cancer patients: premenopausal women with ER-positive tumors who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Although the results are promising, caution must be taken not to over-extrapolate these findings, or this dose schedule, to all breast cancer patients. The Z-FAST and ZO-FAST trials enrolled ER-positive postmenopausal women receiving letrozole and randomized them to “upfront” versus “delayed” zoledronic acid therapy (4 mg, every 6 months for 5 years) in an attempt to reduce bone loss–related morbidity. 55 , 119 , 120 Time to recurrence was a secondary end point. A recent combined analysis of these trials showed lower recurrence rates in the group receiving upfront zoledronic acid therapy (1.1% vs. 2.3%; P = .04). 55 Two additional large trials of adjuvant bisphosphonates have met their targeted accrual goals, with efficacy analysis pending. The National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-34 trial (closed to accrual in 2004) enrolled women with stage I or II breast cancer and compared 3 years of daily oral clodronate (1600 mg, daily) to placebo. The primary end point was disease-free survival. Another clinical trial asking “Does Adjuvant Zoledronic Acid Reduce Recurrence in Patients with High-Risk Localized Breast Cancer?” (AZURE) enrolled stage II and III breast cancer patients, comparing standard adjuvant cancer therapy alone or given with “intensive” zoledronic acid for 5 years (4 mg monthly for 6 months, followed by once every 3 months for 2 years, then once every 6 months through year 5). This trial closed to accrual in 2006. The North American Breast Cancer Intergroup, in combination with the NSABP, is conducting SWOG S0307, a comparison of 3 different bisphosphonates in the adjuvant breast cancer setting. This trial is randomizing 4500 women with stage I or III breast cancer receiving standard adjuvant therapy to oral clodronate (1600 mg, daily) versus oral ibandronate (50 mg, daily) versus zoledronic acid (4 mg intravenously, monthly for 6 months, then every 3 months), all for 3 years duration. These unreported trials include all patient and tumor subsets, including both pre- and postmenopausal women, ER-positive and -negative tumors, and patients who received a range of standard systemic therapy, including chemotherapy. The results of these trials will be critical in determining how broadly applicable bisphosphonates are across the spectrum of breast cancer patients. Several additional ongoing early stage bisphosphonate trials are evaluating various agents, doses, schedules, and adjuvant settings, including residual disease after preoperative chemotherapy and in elderly populations. Prostate Cancer In prostate cancer, trials have yet to show any reduction in recurrence or death from the adjuvant use of bisphosphonates. A randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effects of zoledronic acid on time to first bone metastasis in men with prostate cancer, no bone metastases, and rising prostate-specific antigen despite ADT was terminated approximately halfway into accrual when interim analysis showed a lower-than-expected event rate. 151 A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of oral clodronate versus placebo in patients with nonmetastatic prostate cancer found no difference in bone metastases–free survival or overall survival after nearly 10 years of follow-up. 152 Several trials evaluating the adjuvant use of osteoclast-targeted therapy in prostate cancer are ongoing. One of the objectives of the Randomized Androgen Deprivation and Radiotherapy (RADAR) trial is to determine whether 18 months of zoledronic acid will reduce relapse risk by impeding the development of bony metastases. The ZEUS trial will assess the efficacy of zoledronic acid every 3 months versus best supportive care in preventing skeletal metastases in patients with high-risk prostate cancer. Additionally, the RANK-L inhibitor denosumab is being tested in an ongoing large (1500 patients) international randomized, phase III, placebo-controlled trial in men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer with the end point of bone metastasis–free survival. Conclusions The adjuvant bisphosphonate trials in breast cancer reported to date support the potential role of these drugs in impacting recurrence and survival in early stage breast cancer. The data do not yet support the addition of adjuvant bisphosphonates as standard of care for all patients. The promising, yet somewhat contradictory, results of the 3 reported breast cancer adjuvant clodronate studies suggest that bisphosphonates can impact disease recurrence, but highlight the need for further investigation. Extrapolation of the ABCSG-12 findings to postmenopausal women, ER-negative tumors, and women receiving chemotherapy will require data from ongoing clinical trials. These studies will aid in defining the optimal patient and tumor populations for the addition of adjuvant bisphosphonates, as well as optimal doses and schedules of administration, and long-term toxicities. Whether doses used in metastatic disease are required for prevention or whether lower doses will suffice is unknown. It is unclear whether adjuvant bisphosphonates should be given continuously and orally, whether intravenous therapy is preferable, and whether less intensive intravenous regimens will be as effective as more intensive regimens. The optimal duration of adjuvant bisphosphonate therapy is also unknown.  Breast Cancer Preclinical in vitro studies have shown that bisphosphonates inhibit the adhesion of breast cancer cells to extracellular bone matrix, inhibit tumor cell invasion, 140 – 143 and induce apoptosis via the ras pathway in human breast cancer cells. 144 In an animal study, pretreatment of nude mice with bisphosphonates before inoculation of tumor cells reduced the development of osteolytic lesions. 145 Taken together, these studies suggest that bisphosphonates may inhibit critical steps in the development of bone metastases in addition to inhibiting resorption. Three randomized trials in early stage breast cancer investigated whether oral clodronate can prevent bone metastases and improve survival; 2 of the 3 showed a survival benefit. In a large (n = 1069) placebo-controlled trial, breast cancer patients receiving standard systemic therapies were randomized to receive oral clodronate (1600 mg, daily) or placebo for 2 years as adjuvant treatment. 146 This trial reported a reduced risk of bone metastases with clodronate of 51 versus 73 events (HR, 0.69; P = .04) at 5 years, and 19 versus 35 events (HR, 0.55; P = .048) during the 2 years on treatment. Survival at 5 years, the preplanned study end point, favored the clodronate group with a hazard rate of uncertain significance because of multiple analyses (for all patients: HR, = 0.77; P = 0.048). The most recent report includes survival data with long-term follow-up that showed a continued separation of the survival curves between years 5 and 10. 146 In a second smaller, randomized, open-label study, 302 women with breast cancer and micrometastases detected in a bone marrow aspirate at diagnosis were randomized to receive either clodronate (1,600 mg, daily) or no bisphosphonate for 2 years. Additionally, patients received standard adjuvant systemic therapy. Patients who received clodronate had a 50% reduction in the incidence of bone metastases ( P = .003), and a significantly longer bone metastasis-free survival ( P < .001). Distant metastases were detected in 21 of 157 patients (13%) who received clodronate compared with 42 of 145 patients (29%) in the control group ( P < .001). 147 A later analysis at 8.5 years’ follow-up continued to confirm a significant improvement in overall survival for clodronate patients, although the significance in disease-free survival no longer persisted. 148 In a third small randomized, open-label study investigating 3 years of adjuvant clodronate therapy in 299 patients with lymph node-positive breast cancer, the results showed no reduction in bone metastases in the clodronate-treated arm, although bone as a first site of relapse was less frequent in the clodronate group than in the control arm (14% vs. 30%). However, a worrisome increase in visceral metastases and reduction in overall survival at 5 years was seen for patients receiving clodronate. 149 A possible explanation for these adverse outcomes is an imbalance in hormone-negative cases between the arms of the study, with significantly more PR-negative (45% vs. 31%; P = .03) and a trend towards more ER-negative (35% vs. 23%) tumors in the clodronate group. This difference was potentially exacerbated by the practice in this trial of assigning endocrine therapy alone to all postmenopausal women and chemotherapy alone to all premenopausal women, regardless of ER/PR status. The negative impact of clodronate on overall survival appears to be neutralized when the imbalance in hormone receptor negativity is corrected. Even without correction, the survival detriment no longer showed significance at 10 years. A meta-analysis using the 5-year data from these 3 adjuvant clodronate trials did not show a statistically significant difference in overall or bone metastasis-free survival when the data were pooled. 150 A marked heterogeneity among the trials in part explains the wide confidence interval around the HR (HR, 0.75; 95% CI, 0.31–1.82). A recent study investigating the adjuvant use of zoledronic acid reported an improvement in disease-free survival, in addition to favorable effects on BMD. 102 The ABCSG-12 trial enrolled 1,800 premenopausal women with ER-positive breast cancer. All patients received ovarian suppression for 3 years with a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogue, goserelin. Patients were randomized in a 2 by 2 design to receive tamoxifen versus anastrozole, and zoledronic acid (4 mg, every 6 months) or not. At the first efficacy analysis, reported after 137 events (70 distant relapses) with approximately 60 months follow-up, no difference in outcome was seen with respect to the endocrine therapy randomization. However, the authors found a statistically significant improvement in disease-free survival for patients who received zoledronic acid (HR, 0.64; P = .01), with a similar trend toward improved overall survival (HR, 0.60; P = .10). The absolute benefit in disease-free survival was 3.2%. Although ABCSG-12 clearly provides additional support for the metastasis-suppressing potential of adjuvant bisphosphonates, this study enrolled only a narrow subset of breast cancer patients: premenopausal women with ER-positive tumors who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Although the results are promising, caution must be taken not to over-extrapolate these findings, or this dose schedule, to all breast cancer patients. The Z-FAST and ZO-FAST trials enrolled ER-positive postmenopausal women receiving letrozole and randomized them to “upfront” versus “delayed” zoledronic acid therapy (4 mg, every 6 months for 5 years) in an attempt to reduce bone loss–related morbidity. 55 , 119 , 120 Time to recurrence was a secondary end point. A recent combined analysis of these trials showed lower recurrence rates in the group receiving upfront zoledronic acid therapy (1.1% vs. 2.3%; P = .04). 55 Two additional large trials of adjuvant bisphosphonates have met their targeted accrual goals, with efficacy analysis pending. The National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-34 trial (closed to accrual in 2004) enrolled women with stage I or II breast cancer and compared 3 years of daily oral clodronate (1600 mg, daily) to placebo. The primary end point was disease-free survival. Another clinical trial asking “Does Adjuvant Zoledronic Acid Reduce Recurrence in Patients with High-Risk Localized Breast Cancer?” (AZURE) enrolled stage II and III breast cancer patients, comparing standard adjuvant cancer therapy alone or given with “intensive” zoledronic acid for 5 years (4 mg monthly for 6 months, followed by once every 3 months for 2 years, then once every 6 months through year 5). This trial closed to accrual in 2006. The North American Breast Cancer Intergroup, in combination with the NSABP, is conducting SWOG S0307, a comparison of 3 different bisphosphonates in the adjuvant breast cancer setting. This trial is randomizing 4500 women with stage I or III breast cancer receiving standard adjuvant therapy to oral clodronate (1600 mg, daily) versus oral ibandronate (50 mg, daily) versus zoledronic acid (4 mg intravenously, monthly for 6 months, then every 3 months), all for 3 years duration. These unreported trials include all patient and tumor subsets, including both pre- and postmenopausal women, ER-positive and -negative tumors, and patients who received a range of standard systemic therapy, including chemotherapy. The results of these trials will be critical in determining how broadly applicable bisphosphonates are across the spectrum of breast cancer patients. Several additional ongoing early stage bisphosphonate trials are evaluating various agents, doses, schedules, and adjuvant settings, including residual disease after preoperative chemotherapy and in elderly populations.  Prostate Cancer In prostate cancer, trials have yet to show any reduction in recurrence or death from the adjuvant use of bisphosphonates. A randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effects of zoledronic acid on time to first bone metastasis in men with prostate cancer, no bone metastases, and rising prostate-specific antigen despite ADT was terminated approximately halfway into accrual when interim analysis showed a lower-than-expected event rate. 151 A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of oral clodronate versus placebo in patients with nonmetastatic prostate cancer found no difference in bone metastases–free survival or overall survival after nearly 10 years of follow-up. 152 Several trials evaluating the adjuvant use of osteoclast-targeted therapy in prostate cancer are ongoing. One of the objectives of the Randomized Androgen Deprivation and Radiotherapy (RADAR) trial is to determine whether 18 months of zoledronic acid will reduce relapse risk by impeding the development of bony metastases. The ZEUS trial will assess the efficacy of zoledronic acid every 3 months versus best supportive care in preventing skeletal metastases in patients with high-risk prostate cancer. Additionally, the RANK-L inhibitor denosumab is being tested in an ongoing large (1500 patients) international randomized, phase III, placebo-controlled trial in men with hormone-refractory prostate cancer with the end point of bone metastasis–free survival.  Conclusions The adjuvant bisphosphonate trials in breast cancer reported to date support the potential role of these drugs in impacting recurrence and survival in early stage breast cancer. The data do not yet support the addition of adjuvant bisphosphonates as standard of care for all patients. The promising, yet somewhat contradictory, results of the 3 reported breast cancer adjuvant clodronate studies suggest that bisphosphonates can impact disease recurrence, but highlight the need for further investigation. Extrapolation of the ABCSG-12 findings to postmenopausal women, ER-negative tumors, and women receiving chemotherapy will require data from ongoing clinical trials. These studies will aid in defining the optimal patient and tumor populations for the addition of adjuvant bisphosphonates, as well as optimal doses and schedules of administration, and long-term toxicities. Whether doses used in metastatic disease are required for prevention or whether lower doses will suffice is unknown. It is unclear whether adjuvant bisphosphonates should be given continuously and orally, whether intravenous therapy is preferable, and whether less intensive intravenous regimens will be as effective as more intensive regimens. The optimal duration of adjuvant bisphosphonate therapy is also unknown.  Bone Metastases Pathophysiology Normal bone homeostasis involves constant remodeling by the coordinated actions of osteoclasts and osteoblasts. In metastatic bone disease, as in osteoporosis, this balance is tipped to favor osteoclast-mediated resorption. The interactions between the tumor and the bone microenvironment shape the characteristics of the bone metastases. Metastatic bone disease associated with breast cancer is often predominantly osteolytic, whereas lesions from prostate cancer are predominantly osteoblastic on imaging. However, bone metastases are frequently heterogeneous, and histological examination often shows evidence of both osteolytic and osteoblastic features. 153 , 154 At the cellular level, evidence of reciprocal signaling between the tumor and bone microenvironment can be seen. Cancer cells interact with osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and the bone matrix through multiple pathways. 155 Tumor cells in the bone microenvironment may produce factors such as interleukins, prostaglandins, and PTH–related protein (PTHrP) which directly and indirectly stimulates bone resorption. Osteolysis releases cytokines and growth factors that were stored within the bone matrix, such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1, and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). These factors may induce tumor cell proliferation, thereby generating a vicious cycle of tumor growth and bone destruction. 155 Understanding the biology of this process has provided useful insights for developing therapy to prevent or reduce the morbidity of bone metastases. In addition, therapies that specifically target the bone microenvironment are being incorporated into clinical practice. Frequency The frequency of bone metastases varies by cancer type and duration of advanced disease. The incidence of bone metastases in patients with advanced disease is 73% in breast, 68% in prostate, 42% in thyroid, 35% in kidney, and 36% in lung cancers. Bone metastases can cause significant morbidity. 156 Patients with bone metastases are at risk for skeletal-related events, including fracture, need for radiation to bone, spinal cord compromise, and hypercalcemia or need for surgery ( Figure 3 ). The risk of experiencing an additional skeletal-related event within 1 year of a first event is substantial. In an analysis performed in the United Kingdom, skeletal-related events accounted for 63% of hospital costs for patients with metastatic breast cancer. 157 Cancer patients with bone involvement are at risk for pain, particularly with motion, and the effects of bone metastases can negatively impact a patient's quality of life. Therapies In addressing bone metastases, the mainstay of oncology care is attempting to control the tumor burden. This is typically addressed through antineoplastic therapies. Bone-specific interventions are often incorporated into the treatment plan and may be localized or systemic. Surgery and radiation therapy can be used to address local control of specific lesions. Bone-directed systemic interventions include bisphosphonates and radiopharmaceutical therapy. Throughout the management of the patient, attention must be paid to pain control and minimizing the risk of potentially catastrophic events, such as fracture or spinal cord compromise. Bisphosphonates to Reduce Skeletal Morbidity Large randomized clinical trials have shown that the addition of bisphosphonate therapy to standard anti-cancer therapy can decrease the frequency of skeletal-related events by approximately a third. 158 – 162 Studies have also shown that bisphosphonate therapy can reduce pain and improve quality of life in patients with bone metastases. 161 , 163 – 167 Bisphosphonates have been incorporated into the routine clinical management of metastatic bone disease in a number of tumor types. 8 , 161 , 168 , 169 In the Unites States, pamidronate and zoledronic acid are FDA approved for treating metastatic bone disease. Clodronate and ibandronate are licensed for use in bone metastases outside the United States. Treatment of Bone Metastases in Breast Cancer In clinical trials, bisphosphonates have shown treatment benefits for breast cancer patients with bone metastases. Pamidronate reduced the frequency of skeletal morbidity in placebo-controlled trials involving breast cancer patients with bone lesions who were receiving hormone or chemotherapy. 166 The skeletal morbidity rate was 2.4 events per year in the pamidronate arm and 3.7 in the placebo arm ( P < .001). The median time to skeletal complication was 12.7 months in the pamidronate group and 7 months in the placebo group ( P < .001). In the pamidronate arm, 51% had skeletal complications at up to 24 months on treatment, compared with 64% in the placebo arm ( P < .001). In preclinical testing, zoledronic acid appeared to be a more potent bisphosphonate than pamidro-nate, and clinically it showed superiority over pamidronate in treating hypercalcemia of malignancy. 170 A randomized, phase III, multicenter trial was conducted to compare zoledronic acid to pamidronate in patients with bone lesions secondary to breast cancer or multiple myeloma, with the objective of determining the safety and efficacy of long-term therapy with these agents. 171 The 13-month core phase of the trial showed that zoledronic acid had an efficacy and safety profile comparable with pamidronate. In a 25-month extension phase, the overall incidence of skeletal-related events other than hypercalcemia of malignancy was similar between the zoledronic acid and pamidronate groups. The percentage of patients who required radiotherapy to bone was 19% for zoledronic acid compared with 24% for pamidronate ( P = .037). A comparable median time to first event was seen in both groups (376 days with zoledronic acid, 356 with pamidronate; P = .151). Zoledronic acid reduced the mean annual incidence of skeletal complications, or skeletal morbidity rate, by 25% compared with pamidronate, with 1.04 events per year for zoledronic acid and 1.39 for pamidronate ( P = .084). In the overall patient population, zoledronic acid reduced the risk of developing a skeletal complication by an additional 16% compared with pamidronate, with a risk ratio derived from the multiple-event analysis of 0.841 ( P = .030). A randomized trial in Japan compared zoledronate, 4 mg, to placebo every 4 weeks for 1 year in 228 women with breast cancer with at least 1 osteolytic bone metastasis. 172 The placebo control was used because no intravenous bisphosphonate is approved for this indication in Japan. In this trial, zoledronate reduced the rate of skeletal-related events by 39% ( P = .027). The absolute reduction in the number of patients having an event was 20% (number needed to treat = 5). In addition, bone pain scores were significantly improved within 4 weeks of treatment and remained modestly reduced for 52 weeks. No serious (grade 3 or 4) toxicities or substantial declines in renal function were seen. This study corroborates the benefit of zoledronate in reducing skeletal-related events seen in previous studies. The ASCO clinical practice guidelines for breast cancer suggest that patients in whom radiographic evidence of bone metastases exist should receive therapy with either zoledronic acid, 4 mg over 15 minutes, or pamidronate, 90 mg delivered over 2 hours, both every 3 to 4 weeks. 8 Currently evidence is insufficient to support superiority of one over the other, and, in countries where they are approved, clodronate or ibandronate are also therapeutic options. Due to increasing concerns over potential bisphosphonate-associated toxicities, all women should undergo dental examination with appropriate preventive dental care before starting bisphosphonate therapy. Serum creatinine also should be monitored before each dose of pamidronate or zoledronate. The optimal duration of bisphosphonate therapy has not been well defined. The longest phase III clinical trials in patients with bone metastases examined a 3 to 4 week dosing of bisphosphonates for only 2 years. Little data is available beyond 2 years of treatment. The unknown potential additional benefit from continuing bisphosphonates must be weighed against the potential toxicities of long-term administration. The ASCO bisphosphonate guidelines for breast cancer recommend continuing bisphospho-nate therapy indefinitely or until the patient's performance status declines substantially. The consensus of the NCCN Task Force is that continuation of bisphosphonate therapy should be reconsidered at 2 years. Continued bisphosphonate treatment should be considered in patients with active cancer or an existing focus of bone metastasis. Discontinuation should be considered for patients with no active disease or who have experienced significant deterioration of renal function. The presence of bisphospho-nate-associated ONJ or sub-trochanteric hip fracture is not necessarily an indication for discontinuation. If a clear indication was seen for starting therapy (bone metastasis or active cancer known to metastasize to bone) and those indications continue to exist, continued therapy may be appropriate. The development of low-frequency significant side effects should not detract from the overall usefulness of the agents. If bisphosphonates are discontinued, an active bone surveillance program should be initiated. The optimal dosing interval of bisphosphonate therapy in bone metastases is also unknown. No data are available to support lengthening intervals between treatments, although this is the subject of important ongoing investigations. The ongoing OPTIMIZE 2 trial is studying breast cancer patients with bone metastases who received approximately 1 year of monthly zoledronic acid. Patients are randomized in a double-blind fashion to continue monthly dosing for an additional year versus changing dosing intervals to every 3 months. The ongoing BISMARK trial is a randomization between standard dosing—once every 4 weeks—of zoledronic acid and intervals based on markers of bone turnover, which are evaluated at 15- to 16-week intervals. For patients with low bone turnover at the time of the marker evaluation, 1 dose of zoledronic acid is given every 15 or 16 weeks. For patients with intermediate markers of bone turnover, 2 doses are given in this time frame. For patients with high levels of bone turnover, one dose every 4 weeks is given. This protocol therefore allows for changes in the dosing interval of zoledronic acid based on current bone activity. The CALGB 70604 trial randomizes patients with meta-static breast or prostate cancer or multiple myeloma involving the bone to receive zoledronic acid, 4 mg every 4 or 12 weeks, and will investigate the rate of SREs between the groups over 2 years. Pamidronate and zoledronic acid are FDA approved for use in patients with metastatic bone disease and have been shown to be efficacious in reducing or delaying the onset of skeletal-related events in patients with breast and solid tumors with documented bone metastases. Bisphosphonates are effective in reducing bone pain and improving quality of life. Currently, questions remain on how to optimally use bisphosphonates. Ongoing clinical trials will help identify optimal dosing schedules, duration, and the role of other novel agents in the treatment of bone metastases. Treatment Bone Metastases in Prostate Cancer An estimated 65% to 75% of patients diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer experience a skeletal-related event. Their median 5-year survival is 25%, and almost all patients who die of prostate cancer have skeletal involvement. 157 Almost all men diagnosed with metastatic disease are initially offered hormonal therapy, and almost all show response to the treatment. Significant improvement in pain relief, a decline in prostate-specific antigen levels, and improvement in quality of life are seen. Unfortunately, in most cases, the disease relapses after a median response of about 2 years. Unlike in breast cancer, only 3 chemotherapy drugs have been approved for patients with prostate cancer. The NCCN Prostate Cancer Guidelines (available at www.nccn.org ) recommend docetaxel administered every 3 weeks in combination with prednisone as preferred first-line treatment for castration-recurrent disseminated prostate cancer. 5 Alternate regimens included in these NCCN Guidelines include 3-week docetaxel with estramustine, weekly docetaxel with prednisone, or mitoxantrone with prednisone. Bisphosphonates have been shown to be effective in reducing bone complications in patients with osteolytic bone metastases caused by a variety of solid tumors. Because prostate cancer is primarily osteoblastic, researchers initially thought that bisphosphonates may not be as effective in this disease. However, studies have revealed that bone resorption in metastatic prostate cancer is high, reflecting substantial osteoclastic activity. Therefore, biologic rationale exists for the use of bisphosphonates in prostate cancer. Effectiveness of clodronate treatment was evaluated in symptomatic bone progression-free survival in 2 studies. 173 , 174 In the first, 311 men with hormone-sensitive metastatic prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive oral clodronate or placebo for 3 years. 173 The second trial used clodronate in conjunction with mitoxantrone and prednisone versus mitoxantrone and prednisone alone. 174 Clodronate treatments resulted in no pain relief or improvement in quality of life in both studies. Similarly, a randomized placebo-controlled study of pamidronate (90 mg every 3 weeks) versus placebo in 378 metastatic prostate cancer patients found no differences in pain control or reduction of skeletal-related events. 175 Zoledronic acid is the only bisphosphonate with proven clinical benefit in reducing skeletal complications in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. In a double-blind phase III trial, patients with hormone-refractory disease (rising prostate-specific antigen despite medical or surgical castration) and a history of bone metastases were randomized to zoledronic acid, 4 mg (n = 214), zoledronic acid, 8 mg (n = 221), or placebo (n = 208) every 3 weeks for 15 months. 176 The primary end point was time to occurrence of skeletal-related events. Risk of renal impairment was elevated with the 8-mg dose, and medication for this arm was therefore reduced to 4 mg. Patients taking placebo had significantly more events than those on zoledronic acid (44.2% vs. 33.2%; P = .021). Subsequently, of 122 patients who completed 24 months on the study, fewer patients treated with zoledronic acid developed skeletal complications (38% vs. 49% for the placebo group; P = .028). 167 The delay in onset to the first skeletal-related event was about 31% longer for those on zoledronic acid. Overall, the authors noted a decrease in fracture, spinal cord compression, need for antineoplastic therapy, and need for radiation and surgery in patients receiving zoledronic acid compared with placebo. In conclusion, the main risk factor for skeletal complications is the presence of bone metastases in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. These patients should be considered for bisphosphonate therapy. As with other tumors, insufficient data are available to guide choice, dose, and route of administration of bisphosphonates in prostate cancer patients. Bisphosphonates have no proven role in hormone-naïve patients with advanced prostate cancer; currently, hormone therapy adequately controls underlying disease in this setting. Research into the earlier use of bisphosphonates in these patients is ongoing. 177 A phase III trial is currently recruiting patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer to compare time to development of a skeletal event on zoledronic acid versus denosumab. 178 Better understanding of the role of bisphosphonates and other novel bone-targeting agents in treatment-related bone loss, prevention and treatment of metastases, and antitumor effects, will probably expand the role they play in managing advanced prostate cancer. Investigational Targets for Treatment of Bone Complications New classes of agents with anti-osteoclastic activity are in various stages of investigation for treating and preventing bone metastases and osteoporosis. These include the RANK-L inhibitor, denosumab, the Src kinase inhibitor, dasatinib, and several versions of cathepsin k inhibitors. The relative efficacy and toxicity profiles of these agents compared with bisphosphonates will be of great interest. Whether these agents will be optimally used as an alternative for or in combination or sequence with bisphosphonates remains to be studied. RANK-L RANK-L mediates the formation, function, and survival of osteoclasts. Denosumab, the monoclonal antibody that binds and neutralizes RANK-L, has been evaluated in phase II studies in patients with bone metastases naïve to intravenous bisphosphonate therapy and those with elevated levels of the bone resorption marker urinary-N-telo-peptide despite ongoing intravenous bisphosphonate treatment. 179 , 180 Denosumab was well tolerated, with strong suppression of bone-resorption markers. Phase III clinical trials are ongoing comparing denosumab to zoledronic acid in the treatment of bone metastases in patients who have not previously received intravenous bisphosphonates. Src Src is involved in signaling cascades important for receptor-mediated osteoclast formation and function, including RANK. Preclinical data show that Src plays a role promoting bone metastases. Therefore, inhibition of Src could have negative effects not only on osteoclast activity, but also on tumor cells that invade bone and promote osteoclast activity.Src inhibitors represent potential novel therapeutics for bone metastases and are currently under investigation in patients with metastatic bone disease. Dasatinib is approved by the FDA for treatment of imatinib-resistant or intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia and Philadelphia chromosome–positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. It is currently being evaluated in clinical trials for patients with metastatic bone disease from solid tumors. 181 – 183 Cathepsin K Cathepsin K is a cysteine protease produced by osteoclasts. It mediates bone resorption and degradation. 184 Cathepsin K is also produced by cancer cells and helps promote cancer cell invasion. Preclinical studies have shown that inhibitors of cathepsin K can reduce osteolysis and skeletal tumor burden by breast cancer cells. 185 Odonacatib, a cathepsin K inhibitor, is currently in clinical trial. 186  Pathophysiology Normal bone homeostasis involves constant remodeling by the coordinated actions of osteoclasts and osteoblasts. In metastatic bone disease, as in osteoporosis, this balance is tipped to favor osteoclast-mediated resorption. The interactions between the tumor and the bone microenvironment shape the characteristics of the bone metastases. Metastatic bone disease associated with breast cancer is often predominantly osteolytic, whereas lesions from prostate cancer are predominantly osteoblastic on imaging. However, bone metastases are frequently heterogeneous, and histological examination often shows evidence of both osteolytic and osteoblastic features. 153 , 154 At the cellular level, evidence of reciprocal signaling between the tumor and bone microenvironment can be seen. Cancer cells interact with osteoclasts, osteoblasts, and the bone matrix through multiple pathways. 155 Tumor cells in the bone microenvironment may produce factors such as interleukins, prostaglandins, and PTH–related protein (PTHrP) which directly and indirectly stimulates bone resorption. Osteolysis releases cytokines and growth factors that were stored within the bone matrix, such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1, and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF). These factors may induce tumor cell proliferation, thereby generating a vicious cycle of tumor growth and bone destruction. 155 Understanding the biology of this process has provided useful insights for developing therapy to prevent or reduce the morbidity of bone metastases. In addition, therapies that specifically target the bone microenvironment are being incorporated into clinical practice.  Frequency The frequency of bone metastases varies by cancer type and duration of advanced disease. The incidence of bone metastases in patients with advanced disease is 73% in breast, 68% in prostate, 42% in thyroid, 35% in kidney, and 36% in lung cancers. Bone metastases can cause significant morbidity. 156 Patients with bone metastases are at risk for skeletal-related events, including fracture, need for radiation to bone, spinal cord compromise, and hypercalcemia or need for surgery ( Figure 3 ). The risk of experiencing an additional skeletal-related event within 1 year of a first event is substantial. In an analysis performed in the United Kingdom, skeletal-related events accounted for 63% of hospital costs for patients with metastatic breast cancer. 157 Cancer patients with bone involvement are at risk for pain, particularly with motion, and the effects of bone metastases can negatively impact a patient's quality of life.  Therapies In addressing bone metastases, the mainstay of oncology care is attempting to control the tumor burden. This is typically addressed through antineoplastic therapies. Bone-specific interventions are often incorporated into the treatment plan and may be localized or systemic. Surgery and radiation therapy can be used to address local control of specific lesions. Bone-directed systemic interventions include bisphosphonates and radiopharmaceutical therapy. Throughout the management of the patient, attention must be paid to pain control and minimizing the risk of potentially catastrophic events, such as fracture or spinal cord compromise.  Bisphosphonates to Reduce Skeletal Morbidity Large randomized clinical trials have shown that the addition of bisphosphonate therapy to standard anti-cancer therapy can decrease the frequency of skeletal-related events by approximately a third. 158 – 162 Studies have also shown that bisphosphonate therapy can reduce pain and improve quality of life in patients with bone metastases. 161 , 163 – 167 Bisphosphonates have been incorporated into the routine clinical management of metastatic bone disease in a number of tumor types. 8 , 161 , 168 , 169 In the Unites States, pamidronate and zoledronic acid are FDA approved for treating metastatic bone disease. Clodronate and ibandronate are licensed for use in bone metastases outside the United States.  Treatment of Bone Metastases in Breast Cancer In clinical trials, bisphosphonates have shown treatment benefits for breast cancer patients with bone metastases. Pamidronate reduced the frequency of skeletal morbidity in placebo-controlled trials involving breast cancer patients with bone lesions who were receiving hormone or chemotherapy. 166 The skeletal morbidity rate was 2.4 events per year in the pamidronate arm and 3.7 in the placebo arm ( P < .001). The median time to skeletal complication was 12.7 months in the pamidronate group and 7 months in the placebo group ( P < .001). In the pamidronate arm, 51% had skeletal complications at up to 24 months on treatment, compared with 64% in the placebo arm ( P < .001). In preclinical testing, zoledronic acid appeared to be a more potent bisphosphonate than pamidro-nate, and clinically it showed superiority over pamidronate in treating hypercalcemia of malignancy. 170 A randomized, phase III, multicenter trial was conducted to compare zoledronic acid to pamidronate in patients with bone lesions secondary to breast cancer or multiple myeloma, with the objective of determining the safety and efficacy of long-term therapy with these agents. 171 The 13-month core phase of the trial showed that zoledronic acid had an efficacy and safety profile comparable with pamidronate. In a 25-month extension phase, the overall incidence of skeletal-related events other than hypercalcemia of malignancy was similar between the zoledronic acid and pamidronate groups. The percentage of patients who required radiotherapy to bone was 19% for zoledronic acid compared with 24% for pamidronate ( P = .037). A comparable median time to first event was seen in both groups (376 days with zoledronic acid, 356 with pamidronate; P = .151). Zoledronic acid reduced the mean annual incidence of skeletal complications, or skeletal morbidity rate, by 25% compared with pamidronate, with 1.04 events per year for zoledronic acid and 1.39 for pamidronate ( P = .084). In the overall patient population, zoledronic acid reduced the risk of developing a skeletal complication by an additional 16% compared with pamidronate, with a risk ratio derived from the multiple-event analysis of 0.841 ( P = .030). A randomized trial in Japan compared zoledronate, 4 mg, to placebo every 4 weeks for 1 year in 228 women with breast cancer with at least 1 osteolytic bone metastasis. 172 The placebo control was used because no intravenous bisphosphonate is approved for this indication in Japan. In this trial, zoledronate reduced the rate of skeletal-related events by 39% ( P = .027). The absolute reduction in the number of patients having an event was 20% (number needed to treat = 5). In addition, bone pain scores were significantly improved within 4 weeks of treatment and remained modestly reduced for 52 weeks. No serious (grade 3 or 4) toxicities or substantial declines in renal function were seen. This study corroborates the benefit of zoledronate in reducing skeletal-related events seen in previous studies. The ASCO clinical practice guidelines for breast cancer suggest that patients in whom radiographic evidence of bone metastases exist should receive therapy with either zoledronic acid, 4 mg over 15 minutes, or pamidronate, 90 mg delivered over 2 hours, both every 3 to 4 weeks. 8 Currently evidence is insufficient to support superiority of one over the other, and, in countries where they are approved, clodronate or ibandronate are also therapeutic options. Due to increasing concerns over potential bisphosphonate-associated toxicities, all women should undergo dental examination with appropriate preventive dental care before starting bisphosphonate therapy. Serum creatinine also should be monitored before each dose of pamidronate or zoledronate. The optimal duration of bisphosphonate therapy has not been well defined. The longest phase III clinical trials in patients with bone metastases examined a 3 to 4 week dosing of bisphosphonates for only 2 years. Little data is available beyond 2 years of treatment. The unknown potential additional benefit from continuing bisphosphonates must be weighed against the potential toxicities of long-term administration. The ASCO bisphosphonate guidelines for breast cancer recommend continuing bisphospho-nate therapy indefinitely or until the patient's performance status declines substantially. The consensus of the NCCN Task Force is that continuation of bisphosphonate therapy should be reconsidered at 2 years. Continued bisphosphonate treatment should be considered in patients with active cancer or an existing focus of bone metastasis. Discontinuation should be considered for patients with no active disease or who have experienced significant deterioration of renal function. The presence of bisphospho-nate-associated ONJ or sub-trochanteric hip fracture is not necessarily an indication for discontinuation. If a clear indication was seen for starting therapy (bone metastasis or active cancer known to metastasize to bone) and those indications continue to exist, continued therapy may be appropriate. The development of low-frequency significant side effects should not detract from the overall usefulness of the agents. If bisphosphonates are discontinued, an active bone surveillance program should be initiated. The optimal dosing interval of bisphosphonate therapy in bone metastases is also unknown. No data are available to support lengthening intervals between treatments, although this is the subject of important ongoing investigations. The ongoing OPTIMIZE 2 trial is studying breast cancer patients with bone metastases who received approximately 1 year of monthly zoledronic acid. Patients are randomized in a double-blind fashion to continue monthly dosing for an additional year versus changing dosing intervals to every 3 months. The ongoing BISMARK trial is a randomization between standard dosing—once every 4 weeks—of zoledronic acid and intervals based on markers of bone turnover, which are evaluated at 15- to 16-week intervals. For patients with low bone turnover at the time of the marker evaluation, 1 dose of zoledronic acid is given every 15 or 16 weeks. For patients with intermediate markers of bone turnover, 2 doses are given in this time frame. For patients with high levels of bone turnover, one dose every 4 weeks is given. This protocol therefore allows for changes in the dosing interval of zoledronic acid based on current bone activity. The CALGB 70604 trial randomizes patients with meta-static breast or prostate cancer or multiple myeloma involving the bone to receive zoledronic acid, 4 mg every 4 or 12 weeks, and will investigate the rate of SREs between the groups over 2 years. Pamidronate and zoledronic acid are FDA approved for use in patients with metastatic bone disease and have been shown to be efficacious in reducing or delaying the onset of skeletal-related events in patients with breast and solid tumors with documented bone metastases. Bisphosphonates are effective in reducing bone pain and improving quality of life. Currently, questions remain on how to optimally use bisphosphonates. Ongoing clinical trials will help identify optimal dosing schedules, duration, and the role of other novel agents in the treatment of bone metastases.  Treatment Bone Metastases in Prostate Cancer An estimated 65% to 75% of patients diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer experience a skeletal-related event. Their median 5-year survival is 25%, and almost all patients who die of prostate cancer have skeletal involvement. 157 Almost all men diagnosed with metastatic disease are initially offered hormonal therapy, and almost all show response to the treatment. Significant improvement in pain relief, a decline in prostate-specific antigen levels, and improvement in quality of life are seen. Unfortunately, in most cases, the disease relapses after a median response of about 2 years. Unlike in breast cancer, only 3 chemotherapy drugs have been approved for patients with prostate cancer. The NCCN Prostate Cancer Guidelines (available at www.nccn.org ) recommend docetaxel administered every 3 weeks in combination with prednisone as preferred first-line treatment for castration-recurrent disseminated prostate cancer. 5 Alternate regimens included in these NCCN Guidelines include 3-week docetaxel with estramustine, weekly docetaxel with prednisone, or mitoxantrone with prednisone. Bisphosphonates have been shown to be effective in reducing bone complications in patients with osteolytic bone metastases caused by a variety of solid tumors. Because prostate cancer is primarily osteoblastic, researchers initially thought that bisphosphonates may not be as effective in this disease. However, studies have revealed that bone resorption in metastatic prostate cancer is high, reflecting substantial osteoclastic activity. Therefore, biologic rationale exists for the use of bisphosphonates in prostate cancer. Effectiveness of clodronate treatment was evaluated in symptomatic bone progression-free survival in 2 studies. 173 , 174 In the first, 311 men with hormone-sensitive metastatic prostate cancer were randomly assigned to receive oral clodronate or placebo for 3 years. 173 The second trial used clodronate in conjunction with mitoxantrone and prednisone versus mitoxantrone and prednisone alone. 174 Clodronate treatments resulted in no pain relief or improvement in quality of life in both studies. Similarly, a randomized placebo-controlled study of pamidronate (90 mg every 3 weeks) versus placebo in 378 metastatic prostate cancer patients found no differences in pain control or reduction of skeletal-related events. 175 Zoledronic acid is the only bisphosphonate with proven clinical benefit in reducing skeletal complications in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. In a double-blind phase III trial, patients with hormone-refractory disease (rising prostate-specific antigen despite medical or surgical castration) and a history of bone metastases were randomized to zoledronic acid, 4 mg (n = 214), zoledronic acid, 8 mg (n = 221), or placebo (n = 208) every 3 weeks for 15 months. 176 The primary end point was time to occurrence of skeletal-related events. Risk of renal impairment was elevated with the 8-mg dose, and medication for this arm was therefore reduced to 4 mg. Patients taking placebo had significantly more events than those on zoledronic acid (44.2% vs. 33.2%; P = .021). Subsequently, of 122 patients who completed 24 months on the study, fewer patients treated with zoledronic acid developed skeletal complications (38% vs. 49% for the placebo group; P = .028). 167 The delay in onset to the first skeletal-related event was about 31% longer for those on zoledronic acid. Overall, the authors noted a decrease in fracture, spinal cord compression, need for antineoplastic therapy, and need for radiation and surgery in patients receiving zoledronic acid compared with placebo. In conclusion, the main risk factor for skeletal complications is the presence of bone metastases in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer. These patients should be considered for bisphosphonate therapy. As with other tumors, insufficient data are available to guide choice, dose, and route of administration of bisphosphonates in prostate cancer patients. Bisphosphonates have no proven role in hormone-naïve patients with advanced prostate cancer; currently, hormone therapy adequately controls underlying disease in this setting. Research into the earlier use of bisphosphonates in these patients is ongoing. 177 A phase III trial is currently recruiting patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer to compare time to development of a skeletal event on zoledronic acid versus denosumab. 178 Better understanding of the role of bisphosphonates and other novel bone-targeting agents in treatment-related bone loss, prevention and treatment of metastases, and antitumor effects, will probably expand the role they play in managing advanced prostate cancer.  Investigational Targets for Treatment of Bone Complications New classes of agents with anti-osteoclastic activity are in various stages of investigation for treating and preventing bone metastases and osteoporosis. These include the RANK-L inhibitor, denosumab, the Src kinase inhibitor, dasatinib, and several versions of cathepsin k inhibitors. The relative efficacy and toxicity profiles of these agents compared with bisphosphonates will be of great interest. Whether these agents will be optimally used as an alternative for or in combination or sequence with bisphosphonates remains to be studied. RANK-L RANK-L mediates the formation, function, and survival of osteoclasts. Denosumab, the monoclonal antibody that binds and neutralizes RANK-L, has been evaluated in phase II studies in patients with bone metastases naïve to intravenous bisphosphonate therapy and those with elevated levels of the bone resorption marker urinary-N-telo-peptide despite ongoing intravenous bisphosphonate treatment. 179 , 180 Denosumab was well tolerated, with strong suppression of bone-resorption markers. Phase III clinical trials are ongoing comparing denosumab to zoledronic acid in the treatment of bone metastases in patients who have not previously received intravenous bisphosphonates. Src Src is involved in signaling cascades important for receptor-mediated osteoclast formation and function, including RANK. Preclinical data show that Src plays a role promoting bone metastases. Therefore, inhibition of Src could have negative effects not only on osteoclast activity, but also on tumor cells that invade bone and promote osteoclast activity.Src inhibitors represent potential novel therapeutics for bone metastases and are currently under investigation in patients with metastatic bone disease. Dasatinib is approved by the FDA for treatment of imatinib-resistant or intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia and Philadelphia chromosome–positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. It is currently being evaluated in clinical trials for patients with metastatic bone disease from solid tumors. 181 – 183 Cathepsin K Cathepsin K is a cysteine protease produced by osteoclasts. It mediates bone resorption and degradation. 184 Cathepsin K is also produced by cancer cells and helps promote cancer cell invasion. Preclinical studies have shown that inhibitors of cathepsin K can reduce osteolysis and skeletal tumor burden by breast cancer cells. 185 Odonacatib, a cathepsin K inhibitor, is currently in clinical trial. 186  RANK-L RANK-L mediates the formation, function, and survival of osteoclasts. Denosumab, the monoclonal antibody that binds and neutralizes RANK-L, has been evaluated in phase II studies in patients with bone metastases naïve to intravenous bisphosphonate therapy and those with elevated levels of the bone resorption marker urinary-N-telo-peptide despite ongoing intravenous bisphosphonate treatment. 179 , 180 Denosumab was well tolerated, with strong suppression of bone-resorption markers. Phase III clinical trials are ongoing comparing denosumab to zoledronic acid in the treatment of bone metastases in patients who have not previously received intravenous bisphosphonates.  Src Src is involved in signaling cascades important for receptor-mediated osteoclast formation and function, including RANK. Preclinical data show that Src plays a role promoting bone metastases. Therefore, inhibition of Src could have negative effects not only on osteoclast activity, but also on tumor cells that invade bone and promote osteoclast activity.Src inhibitors represent potential novel therapeutics for bone metastases and are currently under investigation in patients with metastatic bone disease. Dasatinib is approved by the FDA for treatment of imatinib-resistant or intolerant chronic myeloid leukemia and Philadelphia chromosome–positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. It is currently being evaluated in clinical trials for patients with metastatic bone disease from solid tumors. 181 – 183  Cathepsin K Cathepsin K is a cysteine protease produced by osteoclasts. It mediates bone resorption and degradation. 184 Cathepsin K is also produced by cancer cells and helps promote cancer cell invasion. Preclinical studies have shown that inhibitors of cathepsin K can reduce osteolysis and skeletal tumor burden by breast cancer cells. 185 Odonacatib, a cathepsin K inhibitor, is currently in clinical trial. 186  Imaging of Bone Metastases Numerous imaging techniques are available to evaluate bone metastases, including plain film radiography, CT, MRI, 99mTc bone scanning (radionuclide bone scan), and PET, both with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and 18F sodium fluoride. Imaging has an important role in detection, diagnosis, treatment planning, and follow-up of bone metastases. The results of imaging studies must be interpreted within clinical context. If bone metastases are present or suspected, imaging or biopsy may be required to confirm the diagnosis and establish the extent of disease. Response to therapy can be evaluated using radiographs (plain films) and by correlating the radiographic changes with bone scan, clinical, and laboratory findings. Plain film radiography, the oldest imaging technique for evaluating bone metastases, recognizes alterations in bone density, such as osteolytic and osteoblastic changes. In case of indeterminate bone scan findings, plain film may be helpful in further characterizing a suspicious lesion. Plain films may also be helpful in detecting the cause of bone pain. Plain films can assess cortical destruction by the cancer, providing valuable information regarding fracture risk. Unfortunately, plain films are relatively insensitive in the detection of early or small metastatic lesions. A 30% to 50% loss in bone density must occur to recognize an osteolytic lesion on plain film. CT, like plain films, is a map of bone density, with tomographic capability. Compared with plain films, CT has an improved target-to-background ratio and improved sensitivity. Muindi et al. 187 and Durning et al. 188 found that CT is more sensitive than plain film radiography in detecting metastatic lesions. CT is used to assess lesion size and cortical reaction and can also identify alterations in adjacent soft tissue. As with plain films, CT is useful for characterizing suspicious lesions on bone scans. The usefulness of CT in detecting early involvement of the bone marrow, however, is limited. In addition, skeletal coverage is limited with CT because of its relatively high radiation dose, making it unsuitable as a screening tool. MRI is associated with a high sensitivity (82%–100%) and specificity (73%–100%) for bone marrow metastases. Unlike CT and plain film, MRI does not assess bone density, but is helpful in assessing tissue alterations. Therefore, MRI can detect metastases that have infiltrated bone marrow 189 before they provoke an osseous bone response. MRI is more sensitive for detecting early lesions and marrow-based metastases than plain films, CT, or radionuclide bone scans. Although MRI is a good choice for detecting marrow infiltration, its role in bone metastases is generally limited because it is more expensive and not as readily available as CT. Skeletal scintigraphy (bone scan) is an effective method for screening the whole body for bone metastases. 190 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate (MDP), is the most frequently used radiotracer. Because technetium-labeled MDP is taken up by active osteoblasts, 99mTc-planar bone scans detect metastatic tumor deposits in bone by the increased osteoblastic activity they induce. Radionuclide bone scans are relatively insensitive for purely osteolytic lesions found commonly in cancers of the kidney and thyroid and multiple myeloma, but they are highly sensitive to osteoblastic and mixed osteolytic-osteoblastic lesions such as from prostate and breast cancer. Bone scans have the disadvantages of poor spatial and contrast resolution. Sensitivity of 99mTc bone scan is estimated at between 62% and 100%, with the lowest sensitivity seen in patients with predominantly lytic disease. Many benign processes and other entities (i.e., trauma fractures, Paget disease) can produce an area of increased radiotracer uptake that mimics a metastatic deposit. Bone scans are not optimal for monitoring response to treatment, because the osteoblast changes induced by cancer metastases can be long-lived. Osteoblastic activity resulting from healing after therapy (i.e., flare phenomenon) may mislead-ingly suggest advancing disease on bone scans. In many patients, further imaging, such as plain films or CT, is required. PET can help in identifying bone metastases at an early stage of growth, before host response of the osteoblasts occur. It has higher spatial resolution than bone scan and a quantitative capability. Therefore, PET can better assess response to therapy. Two currently available PET tracers are 18F sodium fluoride and 18F FDG. 18F sodium fluoride is taken up by osteoblasts and therefore is reflective of a reparative response, making fluoride PET scans similar to 99mTc bone scan. 18F fluoride gets incorporated into newly formed bone in increased amounts, reflecting increased turnover. 18F sodium fluoride PET has improved lesion detection over technecium bone scans. However, finding additional lesions may not necessarily alter therapy. 18F FDG-PET can detect early malignant bone-marrow infiltration because of the early increased glucose metabolism in neoplastic cells. 191 Unlike 99mTc-MDP bone scans and 18F sodium fluoride PET bone scans, 18F FDG-PET directly assesses the metabolic activity of the metastatic tissue rather than the bony response to the presence of the metastasis. Therefore, FDG-PET can be helpful in detecting purely osteolytic lesions and marrow infiltration, but it may not be helpful for osteoblastic lesions with relatively low metabolic activity. Consequently, lesions present on MRI or PET may not be visible on bone scans, and vice versa. These techniques nicely complement each other when mixed lesions are present. In a comparative study of 3 modalities in detecting bone metastases, Daldrup-Link et al. 192 found sensitivities of 90% for FDG-PET, 82% for whole-body MRI, and 71% for 99mTc bone scans. Similar results have emerged from comparative studies of FDG-PET and 99mTc bone scans. 193 , 194 FDG-PET shows a high number of false-positive lesions, which require follow-up imaging with other modalities. In skull metastases, the high rate of glucose metabolism in the normal areas of brain may obscure metastases. Additional PET tracers are under investigation in cancer imaging. 18F fluoroestradiol can measure ERs. Markers of DNA synthesis such as 11C thymi-dine and 18F fluorothymidine can measure cellular proliferation. 11C acetate can measure lipid biosynthesis, an indication of cellular reproduction. A model of how a patient might pass through a set of imaging studies is illustrated in Figure 4 . Imaging analysis for metastases is focused on the most likely bones of involvement: vertebrae, pelvis, ribs, skull, femur, and humerus. Patients with suspected bone metastases may be assessed initially with skeletal scintigraphy (99mTc-MDP bone scan). 195 Given its specificity, if the bone scan is negative and no symptoms are present, clinicians can presume the patient has no metastatic disease. A positive scintigraph is followed by plain film radiography to further localize and characterize the lesion. If radiographs are negative and the patient is symptomatic or has a suspicious lesion, an MRI or CT scan should be considered. In conclusion, understanding the advantagesand disadvantages of different bone imaging techniques will assist the clinician in screening, planning treatment, and assessing response. Multiple imaging modalities may be required to confirm the presence of and optimally evaluate bone metastases. Monitoring bone metastases can be problematic with any imaging technique, because changes in bone often occur very slowly. Marrow regeneration in successfully treated patients may appear to be progressive disease on MRI or PET. For evaluation of impending fracture and the need for surgical intervention, plain films and CT scans provide the best information. Results of imaging studies must be interpreted within the clinical context of the individual patient.  Surgical and Radiation Treatment of Bone Metastases Complications caused by bone metastases, including pain, fractures, and decreased mobility, can affect quality of life and reduce a patient's performance status. Localized therapies, including radiation and surgery, can be used for preventing impending events, as well as for palliation. Radiation Treatment Radiation therapy is commonly used in the management of bone metastases, both for pain relief and prevention of morbidity and disease progression. Radiation therapy has shown responses rates of 60% to 70%. Complete pain relief may occur in 20% to 30% of patients receiving radiotherapy. 196 , 197 However, in many patients, the effects may not be felt for several weeks after treatment starts and relief may last only 3 to 4 months. External Beam Radiation Therapy External beam radiation therapy is widely used for cancer patients who present with localized bone pain. The optimal treatment schedule—single versus multiple fraction—is under debate. A systematic review of published trials show no difference between single and multiple fraction in terms of efficacy and toxicity, although a slightly higher re-treatment rate has been seen with single fraction. The Radiation Therapy and Oncology Group (RTOG) conducted one of the largest trials in the United States to study effects of single versus multiple fractions of external beam radiation therapy in treating bone metastases in breast and prostate cancer patients. 198 Patients (n = 898) were randomized to a single 8-Gy fraction or 30 Gy given in 10 fractions. No significant difference in response rates were seen between the 2 arms, although a significantly higher re-treatment rate was seen in the single-fraction arm. In the RTOG trial, more acute toxicity (grades 2-4) was seen in the multiple fraction arm compared with the single-fraction arm. 198 The higher re-treatment rate with single fraction treatment may be attributed to the bias that giving additional doses of radiation may help patients who not have experienced relief from a single dose. A cost-utility analysis performed in the Netherlands compared 2-year quality-adjusted life expectancies and 12-week societal costs. 199 Total societal costs for radiation therapy (including re-treatments, non-medical costs, and non-radiation treatment costs) were estimated at $4700 and $6453 for single fractions and multiple fractions, respectively. Despite multiple studies indicating no difference in response rate, duration of response, use of pain medication, side-effects, or quality of life, radiation oncologists in the United States appear to be reluctant to deliver single-fraction radiation for uncomplicated bone metastases. 200 Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy Stereotactic body radiation therapy was initially developed for targeting lung lesions and is now being used to treat spine metastases. Although conventional radiation therapy of spinal metastatic tumors is useful for palliation, its effectiveness is limited by spinal cord tolerance. In patients with spinal metastases not causing cord compression, stereotactic radiation can be used to overcome some of the dose limitation associated with conventional radiotherapy. It can also be used for patients who have a good prognosis and for whom more aggressive treatment may be warranted. This technique is characterized by high-dose radiation delivered precisely to an extracranial target in 1 to 5 fractions. Researchers have found response rates are around 90% and duration of 13 months, with little to no long-term toxicity. Re-treatment rates range from 0% to 15%. 201 This technique is relatively technically sophisticated and costly but allows better sparing of adjacent critical normal structures. Radioisotopes When symptomatic bone metastases are widespread and present on both sides of the diaphragm, radionuclides can be useful. Radionuclide therapy using strontium-89 chloride, samarium-153, rhenium-186, and rhenium-188 treatments have resulted in palliation of bone pain and improvement in quality of life in patients with advanced hormone-refractory prostate cancer. 202 – 208 These radionuclides localize to regions of enhanced bone turnover and deliver high local doses of radiation through the emission of beta particles. Patients with diffuse multifocal disease are good candidates for systemic radioisotope therapy. Surgical Treatment Surgical management of bone metastasis is performed to relieve pain, provide stabilization, and prevent impending fracture or spinal cord compression. In some situations, surgery provides a greater likelihood of return to ambulatory status than radiation alone. Although surgical treatment of pathologic fractures is often straightforward, treatment of patients with impending pathologic fractures is preferable. Compared with treatment of fractures of the femur, treatment of impending fractures is associated with a shorter hospital stay, a greater likelihood of discharge to home versus extended care, and a greater likelihood of support-free ambulation. 209 The widespread use of bisphosphonate therapy has resulted in a decrease in the incidence of fracture due to bone metastases. Identification of bones at risk remains a “moving target” in the face of better anti-cancer therapies. Surgeons identify lesions at high-risk for fracture based on general criteria. These include lytic lesions greater than 2.5 cm in diameter, encompassing more than 50% of the bone diameter, or the presence of lesser trochanter avulsion. Other indications for surgery for impending fractures include a lesion in a weight-bearing area and a readily identifiable painful lesion that is refractory to external beam radiation therapy. Verifying that the lesion is the source of pain is important. These general guidelines must also be interpreted in the specific clinical context. Fracture stabilization must be preceded by an assessment of metastatic disease in other bones, which could compromise rehabilitation. When considering stabilization of a femoral fracture, a long bone survey or a bone scan within 2 to 3 months is recommended to detect other sites of disease that may relate to weight bearing. Differentiating pathologic fractures from traumatic fractures clinically is also important. Preoperative assessment should include estimation of life expectancy, mental status, mobility status, pain level, metabolic status, skin condition, and nutritional status. From a technical standpoint, one of the easiest bones to stabilize is the proximal femoral shaft; stabilization is more challenging in the pelvis-acetabulum, spine, and periarticular areas. For a periarticular fracture, prosthetic replacement confers fairly predictable pain relief and a return to ambulatory status. Procedures that are applicable to nonmetastatic traumatic fractures often do not apply in the setting of pathologic fractures. For example, a sliding hip screw is commonly used in patients with intertrochanteric osteoporotic fractures. However, these devices are not effective in patients with pathologic fractures, because of the lack of bone healing, particularly with planned subsequent bone radiation. Fractures within the femoral diaphysis can be stabilized using intramedullary nailing. Some of the interlocking capabilities of plates and nails have increased over the past 3 years with new locking plate technology. Insertion of intramedullary nails is a relatively straightforward procedure that requires general or regional anesthesia and a hospital stay of about 2 days. Humeral shaft metastases are often treated with locked intramedullary nailing or, more recently, an inflatable nail, with excellent pain relief and regained use of the extremity in several days. 210 , 211 Case series of patients treated with intramedullary nailing have reported good outcomes, with complete pain relief and resumption of ambulation in a large proportion of patients. However, these outcomes are may be related to patient selection criteria. 212 , 213 Stabilization of acetabular disease is technically challenging but can generally be done with a variation of hip replacement. Marco et al. 214 reported on a case series of 55 patients who were treated with curettage of the tumor, protrusio cup, cement, and pin or screw fixation. Although 76% of patients had a decrease in narcotic usage and half of the nonambulatory patients regained the ability to walk, this procedure has been associated with a 22% complication rate. Saddle prosthesis is another option; a case series of 20 patients showed a similar improvement in analgesia, independence, and ambulation. Again, however, the complication rate was high at 20%. 215 This high morbidity underscores the importance of patient selection for extensive surgery. Additional Minimally Invasive Techniques A variety of minimally invasive techniques are available, including radiofrequency ablation, percutaneous osteoplasty, also referred to as cementoplasty, percutaneous vertebroplasty, and kyphoplasty. Radiofrequency ablation uses thermal energy to destroy tumor cells and has been used to treat painful bony metastases. Goetz et al. 216 reported on a multicenter prospective study of radiofrequency ablation in which 43 patients with painful bone metastases, the majority of whom had undergone prior radiation therapy, had significant pain relief and reduction in opioid use with minimal side effects. Percutaneous vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty are the injection of surgical cement, usually polymethylmethacrylate, into fractured vertebral bodies. Kyphoplasty uses a bone tamp that is inflated before the procedure to create a space for injection of polymethylmethacrylate. Kyphoplasty may result in an increase in vertebral height, which may provide a biomechanical advantage over vertebroplasty. That this technique is effective for pain reduction in both metastatic disease and osteoporosis seems clear, although the mechanism of the effect remains unclear. This technique is growing in popularity; however, published outcomes for the treatment of metastatic disease are still minimal. Fourney et al. 217 described a case series of 97 procedures in 56 patients. A total of 84% of patients had marked or complete pain relief. These results appear comparable to the larger volume of literature on kyphoplasty as a treatment of osteoporosis-related vertebral fractures. 218 Cementoplasty is the percutaneous injection of polymethylmethacrylate into a metastatic lesion to palliate pain. 219 This technique is similar to vertebroplasty. The difference is that it is performed in areas other than the spine and uses 3-dimensional imaging, most commonly CT. This technique is most suited to the pelvis. Image-guided cryoablation is a relatively new minimally invasive technique. Similar to radiofrquency ablation, the metastatic lesions are accessed percutaneously. Cryoprobes are introduced under anesthesia. As the argon gas released from the probes rapidly expands, it produces rapid cooling with temperatures close to ?100°C, leading to intracellular ice ball formation, dehydration, and cell death. Callstrom et al. 220 reported on 14 patients with bone metastases treated with image-guided cryoablation. Improvement in pain, decrease in pain interference with activities of daily living, and noted reductions in narcotic use were seen using this therapy. In conclusion, advances in surgery provide a number of techniques for treating bone pain from metastases. The key to surgical management remains identifying patients with impending fractures and referring them for stabilization before fracture occurs.  Radiation Treatment Radiation therapy is commonly used in the management of bone metastases, both for pain relief and prevention of morbidity and disease progression. Radiation therapy has shown responses rates of 60% to 70%. Complete pain relief may occur in 20% to 30% of patients receiving radiotherapy. 196 , 197 However, in many patients, the effects may not be felt for several weeks after treatment starts and relief may last only 3 to 4 months. External Beam Radiation Therapy External beam radiation therapy is widely used for cancer patients who present with localized bone pain. The optimal treatment schedule—single versus multiple fraction—is under debate. A systematic review of published trials show no difference between single and multiple fraction in terms of efficacy and toxicity, although a slightly higher re-treatment rate has been seen with single fraction. The Radiation Therapy and Oncology Group (RTOG) conducted one of the largest trials in the United States to study effects of single versus multiple fractions of external beam radiation therapy in treating bone metastases in breast and prostate cancer patients. 198 Patients (n = 898) were randomized to a single 8-Gy fraction or 30 Gy given in 10 fractions. No significant difference in response rates were seen between the 2 arms, although a significantly higher re-treatment rate was seen in the single-fraction arm. In the RTOG trial, more acute toxicity (grades 2-4) was seen in the multiple fraction arm compared with the single-fraction arm. 198 The higher re-treatment rate with single fraction treatment may be attributed to the bias that giving additional doses of radiation may help patients who not have experienced relief from a single dose. A cost-utility analysis performed in the Netherlands compared 2-year quality-adjusted life expectancies and 12-week societal costs. 199 Total societal costs for radiation therapy (including re-treatments, non-medical costs, and non-radiation treatment costs) were estimated at $4700 and $6453 for single fractions and multiple fractions, respectively. Despite multiple studies indicating no difference in response rate, duration of response, use of pain medication, side-effects, or quality of life, radiation oncologists in the United States appear to be reluctant to deliver single-fraction radiation for uncomplicated bone metastases. 200 Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy Stereotactic body radiation therapy was initially developed for targeting lung lesions and is now being used to treat spine metastases. Although conventional radiation therapy of spinal metastatic tumors is useful for palliation, its effectiveness is limited by spinal cord tolerance. In patients with spinal metastases not causing cord compression, stereotactic radiation can be used to overcome some of the dose limitation associated with conventional radiotherapy. It can also be used for patients who have a good prognosis and for whom more aggressive treatment may be warranted. This technique is characterized by high-dose radiation delivered precisely to an extracranial target in 1 to 5 fractions. Researchers have found response rates are around 90% and duration of 13 months, with little to no long-term toxicity. Re-treatment rates range from 0% to 15%. 201 This technique is relatively technically sophisticated and costly but allows better sparing of adjacent critical normal structures. Radioisotopes When symptomatic bone metastases are widespread and present on both sides of the diaphragm, radionuclides can be useful. Radionuclide therapy using strontium-89 chloride, samarium-153, rhenium-186, and rhenium-188 treatments have resulted in palliation of bone pain and improvement in quality of life in patients with advanced hormone-refractory prostate cancer. 202 – 208 These radionuclides localize to regions of enhanced bone turnover and deliver high local doses of radiation through the emission of beta particles. Patients with diffuse multifocal disease are good candidates for systemic radioisotope therapy.  External Beam Radiation Therapy External beam radiation therapy is widely used for cancer patients who present with localized bone pain. The optimal treatment schedule—single versus multiple fraction—is under debate. A systematic review of published trials show no difference between single and multiple fraction in terms of efficacy and toxicity, although a slightly higher re-treatment rate has been seen with single fraction. The Radiation Therapy and Oncology Group (RTOG) conducted one of the largest trials in the United States to study effects of single versus multiple fractions of external beam radiation therapy in treating bone metastases in breast and prostate cancer patients. 198 Patients (n = 898) were randomized to a single 8-Gy fraction or 30 Gy given in 10 fractions. No significant difference in response rates were seen between the 2 arms, although a significantly higher re-treatment rate was seen in the single-fraction arm. In the RTOG trial, more acute toxicity (grades 2-4) was seen in the multiple fraction arm compared with the single-fraction arm. 198 The higher re-treatment rate with single fraction treatment may be attributed to the bias that giving additional doses of radiation may help patients who not have experienced relief from a single dose. A cost-utility analysis performed in the Netherlands compared 2-year quality-adjusted life expectancies and 12-week societal costs. 199 Total societal costs for radiation therapy (including re-treatments, non-medical costs, and non-radiation treatment costs) were estimated at $4700 and $6453 for single fractions and multiple fractions, respectively. Despite multiple studies indicating no difference in response rate, duration of response, use of pain medication, side-effects, or quality of life, radiation oncologists in the United States appear to be reluctant to deliver single-fraction radiation for uncomplicated bone metastases. 200  Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy Stereotactic body radiation therapy was initially developed for targeting lung lesions and is now being used to treat spine metastases. Although conventional radiation therapy of spinal metastatic tumors is useful for palliation, its effectiveness is limited by spinal cord tolerance. In patients with spinal metastases not causing cord compression, stereotactic radiation can be used to overcome some of the dose limitation associated with conventional radiotherapy. It can also be used for patients who have a good prognosis and for whom more aggressive treatment may be warranted. This technique is characterized by high-dose radiation delivered precisely to an extracranial target in 1 to 5 fractions. Researchers have found response rates are around 90% and duration of 13 months, with little to no long-term toxicity. Re-treatment rates range from 0% to 15%. 201 This technique is relatively technically sophisticated and costly but allows better sparing of adjacent critical normal structures.  Radioisotopes When symptomatic bone metastases are widespread and present on both sides of the diaphragm, radionuclides can be useful. Radionuclide therapy using strontium-89 chloride, samarium-153, rhenium-186, and rhenium-188 treatments have resulted in palliation of bone pain and improvement in quality of life in patients with advanced hormone-refractory prostate cancer. 202 – 208 These radionuclides localize to regions of enhanced bone turnover and deliver high local doses of radiation through the emission of beta particles. Patients with diffuse multifocal disease are good candidates for systemic radioisotope therapy.  Surgical Treatment Surgical management of bone metastasis is performed to relieve pain, provide stabilization, and prevent impending fracture or spinal cord compression. In some situations, surgery provides a greater likelihood of return to ambulatory status than radiation alone. Although surgical treatment of pathologic fractures is often straightforward, treatment of patients with impending pathologic fractures is preferable. Compared with treatment of fractures of the femur, treatment of impending fractures is associated with a shorter hospital stay, a greater likelihood of discharge to home versus extended care, and a greater likelihood of support-free ambulation. 209 The widespread use of bisphosphonate therapy has resulted in a decrease in the incidence of fracture due to bone metastases. Identification of bones at risk remains a “moving target” in the face of better anti-cancer therapies. Surgeons identify lesions at high-risk for fracture based on general criteria. These include lytic lesions greater than 2.5 cm in diameter, encompassing more than 50% of the bone diameter, or the presence of lesser trochanter avulsion. Other indications for surgery for impending fractures include a lesion in a weight-bearing area and a readily identifiable painful lesion that is refractory to external beam radiation therapy. Verifying that the lesion is the source of pain is important. These general guidelines must also be interpreted in the specific clinical context. Fracture stabilization must be preceded by an assessment of metastatic disease in other bones, which could compromise rehabilitation. When considering stabilization of a femoral fracture, a long bone survey or a bone scan within 2 to 3 months is recommended to detect other sites of disease that may relate to weight bearing. Differentiating pathologic fractures from traumatic fractures clinically is also important. Preoperative assessment should include estimation of life expectancy, mental status, mobility status, pain level, metabolic status, skin condition, and nutritional status. From a technical standpoint, one of the easiest bones to stabilize is the proximal femoral shaft; stabilization is more challenging in the pelvis-acetabulum, spine, and periarticular areas. For a periarticular fracture, prosthetic replacement confers fairly predictable pain relief and a return to ambulatory status. Procedures that are applicable to nonmetastatic traumatic fractures often do not apply in the setting of pathologic fractures. For example, a sliding hip screw is commonly used in patients with intertrochanteric osteoporotic fractures. However, these devices are not effective in patients with pathologic fractures, because of the lack of bone healing, particularly with planned subsequent bone radiation. Fractures within the femoral diaphysis can be stabilized using intramedullary nailing. Some of the interlocking capabilities of plates and nails have increased over the past 3 years with new locking plate technology. Insertion of intramedullary nails is a relatively straightforward procedure that requires general or regional anesthesia and a hospital stay of about 2 days. Humeral shaft metastases are often treated with locked intramedullary nailing or, more recently, an inflatable nail, with excellent pain relief and regained use of the extremity in several days. 210 , 211 Case series of patients treated with intramedullary nailing have reported good outcomes, with complete pain relief and resumption of ambulation in a large proportion of patients. However, these outcomes are may be related to patient selection criteria. 212 , 213 Stabilization of acetabular disease is technically challenging but can generally be done with a variation of hip replacement. Marco et al. 214 reported on a case series of 55 patients who were treated with curettage of the tumor, protrusio cup, cement, and pin or screw fixation. Although 76% of patients had a decrease in narcotic usage and half of the nonambulatory patients regained the ability to walk, this procedure has been associated with a 22% complication rate. Saddle prosthesis is another option; a case series of 20 patients showed a similar improvement in analgesia, independence, and ambulation. Again, however, the complication rate was high at 20%. 215 This high morbidity underscores the importance of patient selection for extensive surgery. Additional Minimally Invasive Techniques A variety of minimally invasive techniques are available, including radiofrequency ablation, percutaneous osteoplasty, also referred to as cementoplasty, percutaneous vertebroplasty, and kyphoplasty. Radiofrequency ablation uses thermal energy to destroy tumor cells and has been used to treat painful bony metastases. Goetz et al. 216 reported on a multicenter prospective study of radiofrequency ablation in which 43 patients with painful bone metastases, the majority of whom had undergone prior radiation therapy, had significant pain relief and reduction in opioid use with minimal side effects. Percutaneous vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty are the injection of surgical cement, usually polymethylmethacrylate, into fractured vertebral bodies. Kyphoplasty uses a bone tamp that is inflated before the procedure to create a space for injection of polymethylmethacrylate. Kyphoplasty may result in an increase in vertebral height, which may provide a biomechanical advantage over vertebroplasty. That this technique is effective for pain reduction in both metastatic disease and osteoporosis seems clear, although the mechanism of the effect remains unclear. This technique is growing in popularity; however, published outcomes for the treatment of metastatic disease are still minimal. Fourney et al. 217 described a case series of 97 procedures in 56 patients. A total of 84% of patients had marked or complete pain relief. These results appear comparable to the larger volume of literature on kyphoplasty as a treatment of osteoporosis-related vertebral fractures. 218 Cementoplasty is the percutaneous injection of polymethylmethacrylate into a metastatic lesion to palliate pain. 219 This technique is similar to vertebroplasty. The difference is that it is performed in areas other than the spine and uses 3-dimensional imaging, most commonly CT. This technique is most suited to the pelvis. Image-guided cryoablation is a relatively new minimally invasive technique. Similar to radiofrquency ablation, the metastatic lesions are accessed percutaneously. Cryoprobes are introduced under anesthesia. As the argon gas released from the probes rapidly expands, it produces rapid cooling with temperatures close to ?100°C, leading to intracellular ice ball formation, dehydration, and cell death. Callstrom et al. 220 reported on 14 patients with bone metastases treated with image-guided cryoablation. Improvement in pain, decrease in pain interference with activities of daily living, and noted reductions in narcotic use were seen using this therapy. In conclusion, advances in surgery provide a number of techniques for treating bone pain from metastases. The key to surgical management remains identifying patients with impending fractures and referring them for stabilization before fracture occurs.  Additional Minimally Invasive Techniques A variety of minimally invasive techniques are available, including radiofrequency ablation, percutaneous osteoplasty, also referred to as cementoplasty, percutaneous vertebroplasty, and kyphoplasty. Radiofrequency ablation uses thermal energy to destroy tumor cells and has been used to treat painful bony metastases. Goetz et al. 216 reported on a multicenter prospective study of radiofrequency ablation in which 43 patients with painful bone metastases, the majority of whom had undergone prior radiation therapy, had significant pain relief and reduction in opioid use with minimal side effects. Percutaneous vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty are the injection of surgical cement, usually polymethylmethacrylate, into fractured vertebral bodies. Kyphoplasty uses a bone tamp that is inflated before the procedure to create a space for injection of polymethylmethacrylate. Kyphoplasty may result in an increase in vertebral height, which may provide a biomechanical advantage over vertebroplasty. That this technique is effective for pain reduction in both metastatic disease and osteoporosis seems clear, although the mechanism of the effect remains unclear. This technique is growing in popularity; however, published outcomes for the treatment of metastatic disease are still minimal. Fourney et al. 217 described a case series of 97 procedures in 56 patients. A total of 84% of patients had marked or complete pain relief. These results appear comparable to the larger volume of literature on kyphoplasty as a treatment of osteoporosis-related vertebral fractures. 218 Cementoplasty is the percutaneous injection of polymethylmethacrylate into a metastatic lesion to palliate pain. 219 This technique is similar to vertebroplasty. The difference is that it is performed in areas other than the spine and uses 3-dimensional imaging, most commonly CT. This technique is most suited to the pelvis. Image-guided cryoablation is a relatively new minimally invasive technique. Similar to radiofrquency ablation, the metastatic lesions are accessed percutaneously. Cryoprobes are introduced under anesthesia. As the argon gas released from the probes rapidly expands, it produces rapid cooling with temperatures close to ?100°C, leading to intracellular ice ball formation, dehydration, and cell death. Callstrom et al. 220 reported on 14 patients with bone metastases treated with image-guided cryoablation. Improvement in pain, decrease in pain interference with activities of daily living, and noted reductions in narcotic use were seen using this therapy. In conclusion, advances in surgery provide a number of techniques for treating bone pain from metastases. The key to surgical management remains identifying patients with impending fractures and referring them for stabilization before fracture occurs.  Conclusions Bone health is an increasingly critical issue for all cancer patients and their health care providers. Evaluation and treatment of cancer treatment-related bone loss should be incorporated into comprehensive cancer care. Strategies to reduce morbidity include educating patients about fracture risk, encouraging healthy lifestyle modifications, providing supplementation with calcium and vitamin D, screening for osteoporosis, and starting drug therapy as clinically indicated. BMD combined with clinical risk factors for fracture determined using the FRAX calculator, provides a better estimation of fracture risk than BMD or clinical risk factors alone. In patients with documented bone metastases, treatment and monitoring should involve a multidisciplinary approach that includes systemic anticancer therapy, osteoclast-targeted therapy, pain control, imaging studies, and surgery and radiation therapy if indicated. In breast cancer, emerging data suggests that bisphosphonates may impact recurrence in early stage breast cancer in addition to impacting bone density.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Example (reproduction) fracture risk analysis results for a white woman in the United States using the FRAX™ online tool. This algorithm incorporates bone density and other risk factors into a comprehensive estimate of fracture risk. The tool is available at www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/ . Abbreviations: BMD, bone mineral density; FRAX™, Fracture Risk Assessment Algorithm. Figure 2 Algorithm for management of bone health of cancer patients in the United States. Abbreviations: 25(OH), serum hydroxy; BMD, bone mineral density; DEXA, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry; FRAX™, Fracture Risk Assessment Algorithm. *See section on “Screening and Detection of Osteoporosis” for FRAX™ algorithm. †See section on “Update on Treatment Options for Osteoporosis” for lifestyle modifications and calcium and vitamin D repletion. ‡See section on “Update on Treatment Options for Osteoporosis” to correct vitamin D deficiency. §In selected cases, longer or shorter intervals may be considered. If a major change in patient risk factors or a major intervention occurs, repeating DEXA scan at one year is reasonable. Note: In addition to monitoring changes in BMD, the oncologist should obtain a lateral thoracic and lumbar x-ray of the spine to determine if vertebral compression deformities are present if there is: 1) a historical height loss > 4 cm (1.6 in) or a prospective height loss > 2 cm (0.8 in), or 2) complaint of acute back pain. Consider referral to a bone health specialist if loss of vertebral height > 20% is present. Figure 3 Prevalence of skeletal-related events in patients with metastatic bone disease not treated with a bisphosphonate. The data are obtained from 4 major trials of placebo versus an intravenous bisphosphonate in different tumor types. 165 , 166 , 222 , 223 Abbreviation: NSCLC, non–small cell lung cancer. Figure 4 Algorithm for imaging for cancer patients in the United States. Modified from Hamaoka T, Madewell JE, Podoloff DA, et al. Bone imaging in metastatic breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2004;22:2942–2953 Table 1 FDA Approved Medications for Osteoporosis Prevention and Treatment Dosing Mechanism; Class Estrogen See Kalantaridou et al. 221 Antiresorptive; steroid hormone Calcitonin 200 IU intranasal daily Antiresorptive; peptide hormone Alendronate 35 mg orally weekly Antiresorptive; bisphosphonate 70 mg orally weekly; with or without vitamin D: 2800, 5600 IU Risedronate 35 mg orally weekly Antiresorptive; bisphosphonate 150 mg orally monthly Ibandronate 150 mg orally monthly, or 3 mg intravenous push every 3 months Antiresorptive; bisphosphonate Zoledronic acid 5 mg intravenous yearly (over 15 minutes) Antiresorptive; bisphosphonate Raloxifene 60 mg orally daily Antiresorptive; selective estrogen receptor modulator Teriparatide (recombinant parathyroid hormone) 20 mg subcutaneous daily for a maximum of 2 years Anabolic; peptide hormone fragment 