Chemoprevention of Lung Carcinogenesis in Addicted Smokers and Ex-Smokers Chemoprevention of lung carcinogenesis is one approach to controlling the epidemic of lung cancer caused by cigarette smoking. The target for chemoprevention should be the activities of the multiple carcinogens, toxicants, co-carcinogens, tumor promoters and inflammatory compounds in cigarette smoke. There are presently many agents both synthetic and naturally occurring that prevent lung tumor development in well established animal models. It seems likely that logically constructed mixtures of these agents, developed from the ground up, will be necessary for prevention of lung carcinogenesis  Conclusions In spite of the lack of success in chemoprevention of lung carcinogenesis so far, there is reason to be optimistic. The data summarized here clearly demonstrate that there are multiple agents that are effective inhibitors of lung carcinogenesis in animal models, and these agents operate by diverse mechanisms. It is likely that success will depend on judicious use of a combination of these agents because cellular damage from years of cigarette smoking is both complex and extensive. Single agents that target single pathways or carcinogens are not likely to be successful. We need to target the multiple activities of cigarette smoke: its carcinogens and toxicants and their downstream, tumor promoting, and inflammatory effects. The successful mixture will be assembled stepwise and driven by efficacy testing in one or more of the animal models described here. This chemopreventive mixture will have minimal toxicity in animal models and humans, which might be achievable by using naturally occurring compounds in doses no greater than those present in common foods such as vegetables. All smokers should be considered for chemoprevention of lung carcinogenesis but with the strong message that no chemopreventive agent makes smoking safe. In addition, chemoprevention should be given in the context of providing smoking cessation advice and assistance. Ex-smokers should also benefit from chemoprevention. Although not discussed here, genetic, molecular and phenotypic biomarkers could be used to select those subjects at highest risk for lung cancer, and treatment should be promptly delivered to such individuals. While avoidance of tobacco products is the surest way to decrease lung cancer risk, chemoprevention promises to be a useful adjunct strategy. 