Oncolytic Viral Therapy of Malignant Glioma SUMMARY Novel approaches to treatment of malignant glioma, the most frequently occurring primary brain tumor, have included the use of a wide range of oncolytic viral vectors. These vectors, either naturally tumor-selective, or engineered as such, have shown promise in the handful of Phase I and Phase II clinical trials conducted in recent years. The strategies developed for each of the different viruses currently being studied, and the history of their development, are summarized here. Additionally, the results of clinical trials in patients, and their implication for future trials, are also discussed.  INTRODUCTION Malignant glioma is the most frequently occurring primary brain tumor. Prognosis is abysmal despite surgical resection and chemotherapy/radiation therapy, with time to progression averaging 6 months and median survival of less than one year. Investigations into the use of oncolytic viruses for the treatment of a variety of malignancies, including malignant glioma, were initiated more than half a century ago following anecdotal observations that some cancer patients experienced periods of remission after suffering from an acute illness of viral etiology, or after being inoculated with attenuated viral vaccines. Perhaps the most well-known case report came from de Pace in 1912 that described a patient whose cervical carcinoma regressed after receiving Pasteur’s attenuated rabies vaccine strain following a dog bite. 1 Subsequently, adenoviruses (earlier referred to as adenoideal-pharyngeal-conjunctival, or APC viruses) were inoculated in thirty patients with epidermoid cervical carcinomas. 2 In this study, 65% of treated tumors had areas of necrosis following intratumoral inoculation. Naturally-occurring viruses evaluated for treatment of acute leukemia include Newcastle disease virus, Sendai, Semliki Forest virus and influenza viruses. 3 Cases of Burkitt’s lymphoma 4 and Hodgkin’s disease 5 have partially responded to treatment with the measles virus. In the late 1970’s, mumps virus was administered for various human cancers, with one study enrolling 200 patients. 6 , 7 Until the early 1990s, safety concerns limited the use of these non-attenuated, replication-competent viruses as primary anti-tumor therapy. Instead, replication-defective viruses, including engineered adenovirus and retrovirus vectors, were evaluated as gene therapy vectors for cancer therapy. However, numerous problems were associated with these vectors, including adequate virus delivery and distribution, insufficient levels of both gene transfer and gene expression, and lack of prolonged efficacy. More recently, advancements in molecular biology, combined with research in novel experimental therapies for cancer treatment has renewed interest in applying oncolytic viruses (OVs) for glioma therapy. A history of these advancements with respect to CNS malignancies, and a summary of the different OVs under evaluation, is provided. There are numerous advantages of oncolytic virotherapy. First, if not already naturally discriminating, OVs can be genetically engineered to be selective for mitotically active, neoplastic cells. This is especially appealing for glioma therapy, as the tumor-adjacent, quiescent neurons remain resistant and intact after treatment. Second, most of the viruses discussed here, and all those tested in Phase I clinical trials for malignant glioma thus far, are replication-competent in addition to being oncolytic. This means that tumor killing is not limited to the initial target cell. Rather, its tumor-targeted cytolytic advantage can spread to surrounding cells that escaped initial infection. This latter property theoretically allows for OVs to seek out and destroy tumor cells distal from the initial treatment site. Third, some OVs have large genomes enabling the introduction of one or more foreign genes, allowing them to act as gene therapy vectors for augmentation of the antitumor effect. M002 (discussed below) is one example of an oncolytic HSV engineered for expression of murine IL-12 heterodimers specifically in tumor cells only. Finally, any viruses that demonstrate efficacy in the treatment of brain tumors can be used clinically in combination with standard treatment modalities. History of Oncolytic Viral Therapy In 1991 Martuza and colleagues reported that the engineered herpes simplex virus (HSV) thymidine kinase-deleted mutant, dl sptk, was replication-attenuated in non-dividing cells, such as neurons. 8 The tk gene deletion required the virus to rely on mitotically-active cells to supply both thymidine kinase and nucleotide pools for DNA replication. The dl sptk virus displayed a promising therapeutic profile in the treatment of glioma in animal studies. However, the tk gene inactivation also rendered this mutant resistant to antiviral agents such as acyclovir that target the viral thymidine kinase. Lost susceptibility to the viral tk-targeted drugs, combined with an undesirable toxicity level at high titers, prevented advancement of this OV into clinical trials for malignant glioma. Nevertheless, these “proof of concept” studies led to the development of the first generation of clinically-safe HSV vectors, G207 and HSV1716, described in more detail later in this review. As with any novel therapy, safety following administration in humans is the highest priority. But additionally, OVs must demonstrate potent anti-tumor activity either alone or combined with existing standard therapies, such as de-bulking surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Over the past two decades, a number of promising OVs have been developed which have demonstrated anti-glioma activity in preclinical studies. These include poliovirus-derived vectors, vaccinia virus, Newcastle disease virus, and most recently, measles virus vectors. Additionally, Phase I clinical trials have been completed for several OVs, including HSV-1 (G207 and HSV1716), 9 , 10 a conditionally replicative adenovirus (CRAd) termed Onyx-015, 11 and a reovirus, REOLYSIN®. 12 A number of these vectors have already demonstrated their safety following administration in patients, including some in combination with prior debulking surgery or in combination with radiation. 13 , 14 Yet, major hurdles remain: these include efficient delivery of oncolytic viruses both into the primary tumor mass as well as delivery to tumor cells distal from the primary site, tumor-specific genotypes resistant to certain oncolytic virus therapies, and persistence of viral replication and expression of foreign genes introduced to augment OV activity by multiple mechanisms. Strategies to overcome these hurdles are currently under intense investigation, and will be discussed at the end of this review.  History of Oncolytic Viral Therapy In 1991 Martuza and colleagues reported that the engineered herpes simplex virus (HSV) thymidine kinase-deleted mutant, dl sptk, was replication-attenuated in non-dividing cells, such as neurons. 8 The tk gene deletion required the virus to rely on mitotically-active cells to supply both thymidine kinase and nucleotide pools for DNA replication. The dl sptk virus displayed a promising therapeutic profile in the treatment of glioma in animal studies. However, the tk gene inactivation also rendered this mutant resistant to antiviral agents such as acyclovir that target the viral thymidine kinase. Lost susceptibility to the viral tk-targeted drugs, combined with an undesirable toxicity level at high titers, prevented advancement of this OV into clinical trials for malignant glioma. Nevertheless, these “proof of concept” studies led to the development of the first generation of clinically-safe HSV vectors, G207 and HSV1716, described in more detail later in this review. As with any novel therapy, safety following administration in humans is the highest priority. But additionally, OVs must demonstrate potent anti-tumor activity either alone or combined with existing standard therapies, such as de-bulking surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Over the past two decades, a number of promising OVs have been developed which have demonstrated anti-glioma activity in preclinical studies. These include poliovirus-derived vectors, vaccinia virus, Newcastle disease virus, and most recently, measles virus vectors. Additionally, Phase I clinical trials have been completed for several OVs, including HSV-1 (G207 and HSV1716), 9 , 10 a conditionally replicative adenovirus (CRAd) termed Onyx-015, 11 and a reovirus, REOLYSIN®. 12 A number of these vectors have already demonstrated their safety following administration in patients, including some in combination with prior debulking surgery or in combination with radiation. 13 , 14 Yet, major hurdles remain: these include efficient delivery of oncolytic viruses both into the primary tumor mass as well as delivery to tumor cells distal from the primary site, tumor-specific genotypes resistant to certain oncolytic virus therapies, and persistence of viral replication and expression of foreign genes introduced to augment OV activity by multiple mechanisms. Strategies to overcome these hurdles are currently under intense investigation, and will be discussed at the end of this review.  HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS-1 Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a well-studied, neurotropic virus whose essential and non-essential genes have been established. 15 The genes involved in its oncolytic properties are distinct from the genes for neurovirulence, and manipulation of the viral genome allows continued oncolysis with conditional replication in cancer cells. Its sensitivity to acyclovir and ganciclovir gives HSV a distinct advantage over other oncolytic vectors in that it adds to its safety profile when used in human clinical trials. Following the development of HSV-1 virus dlsptk described above, other HSV vectors have been constructed that are avirulent in normal brain but can proliferate in actively cycling cells due to different mutations. HSV-1 mutant hrR3 contains an inactivating lacZ insertion into the UL39 locus encoding the large subunit of ribonucleotide reductase (ICP6) 16 , required for the synthesis of nucleotides in a post-mitotic cellular environment, such as neurons, which would otherwise not support HSV proliferation. The UL39 mutation is complemented in trans 17 via the cellular version of the enzyme in malignant gliomas and other cycling cells such that hrR3 can still infect these rapidly dividing cells. 18 Additionally, this mutation increases susceptibility of the virus to anti-viral therapy with acyclovir and ganciclovir. 19 Because of its large genome (>150kb), up to 30kbp of HSV genome can be replaced with foreign DNA while still retaining the virus’s ability to replicate. Following infection with wild type HSV-1, double stranded RNA is produced, and this RNA is sensed by protein kinase R (PKR) through an intracellular stress response. PKR phosphorylates eukaryotic initiation factor alpha (eIF-2?) which turns off protein synthesis. Expression of Infected Cell Protein 34.5 (ICP34.5), a gamma-1 gene, leads to dephosphorylation of eIF-2?, restoring protein synthesis. ICP34.5 is expressed from the ?134.5 gene which is present in two copies and located in the inverted repeat regions flanking the Unique Long (UL) segment of the viral genome. Restoration of protein synthesis occurs when ICP34.5 recruits protein phosphatase-1a, leading to eIF-2? dephosphorylation. 20 R3616, constructed by Roizman and colleagues, 21 lacks both copies of the ?134.5 gene and was derived from the wildtype virus, HSV-1 (F) strain. Deletion or disruption of both copies of the ?134.5 gene severely limits virus replication unless its target is a tumor cell that possesses a complementing mutation, such as ras overexpression 22 , or alterations in PKR and other cell signaling pathways. 23 Deletion of this gene also removes part of the latency-activated transcripts (LATs), which are encoded on the complementary antisense DNA strands. As such, these viruses are impaired in their ability to establish latency following infection. 24 R3616 was the parent virus for G207, which has now completed two Phase 1 clinical trials in the United States. Results of a third trial are pending. Herpes Simplex Viruses: Clinical Trials The first generation oncolytic herpes simplex virus vectors (OHSV) that have already completed Phase 1 or early Phase 2 clinical trials in patients have one or both of these attenuating mutations (?134.5 deletion and UL39 disruption). G207, developed by Martuza’s group, combined both of these strategies and was constructed on HSV-1 (F) wildtype background. 25 HSV1716, in contrast, only lacks copies of its ?134.5 gene- the UL39 sequences remain intact. HSV1716 is derived from wildtype strain 17 and was constructed by Brown and colleagues. 26 G207 G207 has deletions of both copies of its ?134.5 gene in addition to a lacZ insertion into the UL39 locus. 25 These two mutations improve the safety of G207 by rendering it susceptible to standard anti-HSV therapy and by impairing ability of the virus to establish latency within an infected cell. Preclinical studies demonstrated that G207 was safe in neurotoxicity studies in mice and non-human primates, and efficacious against the U87 human malignant glioma xenograft model in immunocompromised mice. 27 New World owl monkeys ( Aotus nancymae ) were used for the primate neurotoxicity studies due to their exquisite sensitivity to HSV infection. 28 These monkeys showed no clinical signs of HSV-induced illness after G207 inoculation (up to 1×109 PFU of G207 injected). Three Phase I trials have been completed to date for G207 treatment alone, or in combination with radiation. In the initial trial, a total of 21 subjects were enrolled, all of whom had recurrence of tumor diagnosed on CT or MRI after standard therapy (resection or biopsy followed by radiation). Each patient received a stereotactic intratumoral injection of G207 within the enhancing portion of the tumor, starting at a dose of 1×106 PFU in the first cohort, 1×107 PFU in the second cohort, and a dose escalation in half-log increments for each subsequent cohort (three patients per cohort). A maximally tolerated dose (MTD) could not be established; even at the highest dose (3×109 PFU). CT scans 30 days after virus inoculation showed reduced enhancement in 8 patients, 8 patients survived nine or more months post-treatment, and a single GBM patient remained alive 5.5 years after inoculation without evidence of disease. 9 The objectives of the second Phase Ib G207 trial were three-fold: 1. to confirm the safety and tolerability of intratumoral inoculation of G207, as well as inoculation into the brain surrounding the tumor, 2. to demonstrate active replication inside the tumor, and 3. to demonstrate safety of multiple dose delivery of the virus. Six patients with recurrent GBM were enrolled in the study. A catheter was stereotactically implanted into the tumor, and 13% of a total dose of 1.15×109 PFU of G207 was injected through the catheter. Either 2 or 5 days later, the tumor was resected en bloc with the catheter in place, and the remainder of the G207 was injected into the tumor bed. Radiologic and pathologic evidence of anti-tumor activity was seen. Evidence of HSV replication in situ was demonstrated. No patient developed HSV encephalitis, though one patient experienced transient fever, delirium, and hemiparesis, which entirely resolved within twelve hours on high-dose dexamethasone; no acyclovir was necessary. These symptoms were attributed to inadvertent inoculation of the virus into the ventricular system. Overall, G207 appeared safe both for multiple dose delivery and for direct inoculation into the brain surrounding the tumor cavity. 13 HSV1716 Concurrent with the G207 studies in the U.S., HSV1716, derived from HSV strain 17, was being tested in clinical trials in Glasgow, UK. Like G207, HSV1716 also lacks both copies of the ?134.5 gene, but its UL39 gene remains intact. 26 In the initial HSV1716 phase I trial, nine patients (8 GBM, 1 AA), all having undergone prior surgery and radiotherapy, most receiving chemotherapy, had an initial dose of 1×103 PFU stereotactically inoculated into the enhancing portion of the tumor. This dose was increased by one log in each of three cohorts, three patients per cohort, ending at a maximum dose of 1×105 PFU. At the highest dose, no signs of encephalitis or other dose-limiting toxicities were encountered, and no MTD was reached. 10 To validate safety and demonstrate in situ viral replication, a second phase I trial was conducted. In this trial, 12 patients (11 GBM, 1 AA) received 1 × 106 PFU of HSV1716 via direct intratumoral inoculation prior to surgical resection 4 to 9 days later. Again, this virus was proven safe and replication within the tumor was supported by PCR detection of the virus in two of the resected tumors. 14 Recently, according to their website, Crusade Laboratories has received regulatory approval to begin Europe-wide Phase III clinical trials of HSV1716 in glioma patients after first recurrence post-resection and radiotherapy, with satisfactory results potentially leading to license and marketing authorization for glioma therapy. M002/M032 OHSV engineered to express transgenes, including interleukins such as IL-4 or IL-12, have been shown to enhance tumor killing in both syngeneic murine brain tumor models and human glioma xenograft tumor models. 29 , 30 M002 and M032, like G207, are both derived from HSV-1 (F) strain with deletion of both ?134.5 gene copies, but in contrast, the UL39 gene remains intact in M002 and M032. A bicistronic expression cassette encoding interleukin-12 p40 and p35 subunits from either murine (M002) or human (M032) origin, and separated by an internal ribosome entry sequence (IRES), were introduced into both 34.5 deleted sites. 30 A lot of M032 has been produced using current Good Manufacturing Practices through the NCI RAID Program for eventual use in Phase I clinical trials in humans. Next Generation HSV A number of different strategies are currently being employed to enhance anti-tumor potential of OHSV vectors. These include introduction of foreign genes for prodrug conversion, 31 – 33 tumor-specific gene expression, 34 , 35 expression of other viral proteins that restore efficient viral replication, 36 , 37 to name a few. Genetic manipulation of HSV proteins that mediate virus entry, combined with new discoveries related to the mechanism of tumor cell resistance to OHSV therapies have led to the engineering of novel tumor-targeted HSV vectors. For example, an OHSV was constructed to specifically target the IL13R?2 receptor, 38 found abundantly on high grade astrocytomas but not on normal human tissues. 39 Derivatives of this IL13Ra2-targeted virus have been constructed which are no longer capable of binding to the normal HSV entry receptor, nectin 1. 40 , 41 Other tumor-targeting strategies under investigation for OHSV vectors include the use of tumor-specific promoters 35 , 42 , 43 or radiation-inducible promoters 44 for expression of genes that optimize the tumor cell microenvironment for efficient viral replication. Malignant gliomas will likely require a broad approach that incorporates current treatment strategies with novel therapeutics, including OHSV. Dual treatment regimens combining OHSV therapy with ionizing radiation or chemotherapies are all strategies currently under intensive investigation. 45 – 49 In summary, the G207 and HSV1716 clinical trials reinforce the safety and potential benefit that OHSV vectors may offer to patients with malignant glioma.  Herpes Simplex Viruses: Clinical Trials The first generation oncolytic herpes simplex virus vectors (OHSV) that have already completed Phase 1 or early Phase 2 clinical trials in patients have one or both of these attenuating mutations (?134.5 deletion and UL39 disruption). G207, developed by Martuza’s group, combined both of these strategies and was constructed on HSV-1 (F) wildtype background. 25 HSV1716, in contrast, only lacks copies of its ?134.5 gene- the UL39 sequences remain intact. HSV1716 is derived from wildtype strain 17 and was constructed by Brown and colleagues. 26 G207 G207 has deletions of both copies of its ?134.5 gene in addition to a lacZ insertion into the UL39 locus. 25 These two mutations improve the safety of G207 by rendering it susceptible to standard anti-HSV therapy and by impairing ability of the virus to establish latency within an infected cell. Preclinical studies demonstrated that G207 was safe in neurotoxicity studies in mice and non-human primates, and efficacious against the U87 human malignant glioma xenograft model in immunocompromised mice. 27 New World owl monkeys ( Aotus nancymae ) were used for the primate neurotoxicity studies due to their exquisite sensitivity to HSV infection. 28 These monkeys showed no clinical signs of HSV-induced illness after G207 inoculation (up to 1×109 PFU of G207 injected). Three Phase I trials have been completed to date for G207 treatment alone, or in combination with radiation. In the initial trial, a total of 21 subjects were enrolled, all of whom had recurrence of tumor diagnosed on CT or MRI after standard therapy (resection or biopsy followed by radiation). Each patient received a stereotactic intratumoral injection of G207 within the enhancing portion of the tumor, starting at a dose of 1×106 PFU in the first cohort, 1×107 PFU in the second cohort, and a dose escalation in half-log increments for each subsequent cohort (three patients per cohort). A maximally tolerated dose (MTD) could not be established; even at the highest dose (3×109 PFU). CT scans 30 days after virus inoculation showed reduced enhancement in 8 patients, 8 patients survived nine or more months post-treatment, and a single GBM patient remained alive 5.5 years after inoculation without evidence of disease. 9 The objectives of the second Phase Ib G207 trial were three-fold: 1. to confirm the safety and tolerability of intratumoral inoculation of G207, as well as inoculation into the brain surrounding the tumor, 2. to demonstrate active replication inside the tumor, and 3. to demonstrate safety of multiple dose delivery of the virus. Six patients with recurrent GBM were enrolled in the study. A catheter was stereotactically implanted into the tumor, and 13% of a total dose of 1.15×109 PFU of G207 was injected through the catheter. Either 2 or 5 days later, the tumor was resected en bloc with the catheter in place, and the remainder of the G207 was injected into the tumor bed. Radiologic and pathologic evidence of anti-tumor activity was seen. Evidence of HSV replication in situ was demonstrated. No patient developed HSV encephalitis, though one patient experienced transient fever, delirium, and hemiparesis, which entirely resolved within twelve hours on high-dose dexamethasone; no acyclovir was necessary. These symptoms were attributed to inadvertent inoculation of the virus into the ventricular system. Overall, G207 appeared safe both for multiple dose delivery and for direct inoculation into the brain surrounding the tumor cavity. 13 HSV1716 Concurrent with the G207 studies in the U.S., HSV1716, derived from HSV strain 17, was being tested in clinical trials in Glasgow, UK. Like G207, HSV1716 also lacks both copies of the ?134.5 gene, but its UL39 gene remains intact. 26 In the initial HSV1716 phase I trial, nine patients (8 GBM, 1 AA), all having undergone prior surgery and radiotherapy, most receiving chemotherapy, had an initial dose of 1×103 PFU stereotactically inoculated into the enhancing portion of the tumor. This dose was increased by one log in each of three cohorts, three patients per cohort, ending at a maximum dose of 1×105 PFU. At the highest dose, no signs of encephalitis or other dose-limiting toxicities were encountered, and no MTD was reached. 10 To validate safety and demonstrate in situ viral replication, a second phase I trial was conducted. In this trial, 12 patients (11 GBM, 1 AA) received 1 × 106 PFU of HSV1716 via direct intratumoral inoculation prior to surgical resection 4 to 9 days later. Again, this virus was proven safe and replication within the tumor was supported by PCR detection of the virus in two of the resected tumors. 14 Recently, according to their website, Crusade Laboratories has received regulatory approval to begin Europe-wide Phase III clinical trials of HSV1716 in glioma patients after first recurrence post-resection and radiotherapy, with satisfactory results potentially leading to license and marketing authorization for glioma therapy. M002/M032 OHSV engineered to express transgenes, including interleukins such as IL-4 or IL-12, have been shown to enhance tumor killing in both syngeneic murine brain tumor models and human glioma xenograft tumor models. 29 , 30 M002 and M032, like G207, are both derived from HSV-1 (F) strain with deletion of both ?134.5 gene copies, but in contrast, the UL39 gene remains intact in M002 and M032. A bicistronic expression cassette encoding interleukin-12 p40 and p35 subunits from either murine (M002) or human (M032) origin, and separated by an internal ribosome entry sequence (IRES), were introduced into both 34.5 deleted sites. 30 A lot of M032 has been produced using current Good Manufacturing Practices through the NCI RAID Program for eventual use in Phase I clinical trials in humans.  G207 G207 has deletions of both copies of its ?134.5 gene in addition to a lacZ insertion into the UL39 locus. 25 These two mutations improve the safety of G207 by rendering it susceptible to standard anti-HSV therapy and by impairing ability of the virus to establish latency within an infected cell. Preclinical studies demonstrated that G207 was safe in neurotoxicity studies in mice and non-human primates, and efficacious against the U87 human malignant glioma xenograft model in immunocompromised mice. 27 New World owl monkeys ( Aotus nancymae ) were used for the primate neurotoxicity studies due to their exquisite sensitivity to HSV infection. 28 These monkeys showed no clinical signs of HSV-induced illness after G207 inoculation (up to 1×109 PFU of G207 injected). Three Phase I trials have been completed to date for G207 treatment alone, or in combination with radiation. In the initial trial, a total of 21 subjects were enrolled, all of whom had recurrence of tumor diagnosed on CT or MRI after standard therapy (resection or biopsy followed by radiation). Each patient received a stereotactic intratumoral injection of G207 within the enhancing portion of the tumor, starting at a dose of 1×106 PFU in the first cohort, 1×107 PFU in the second cohort, and a dose escalation in half-log increments for each subsequent cohort (three patients per cohort). A maximally tolerated dose (MTD) could not be established; even at the highest dose (3×109 PFU). CT scans 30 days after virus inoculation showed reduced enhancement in 8 patients, 8 patients survived nine or more months post-treatment, and a single GBM patient remained alive 5.5 years after inoculation without evidence of disease. 9 The objectives of the second Phase Ib G207 trial were three-fold: 1. to confirm the safety and tolerability of intratumoral inoculation of G207, as well as inoculation into the brain surrounding the tumor, 2. to demonstrate active replication inside the tumor, and 3. to demonstrate safety of multiple dose delivery of the virus. Six patients with recurrent GBM were enrolled in the study. A catheter was stereotactically implanted into the tumor, and 13% of a total dose of 1.15×109 PFU of G207 was injected through the catheter. Either 2 or 5 days later, the tumor was resected en bloc with the catheter in place, and the remainder of the G207 was injected into the tumor bed. Radiologic and pathologic evidence of anti-tumor activity was seen. Evidence of HSV replication in situ was demonstrated. No patient developed HSV encephalitis, though one patient experienced transient fever, delirium, and hemiparesis, which entirely resolved within twelve hours on high-dose dexamethasone; no acyclovir was necessary. These symptoms were attributed to inadvertent inoculation of the virus into the ventricular system. Overall, G207 appeared safe both for multiple dose delivery and for direct inoculation into the brain surrounding the tumor cavity. 13  HSV1716 Concurrent with the G207 studies in the U.S., HSV1716, derived from HSV strain 17, was being tested in clinical trials in Glasgow, UK. Like G207, HSV1716 also lacks both copies of the ?134.5 gene, but its UL39 gene remains intact. 26 In the initial HSV1716 phase I trial, nine patients (8 GBM, 1 AA), all having undergone prior surgery and radiotherapy, most receiving chemotherapy, had an initial dose of 1×103 PFU stereotactically inoculated into the enhancing portion of the tumor. This dose was increased by one log in each of three cohorts, three patients per cohort, ending at a maximum dose of 1×105 PFU. At the highest dose, no signs of encephalitis or other dose-limiting toxicities were encountered, and no MTD was reached. 10 To validate safety and demonstrate in situ viral replication, a second phase I trial was conducted. In this trial, 12 patients (11 GBM, 1 AA) received 1 × 106 PFU of HSV1716 via direct intratumoral inoculation prior to surgical resection 4 to 9 days later. Again, this virus was proven safe and replication within the tumor was supported by PCR detection of the virus in two of the resected tumors. 14 Recently, according to their website, Crusade Laboratories has received regulatory approval to begin Europe-wide Phase III clinical trials of HSV1716 in glioma patients after first recurrence post-resection and radiotherapy, with satisfactory results potentially leading to license and marketing authorization for glioma therapy.  M002/M032 OHSV engineered to express transgenes, including interleukins such as IL-4 or IL-12, have been shown to enhance tumor killing in both syngeneic murine brain tumor models and human glioma xenograft tumor models. 29 , 30 M002 and M032, like G207, are both derived from HSV-1 (F) strain with deletion of both ?134.5 gene copies, but in contrast, the UL39 gene remains intact in M002 and M032. A bicistronic expression cassette encoding interleukin-12 p40 and p35 subunits from either murine (M002) or human (M032) origin, and separated by an internal ribosome entry sequence (IRES), were introduced into both 34.5 deleted sites. 30 A lot of M032 has been produced using current Good Manufacturing Practices through the NCI RAID Program for eventual use in Phase I clinical trials in humans.  Next Generation HSV A number of different strategies are currently being employed to enhance anti-tumor potential of OHSV vectors. These include introduction of foreign genes for prodrug conversion, 31 – 33 tumor-specific gene expression, 34 , 35 expression of other viral proteins that restore efficient viral replication, 36 , 37 to name a few. Genetic manipulation of HSV proteins that mediate virus entry, combined with new discoveries related to the mechanism of tumor cell resistance to OHSV therapies have led to the engineering of novel tumor-targeted HSV vectors. For example, an OHSV was constructed to specifically target the IL13R?2 receptor, 38 found abundantly on high grade astrocytomas but not on normal human tissues. 39 Derivatives of this IL13Ra2-targeted virus have been constructed which are no longer capable of binding to the normal HSV entry receptor, nectin 1. 40 , 41 Other tumor-targeting strategies under investigation for OHSV vectors include the use of tumor-specific promoters 35 , 42 , 43 or radiation-inducible promoters 44 for expression of genes that optimize the tumor cell microenvironment for efficient viral replication. Malignant gliomas will likely require a broad approach that incorporates current treatment strategies with novel therapeutics, including OHSV. Dual treatment regimens combining OHSV therapy with ionizing radiation or chemotherapies are all strategies currently under intensive investigation. 45 – 49 In summary, the G207 and HSV1716 clinical trials reinforce the safety and potential benefit that OHSV vectors may offer to patients with malignant glioma.  CONDITIONALLY REPLICATING ADENOVIRUSES (CRAds) Human adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) has served as the platform for a multitude of oncolytic viral agents. This non-enveloped DNA virus is not associated with any serious disease and has a well-characterized genome of approximately 36 kb that allows for relatively easy manipulation. 50 Recent years have witnessed a rapid expansion in the number of strategies with CRAds intended to treat glioma, illustrating the variety of strategies by which this might be accomplished. An overview of the CRAds that have been developed, as well as those that have advanced, or are soon to advance to, clinical trials, is summarized below. ONYX-015 ONYX-015 is an adenovirus made conditionally-replicative by deletion of the E1B-55k gene, which is responsible for binding cellular p53. This interaction normally prevents apoptosis of the infected cell, permitting continued viral replication. While this CRAd was intended to replicate selectively within p53-deficient cells, it has since been shown that other functions of E1B-55k are responsible for its cancer-selective replication. 51 ONYX-015 was among the first CRAds to be described and has been utilized in clinical trials for head and neck cancer. More recently, human glioma xenografts were shown to be susceptible to ONYX-015 replication in vivo, 52 an effect that was enhanced by radiation therapy 53 These findings led to a Phase I clinical trial for recurrent glioma, in which ONYX-015 was administered to the tumor bed following surgical resection. The virus was well-tolerated in this trial, with no evidence of toxicity. However, efficacy was not determined. 11 Ad-?24 and derivatives Other partial deletions of the Ad5 genome have also been used to generate CRAds. Fueyo et al . 54 described a CRAd in which the E1A gene was partially deleted. This CRAd, designated Ad-?24, has a 24 base pair deletion within E1A that renders the protein unable to bind cellular Rb, thus limiting its replication to cells with disregulated cell cycles. Ad-?24 was more oncolytic than an E1B-deleted CRAd in a panel of glioma cell lines tested and more effectively suppressed tumor growth in both intracranial and subcutaneous models of glioma. 55 Additionally, because Ad-?24 increases expression and activity of topoisomerase I in glioma cells, its antitumor effect was shown to be synergistically improved in an experimental murine glioma model when administered along with the topoisomerase I inhibitor irinotecan. 56 The Ad-?24 system has itself served as the platform for a number of modifications, including the addition of transgenes whose expression should augment its oncolytic potency. Some examples include p53, 57 , 58 a humanized form of the prodrug converting enzyme yeast cytosine deaminase (hyCD), 59 and the tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3). 60 Other modifications of Ad-?24 vectors have focused on the fiber knob to target glioma-specific receptors. Adenovirus infection depends upon initial binding of the knob portion of the fiber capsid protein with the coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) on the cell surface, followed by a secondary binding of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motifs in the viral capsid to cell surface integrins. Many tumor cell types, including gliomas, express low levels of CAR but high levels of integrins. Inclusion of an RGD peptide in the fiber knob retargets initial binding of the virus to cell surface integrins. 61 Additionally, Ad-?24-RGD can infect glioma stem cells isolated from human tumor specimens and can induce autophagy in these cells. 62 Finally, the Ad-?24 system has also been modified by those seeking to enhance the selectivity of its replication. This has been achieved either by deletion of additional portions of the genome, 55 , 63 , 64 or by the addition of exogenous promoters such as the E2F1 65 and tyrosinase promoter. 66 CRAd-survivin The CRAd-survivin system includes several oncolytic adenoviruses, in which replication is controlled by the survivin promoter. 67 – 72 Survivin is an inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) which is normally active only during embryogenesis. These survivin-controlled CRAds have incorporated a number of different fiber genes, in order to enhance their infection of glioma cells. Examples include RGD-modified fiber, 72 a chimeric fiber with Ad3 knob 69 and the inclusion of a poly-lysine motif. 70 Additionally, the activity of the survivin promoter is induced by radiation, thereby increasing viral replication and resulting in a synergistic antitumor effect when virus administration is combined with radiation therapy. 67 Oncolytic Adenoviruses-Additional Therapeutic Strategies In addition to the three systems detailed above, a variety of other strategies for the generation of glioma-targeted CRAds have also been described. Bieler et al . 73 used an adenovirus with a partial deletion of E1A in combination with irinotecan and trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor which upregulates CAR expression, in a three-pronged strategy to improve replication and destroy drug-resistant glioma cells. This virus also acts synergistically to inhibit tumor growth in vivo when used in conjunction with radiation. 74 Other groups have developed CRAds for which replication was dependent upon a hypoxia response element, 75 the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) promoter 76 or the hTERT promoter. 77 , 78 Hoffmann et al . 79 , 80 constructed a CRAd with the E1A and E4 genes under control of the GFAP and Ki67 promoters, respectively. In some cases, CRAds have been infectivity-enhanced through the inclusion of an RGD-modified fiber 78 or a chimeric fiber consisting of the Ad5 fiber tail and the Ad35 shaft and knob (referred to as 5/35), which retargets the virus to CD46. 79 – 81 Several of these CRAds have demonstrated enhanced antitumor activity when administered with chemotherapeutic agents such as TMZ, 78 , 80 RAD001, 78 and BCNU. 75 Finally, inclusion of cytotoxic transgenes such as TK 82 or TRAIL 81 in CRAds has also been investigated. Ongoing studies with CRAd vector systems continue to investigate the optimal combination of viral mutations with standard therapies for glioma therapy. Table 1 summarizes all of the CRAd vectors described here.  ONYX-015 ONYX-015 is an adenovirus made conditionally-replicative by deletion of the E1B-55k gene, which is responsible for binding cellular p53. This interaction normally prevents apoptosis of the infected cell, permitting continued viral replication. While this CRAd was intended to replicate selectively within p53-deficient cells, it has since been shown that other functions of E1B-55k are responsible for its cancer-selective replication. 51 ONYX-015 was among the first CRAds to be described and has been utilized in clinical trials for head and neck cancer. More recently, human glioma xenografts were shown to be susceptible to ONYX-015 replication in vivo, 52 an effect that was enhanced by radiation therapy 53 These findings led to a Phase I clinical trial for recurrent glioma, in which ONYX-015 was administered to the tumor bed following surgical resection. The virus was well-tolerated in this trial, with no evidence of toxicity. However, efficacy was not determined. 11  Ad-?24 and derivatives Other partial deletions of the Ad5 genome have also been used to generate CRAds. Fueyo et al . 54 described a CRAd in which the E1A gene was partially deleted. This CRAd, designated Ad-?24, has a 24 base pair deletion within E1A that renders the protein unable to bind cellular Rb, thus limiting its replication to cells with disregulated cell cycles. Ad-?24 was more oncolytic than an E1B-deleted CRAd in a panel of glioma cell lines tested and more effectively suppressed tumor growth in both intracranial and subcutaneous models of glioma. 55 Additionally, because Ad-?24 increases expression and activity of topoisomerase I in glioma cells, its antitumor effect was shown to be synergistically improved in an experimental murine glioma model when administered along with the topoisomerase I inhibitor irinotecan. 56 The Ad-?24 system has itself served as the platform for a number of modifications, including the addition of transgenes whose expression should augment its oncolytic potency. Some examples include p53, 57 , 58 a humanized form of the prodrug converting enzyme yeast cytosine deaminase (hyCD), 59 and the tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3). 60 Other modifications of Ad-?24 vectors have focused on the fiber knob to target glioma-specific receptors. Adenovirus infection depends upon initial binding of the knob portion of the fiber capsid protein with the coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) on the cell surface, followed by a secondary binding of Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motifs in the viral capsid to cell surface integrins. Many tumor cell types, including gliomas, express low levels of CAR but high levels of integrins. Inclusion of an RGD peptide in the fiber knob retargets initial binding of the virus to cell surface integrins. 61 Additionally, Ad-?24-RGD can infect glioma stem cells isolated from human tumor specimens and can induce autophagy in these cells. 62 Finally, the Ad-?24 system has also been modified by those seeking to enhance the selectivity of its replication. This has been achieved either by deletion of additional portions of the genome, 55 , 63 , 64 or by the addition of exogenous promoters such as the E2F1 65 and tyrosinase promoter. 66  CRAd-survivin The CRAd-survivin system includes several oncolytic adenoviruses, in which replication is controlled by the survivin promoter. 67 – 72 Survivin is an inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) which is normally active only during embryogenesis. These survivin-controlled CRAds have incorporated a number of different fiber genes, in order to enhance their infection of glioma cells. Examples include RGD-modified fiber, 72 a chimeric fiber with Ad3 knob 69 and the inclusion of a poly-lysine motif. 70 Additionally, the activity of the survivin promoter is induced by radiation, thereby increasing viral replication and resulting in a synergistic antitumor effect when virus administration is combined with radiation therapy. 67  Oncolytic Adenoviruses-Additional Therapeutic Strategies In addition to the three systems detailed above, a variety of other strategies for the generation of glioma-targeted CRAds have also been described. Bieler et al . 73 used an adenovirus with a partial deletion of E1A in combination with irinotecan and trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor which upregulates CAR expression, in a three-pronged strategy to improve replication and destroy drug-resistant glioma cells. This virus also acts synergistically to inhibit tumor growth in vivo when used in conjunction with radiation. 74 Other groups have developed CRAds for which replication was dependent upon a hypoxia response element, 75 the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) promoter 76 or the hTERT promoter. 77 , 78 Hoffmann et al . 79 , 80 constructed a CRAd with the E1A and E4 genes under control of the GFAP and Ki67 promoters, respectively. In some cases, CRAds have been infectivity-enhanced through the inclusion of an RGD-modified fiber 78 or a chimeric fiber consisting of the Ad5 fiber tail and the Ad35 shaft and knob (referred to as 5/35), which retargets the virus to CD46. 79 – 81 Several of these CRAds have demonstrated enhanced antitumor activity when administered with chemotherapeutic agents such as TMZ, 78 , 80 RAD001, 78 and BCNU. 75 Finally, inclusion of cytotoxic transgenes such as TK 82 or TRAIL 81 in CRAds has also been investigated. Ongoing studies with CRAd vector systems continue to investigate the optimal combination of viral mutations with standard therapies for glioma therapy. Table 1 summarizes all of the CRAd vectors described here.  REOVIRUS Reoviruses are nonenveloped RNA viruses that usually do not cause serious disease but may be associated with very mild gastrointestinal or respiratory symptoms that can resolve without further incidence. 83 As discussed earlier in this review, under normal cellular conditions following viral infection, the PKR pathway is activated as a result of the intracellular double-stranded RNA that is produced. PKR activation results in host protein synthesis shutoff, and, consequently, viral replication. In many tumor cells, activation of this pathway is blocked in cells in which the Ras signaling pathway has been upregulated via EGFR 84 and PDGFR 85 mutations commonly found in malignant gliomas, permit productive infection of reoviruses. The naturally discriminatory phenotype of reovirus for cells with unrestrained Ras pathway activity, combined with its mild disease profile in humans led to its evaluation as an oncolytic virus for therapy of multiple tumor types, including glioma. .Early studies showed that of the multiple brain tumors specimens tested ex vivo for vulnerability to reovirus, all glioma specimens were killed, as well as 20 of 24 glioma cell culture lines, but none of the meningiomas tested were susceptible. 86 Experimental models of glioma using U87 and U251N cell lines in vitro and in vivo demonstrated the efficacy of reovirus and confirmed its natural limitation to neoplastic cells. 87 However, serious toxicity involving severe hind limb necrosis at the injection site, myocarditis, and eventual virus-mediated death if administered intracranially occurred in immunocompromised SCID mice treated with reovirus. Such toxicity has not been seen in other, non-SCID models. 87 , 88 Although immunocompromised by their tumor and glucocorticoid use, toxicity in otherwise immune-competent cancer patients was predicted to be minimal due to the known mild disease profile of reovirus in humans. Following direct inoculation in primates, no significant toxicities were observed, 89 paving the way for Phase 1 trials in patients. Two Phase I dose escalation trials, in which reovirus (REOLYSIN®) was injected intratumorally in patients suffering from recurrent malignant glioma, have been conducted in Canada (University of Calgary) and in the United States (University of Alabama at Birmingham; Ohio State University; and Cedars-Sinai Medical Center; ). 12 The second study is still underway at the time of this writing. In the Calgary study, up to 1 × 109 pfu of virus was administered in the highest dose group, and was well tolerated. No maximally tolerated dose was defined in this study. These results warrant continued investigation of reovirus in efficacy studies alone or in combination with currently defined standard of care therapies, including radiation and chemotherapy.  PARAMYXOVIRUS Newcastle Disease Virus The avian paramyxovirus, Newcastle disease virus (NDV), is a highly contagious disease of chickens, turkeys as well as many wild birds. On occasions of human infection, NDV can cause cause mild flu-like symptoms, laryngitis and conjunctivitis. 90 Though both the lytic and nonlytic strains can be cytotoxic, 91 it is the lytic strains that have been more extensively investigated as anti-neoplastic agents after the virus was found to show enhanced replication efficiency in cancer cells as compared to replication in normal cells. 92 , 93 The NDV vector 73-T was one of the early vectors to show efficacy in a number of animal tumor models, following direct administration into human neuroblastoma 94 and fibrosarcoma 95 xenografts in mice. Efficacy was also demonstrated following intraperitoneal administration for treatment of a variety of carcinomas. 96 Another NDV attenuated vector, PV701, has been tested in several solid tumors, but not tumors of CNS origin, for safety following intravenous administration using different dosing regimens. 97 – 99 Two NDV strains have been evaluated in early Phase I/II clinical trials of patients with recurrent GBM: MTH-68/H and NDV-HUJ. The MTH-68/H NDV strain has been utilized by a Hungarian group for the treatment of a number of cancers. 100 – 102 In 1999, a case was reported of a 14 year-old boy diagnosed with a recurrent GBM, who was treated intravenously with MTH-68/H daily, beginning in April, 1996. 101 The tumor reportedly shrunk between November 1996 and September 1998, after which chemotherapy was discontinued, and at last report had been receiving only MTH-68/H injections. In 2004, four additional case studies using MTH-68/H in 1 adult and 3 pediatric GBM patients were reported with substantial increase survival rates ranging between 5–9 years. 103 Finally, MTH-68/H therapy combined with valproic acid (an antiepileptic drug also shown to have anti-tumor activity) was evaluated in a pediatric patient with anaplastic astrocytoma unresponsive to irradiation and chemotherapy. 104 The most recent NDV vector to be assessed in a Phase I/II clinical trial of recurrent GBM is the lentogenic NDV strain HUJ. 105 Lentogenic NDV strains cause mild or asymptomatic illness in poultry that is limited to the respiratory tract. The NDV vectors described earlier (73-T, PV701 and MTH-68H) are all mesogenic strains (moderately pathogenic) and use of these strains poses increased risk of undesirable side effects. The safety and anti-tumor activity of the lentogenic NDV-HUJ vector was assessed following intravenous administration of multiple doses. A total of 14 patients, including one pediatric patient, were enrolled. All patients had MRI-confirmed recurrent GBM. No major side effects were observed, and one patient had a complete tumor response. While replication of HUJ strain is limited in humans, infectious particles were recovered for up to 9 days following dosing in the patients, and suggest that limited replication is occurring, possibly in the tumor tissue. Further studies are warranted using this attenuated strain. Another NDV vector being developed deserves discussion here. Zulkifli et al. 106 evaluated the V4UPM strain, a modified V4 strain developed as thermostable feed pellet vaccine for poultry, for oncolytic activity against two glioma cell lines (DBTRG.05MG and U-87MG) both in vitro and in vivo in subcutaneous flank tumors. The U-87MG was very susceptible to V4UPM both in vitro and in vivo following a single virus dose. The DBTRG.05MG cell line was more resistant to the NDV vector, but oncolysis still occurred. When a single intratumoral administration to the latter tumors did not result in regression, a second higher dose of virus was administered. Despite this, the tumor persistently grew, although the overall tumor volume was significantly reduced as compared to the control treatment group alone. Measles Virus Another member of the Paramyxoviridae family, measles virus (MV) represents a fairly recent addition to the growing panel of oncolytic viral vectors being evaluated for glioma therapy. The MV receptor, CD46, is upregulated in many glioma cell lines, allowing for preferential tumor targeting. 107 , 108 The measles virus vector MV-CEA, engineered to overexpress the human carcinoembryonic antigen, has demonstrated infection of a number of human glioma cell lines and xenografts. 108 Toxicology studies using MV-CEA in rhesus monkeys and including MRI imaging four to five months following direct intracranial administration demonstrated no evidence of neurological dysfunction. 109 The authors indicated that a Phase I study to test safety of MV-CEA following administration both intratumorally and into the resection bed is underway.  Newcastle Disease Virus The avian paramyxovirus, Newcastle disease virus (NDV), is a highly contagious disease of chickens, turkeys as well as many wild birds. On occasions of human infection, NDV can cause cause mild flu-like symptoms, laryngitis and conjunctivitis. 90 Though both the lytic and nonlytic strains can be cytotoxic, 91 it is the lytic strains that have been more extensively investigated as anti-neoplastic agents after the virus was found to show enhanced replication efficiency in cancer cells as compared to replication in normal cells. 92 , 93 The NDV vector 73-T was one of the early vectors to show efficacy in a number of animal tumor models, following direct administration into human neuroblastoma 94 and fibrosarcoma 95 xenografts in mice. Efficacy was also demonstrated following intraperitoneal administration for treatment of a variety of carcinomas. 96 Another NDV attenuated vector, PV701, has been tested in several solid tumors, but not tumors of CNS origin, for safety following intravenous administration using different dosing regimens. 97 – 99 Two NDV strains have been evaluated in early Phase I/II clinical trials of patients with recurrent GBM: MTH-68/H and NDV-HUJ. The MTH-68/H NDV strain has been utilized by a Hungarian group for the treatment of a number of cancers. 100 – 102 In 1999, a case was reported of a 14 year-old boy diagnosed with a recurrent GBM, who was treated intravenously with MTH-68/H daily, beginning in April, 1996. 101 The tumor reportedly shrunk between November 1996 and September 1998, after which chemotherapy was discontinued, and at last report had been receiving only MTH-68/H injections. In 2004, four additional case studies using MTH-68/H in 1 adult and 3 pediatric GBM patients were reported with substantial increase survival rates ranging between 5–9 years. 103 Finally, MTH-68/H therapy combined with valproic acid (an antiepileptic drug also shown to have anti-tumor activity) was evaluated in a pediatric patient with anaplastic astrocytoma unresponsive to irradiation and chemotherapy. 104 The most recent NDV vector to be assessed in a Phase I/II clinical trial of recurrent GBM is the lentogenic NDV strain HUJ. 105 Lentogenic NDV strains cause mild or asymptomatic illness in poultry that is limited to the respiratory tract. The NDV vectors described earlier (73-T, PV701 and MTH-68H) are all mesogenic strains (moderately pathogenic) and use of these strains poses increased risk of undesirable side effects. The safety and anti-tumor activity of the lentogenic NDV-HUJ vector was assessed following intravenous administration of multiple doses. A total of 14 patients, including one pediatric patient, were enrolled. All patients had MRI-confirmed recurrent GBM. No major side effects were observed, and one patient had a complete tumor response. While replication of HUJ strain is limited in humans, infectious particles were recovered for up to 9 days following dosing in the patients, and suggest that limited replication is occurring, possibly in the tumor tissue. Further studies are warranted using this attenuated strain. Another NDV vector being developed deserves discussion here. Zulkifli et al. 106 evaluated the V4UPM strain, a modified V4 strain developed as thermostable feed pellet vaccine for poultry, for oncolytic activity against two glioma cell lines (DBTRG.05MG and U-87MG) both in vitro and in vivo in subcutaneous flank tumors. The U-87MG was very susceptible to V4UPM both in vitro and in vivo following a single virus dose. The DBTRG.05MG cell line was more resistant to the NDV vector, but oncolysis still occurred. When a single intratumoral administration to the latter tumors did not result in regression, a second higher dose of virus was administered. Despite this, the tumor persistently grew, although the overall tumor volume was significantly reduced as compared to the control treatment group alone.  Measles Virus Another member of the Paramyxoviridae family, measles virus (MV) represents a fairly recent addition to the growing panel of oncolytic viral vectors being evaluated for glioma therapy. The MV receptor, CD46, is upregulated in many glioma cell lines, allowing for preferential tumor targeting. 107 , 108 The measles virus vector MV-CEA, engineered to overexpress the human carcinoembryonic antigen, has demonstrated infection of a number of human glioma cell lines and xenografts. 108 Toxicology studies using MV-CEA in rhesus monkeys and including MRI imaging four to five months following direct intracranial administration demonstrated no evidence of neurological dysfunction. 109 The authors indicated that a Phase I study to test safety of MV-CEA following administration both intratumorally and into the resection bed is underway.  POXVIRUSES Vaccinia Virus Vaccinia virus, a member of the Poxviridae family, has been recently considered for use as an oncolytic vector for glioma therapy, in part due to results from a Phase III trial in patients with stage III melanoma. 110 Administered as a tumor vaccine, a polyvalent vaccinia melanoma oncolysate (VMO) revealed an increase in the disease-free interval and overall survival in treated patients. Similar to the initial thymidine kinase deletion mutants in HSV-1, tk inactivation in vaccinia virus limits replication to transformed cells. 111 , 112 A recombinant vaccinia virus engineered to express p53 (rVV-p53) was demonstrated to inhibit growth of a number of human and murine glioma cell lines alone 113 or in combination with radiation therapy in the rat C6 glioma model. 114 Recombinant VV that express interleukins IL-2 or IL-12 have enhanced viral-mediated oncolysis as compared to viruses that don’t express one of these cytokines. 115 , 116 Myxoma virus Another poxviridae family member being considered for oncolytic viral therapy are the myxoma viruses, whose tropism is restricted to European rabbits. Myxoma viruses are nonpathogenic in humans. 117 Myxoma virus has been shown to have oncolytic activity against a number of human glioma and medulloblastoma cell lines in vitro and increased tumor reduction in vivo. 118 , 119 Combination of intratumoral injection of myxoma virus with rapamycin treatment increased intratumoral viral replication and prolonged survival of tumor-bearing mice. 119 The oncolytic activity of myxoma viruses in syngeneic tumors in immunocompetent animals remains to be determined.  Vaccinia Virus Vaccinia virus, a member of the Poxviridae family, has been recently considered for use as an oncolytic vector for glioma therapy, in part due to results from a Phase III trial in patients with stage III melanoma. 110 Administered as a tumor vaccine, a polyvalent vaccinia melanoma oncolysate (VMO) revealed an increase in the disease-free interval and overall survival in treated patients. Similar to the initial thymidine kinase deletion mutants in HSV-1, tk inactivation in vaccinia virus limits replication to transformed cells. 111 , 112 A recombinant vaccinia virus engineered to express p53 (rVV-p53) was demonstrated to inhibit growth of a number of human and murine glioma cell lines alone 113 or in combination with radiation therapy in the rat C6 glioma model. 114 Recombinant VV that express interleukins IL-2 or IL-12 have enhanced viral-mediated oncolysis as compared to viruses that don’t express one of these cytokines. 115 , 116  Myxoma virus Another poxviridae family member being considered for oncolytic viral therapy are the myxoma viruses, whose tropism is restricted to European rabbits. Myxoma viruses are nonpathogenic in humans. 117 Myxoma virus has been shown to have oncolytic activity against a number of human glioma and medulloblastoma cell lines in vitro and increased tumor reduction in vivo. 118 , 119 Combination of intratumoral injection of myxoma virus with rapamycin treatment increased intratumoral viral replication and prolonged survival of tumor-bearing mice. 119 The oncolytic activity of myxoma viruses in syngeneic tumors in immunocompetent animals remains to be determined.  POLIOVIRUS Recombinant PV: PV-RIPO The neuropathogenicity of poliovirus (PV) can be attenuated by mutations within the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) sequence located in the 5’ untranslated region of its genome. 120 Substitution of the PV-1 Mahoney IRES sequence with the IRES sequence from human rhinovirus type 2 (HRV2) was described to severely attenuate it while maintaining its ability to replicate in non-neuronal cells. 120 This mutant, referred to as PVI-RIPO was demonstrated to be safe for intracranial administration. 121 , 122 PV recombinants like PV1-RIPO are naturally tropic for GBM due to expression of the poliovirus receptor CD155 on these tumors. 122 , 123 . Subsequently, PVS-RIPO (derived from Sabin vaccine strain, not wt PV-1 Mahoney strain) was shown to be genetically stable following in vivo passage in GBM xenografts, alleviating concerns regarding its phenotypic stability in the context of its replication in malignant glioma. This finding, supported by lack of sequence changes following serial passage 124 ,supports consideration of PVS-RIPO for advancement into clinical trials in patients with recurrent GBM. Poliovirus-derived Replicons Replicons are oncolytic poliovirus derivatives engineered with a deletion in the capsid (P1) protein, which prevents release of new infectious particles after a single replication cycle. 125 , 126 Safety was established using transgenic mice expressing the human poliovirus receptor that were given both wild-type poliovirus to compare to replicon administration both intracranially and intraspinally. 127 Replicons have demonstrated oncolytic activity in a number of CNS derived tumors in vitro 128 , as well as increased survival of SCID mice bearing intracranial tumors of the human malignant glioma cell line,D54-MG.  Recombinant PV: PV-RIPO The neuropathogenicity of poliovirus (PV) can be attenuated by mutations within the internal ribosome entry site (IRES) sequence located in the 5’ untranslated region of its genome. 120 Substitution of the PV-1 Mahoney IRES sequence with the IRES sequence from human rhinovirus type 2 (HRV2) was described to severely attenuate it while maintaining its ability to replicate in non-neuronal cells. 120 This mutant, referred to as PVI-RIPO was demonstrated to be safe for intracranial administration. 121 , 122 PV recombinants like PV1-RIPO are naturally tropic for GBM due to expression of the poliovirus receptor CD155 on these tumors. 122 , 123 . Subsequently, PVS-RIPO (derived from Sabin vaccine strain, not wt PV-1 Mahoney strain) was shown to be genetically stable following in vivo passage in GBM xenografts, alleviating concerns regarding its phenotypic stability in the context of its replication in malignant glioma. This finding, supported by lack of sequence changes following serial passage 124 ,supports consideration of PVS-RIPO for advancement into clinical trials in patients with recurrent GBM.  Poliovirus-derived Replicons Replicons are oncolytic poliovirus derivatives engineered with a deletion in the capsid (P1) protein, which prevents release of new infectious particles after a single replication cycle. 125 , 126 Safety was established using transgenic mice expressing the human poliovirus receptor that were given both wild-type poliovirus to compare to replicon administration both intracranially and intraspinally. 127 Replicons have demonstrated oncolytic activity in a number of CNS derived tumors in vitro 128 , as well as increased survival of SCID mice bearing intracranial tumors of the human malignant glioma cell line,D54-MG.  RHABDOVIRUS Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Vesicular Stomatitis Virus, (VSV) is part of the family Rhabdoviridae, which are negative-sense, nonsegmented RNA viruses whose genetic organization is similar to that of Paramyxoviridae , both of which are part of the Mononegavirales order. VSV infection in humans is rare, and usually asymptomatic in those cases 129 . When compared as one of nine potential new oncolytic viruses for glioma therapy, the VSV variant, termed VSV-rp30, was superior to the other candidates with regards to replication, spread and ability to lyse tumor cells. 130 This virus was selected for adaptation to optimal replication in malignant glioma cells following numerous serial passages. A recent report showed that intravenous administration of VSV-rp30 in experimental murine models of both human and mouse intracranial tumors specifically targeted those tumors, as compared to control viruses which did not. Tumors outside the brain were also targeted by VSV-rp30, suggesting that this virus may be an effective target against migrating tumor cells as well. 131  Vesicular Stomatitis Virus Vesicular Stomatitis Virus, (VSV) is part of the family Rhabdoviridae, which are negative-sense, nonsegmented RNA viruses whose genetic organization is similar to that of Paramyxoviridae , both of which are part of the Mononegavirales order. VSV infection in humans is rare, and usually asymptomatic in those cases 129 . When compared as one of nine potential new oncolytic viruses for glioma therapy, the VSV variant, termed VSV-rp30, was superior to the other candidates with regards to replication, spread and ability to lyse tumor cells. 130 This virus was selected for adaptation to optimal replication in malignant glioma cells following numerous serial passages. A recent report showed that intravenous administration of VSV-rp30 in experimental murine models of both human and mouse intracranial tumors specifically targeted those tumors, as compared to control viruses which did not. Tumors outside the brain were also targeted by VSV-rp30, suggesting that this virus may be an effective target against migrating tumor cells as well. 131  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE OF ONCOLYTIC VIRUS THERAPY The study of viruses for glioma therapy has become increasingly popular within the past two decades as more sophisticated genetic manipulations have led to the development of safer, and more tumor-specific viruses. The safety of several of these tumor-targeted viruses have been confirmed by several Phase I clinical trials for the herpes simplex viruses G207 9 , 13 and HSV1716, 10 , 14 , 132 adenovirus ONYX-015 11 as well as for the REOLYSIN® reovirus trial, 12 Newcastle Disease Virus vectors MTH-68/H 103 , 104 and NDV-HUJ. 105 Table 2 summarizes the different types of oncolytic viral vectors currently in preclinical studies and in Phase I and Phase II clinical trials for glioma therapy. Several recent studies indicate that supplementing glioma treatment regimens incorporating chemotherapy or radiotherapy with viral therapy may lead to synergistic antitumor effects. Collectively, the clinically-proven safety of several of these viruses, their efficacy in preclinical studies, and evidence of improved tumor oncolysis when administered with standard treatments support further investigation of these agents, in the hope that they may develop into efficacious therapies for these recalcitrant tumors. 