Endothelin B Receptor, a New Target in Cancer Immune Therapy The endothelins and their G protein-coupled receptors A and B have been implicated innumerous diseases and have recently emerged as pivotal players in a variety of malignancies. Tumors over-express the endothelin 1 (ET-1) ligand and the endothelin-A-receptor (ETAR). Their interaction induces tumor growth and metastasis by promoting tumor cell survival and proliferation, angiogenesis, and tissue remodeling. On the basis of results from xenograft models, drug development efforts have focused on antagonizing the autocrine-paracrine effects mediated by ET-1/ETAR. In this review, we discuss a novel role of the endothelin-B-receptor (ETBR) in tumorigenesis and the effect of its blockade during cancer immune therapy. We highlight key characteristics of the B receptor such as its specific overexpression in the tumor compartment; and specifically, in the tumor endothelium, where its activation by ET-1 suppresses T-cell adhesion and homing to tumors. We also review our recent findings on the effects of ETBR-specific blockade in increasing T-cell homing to tumors and enhancing the efficacy of otherwise ineffective immunotherapy.  Clinical-Translational Advances ET<sub>A</sub>R and ET<sub>B</sub>R antagonists in cancer therapy ETAR and ETBR represent interesting targets for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. Many receptor antagonists have been developed and undergone preclinical and clinical testing. Some compounds have preferential A or B receptor inhibitory activity, whereas others exhibit mixed A and B antagonism. Given the prominent role of ETAR in tumor cell biology, ETA R -selective antagonists have been developed more extensively than ETBR antagonists to treat malignancy (see Table 1 ). The first ETA R -selective peptide antagonist, BQ-123 ( 77 ), was shown to inhibit cervical cancer growth in preclinical models ( 78 ). Furthermore, nonpeptide ETAR antagonists such as Atrasentan, ZD4054, and YM598 have been shown to have a static effect on ovarian tumor growth in xenograft models ( 79 ); to delay progression of prostate cancer ( 80 , 81 ); and to attenuate growth and metastasis of human gastric carcinoma ( 82 ). ETAR inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical testing for various cancer indications. A list of endothelin antagonists under preclinical or clinical development for cancer and various other indications is provided in Table 1 . Notably, phase II results with Atrasentan in hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC) were encouraging ( 83 ). However, subsequent phase III trials in metastatic and nonmetastatic HRPC showed no significant therapeutic effects despite evidence of biologic effects on serum markers of disease burden ( 84 , 85 ). Large geographic differences in the median time to progression were also noted; U.S. patients showed less gain in time to progression relative to non-U.S. patients ( 85 ). Given the role of ETBR in melanoma cells, ETBR antagonists have been tested in melanoma, in which they proved efficacious ( 67 , 68 ). Interestingly, IRL1620, an ETBR agonist, was shown to improve both delivery and therapeutic efficacy of paclitaxel in breast tumor-bearing mice ( 86 ). ET<sub>B</sub>R and the tumor endothelial barrier to T-cell homing The focus of cancer therapy targeting ET-1 to date has been to antagonize the autocrine-paracrine effects of ET-1 on tumor cells, mediated mainly by ETAR. Our laboratory recently showed a novel application of ETBR blockade in tumor therapy. Specifically, ETBR blockade at the tumor endothelium proved to be therapeutically efficient for tumor immune therapy ( Fig. 1 ) (ref. 87 ). The success of immune therapy depends on the ability of effector T cells to infiltrate tumors. Although current tumor vaccines have proven effective in producing an antitumor immune response as measured by blood assays, they have fallen short of clinical expectations. Endothelium is a crucial controller of T-cell trafficking in homeostasis, autoimmunity, and transplantation in humans. We showed that the endothelial barrier also exists in tumors and is partly mediated by ETBR. This mechanism was uncovered in human ovarian cancer, in which endothelial cells were microdissected from tumors with brisk tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and tumors lacking TILs, to examine differences in their molecular profile. ETBR emerged as one of the few genes overexpressed in tumor endothelial cells from tumors lacking TILs by Affymetrix array analysis ( 87 ). ETBR was mostly localized to the endothelium and some stroma cells by immunostaining in human ovarian cancers. ETBR mRNA or protein overexpression was associated with absence or paucity of TILs, especially of intraepithelial (also called intratumoral) T cells ( 87 ). These are T cells infiltrating the epithelial component of the tumor (tumor islets), which predict longer survival in ovarian cancer ( 88 ). ET-1 is overexpressed in ovarian cancer cells ( 34 ), and it was found that ET-1 mRNA was significantly higher in microdissected (cytokeratin-positive) tumor cells from tumors lacking TILs relative to tumors with brisk TILs. Thus, the entire ET-1/ETBR (tumor-endothelial) paracrine axis seems upregulated in ovarian cancers lacking TILs. Importantly, we showed that recombinant human ET-1 blocks adhesion of activated T cells to human umbilical vein endothelial cells in vitro . These results establish a vascular mechanism of tumor immune evasion mediated by the endothelin system ( 87 ). TNF-? is a major inflammatory cytokine implicated in carcinogenesis, tumor angiogenesis, and progression, and it is up-regulated in ovarian cancer ( 89 ). It has been previously reported that the overall TNF-? mRNA levels are similar in ovarian tumors with or without intraepithelial T cells ( 88 ). This was counterintuitive, as TNF-? is a major factor activating endothelium and promoting adhesion of T cells. It has been now found that ET-1 efficiently blocks adhesion of T cells to endothelial cells even when endothelial cells are activated with TNF-? ( 87 ). This observation explains the paradox of how tumors may exhibit inflammation yet be prohibitive to T-cell infiltration, thus establishing immune privilege even in the face of inflammation. ET-1 was found to abrogate T-cell adhesion to endothelium via ETBR and through suppression of endothelial intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression at base line as well as following endothelial activation with TNF-?. Furthermore, it was found that ETB R -induced suppression of ICAM-1 expression and surface clustering was mediated by nitric oxide (NO). ETBR blockade with the selective antagonist BQ-788 upregulated endothelial ICAM-1 expression, promoted ICAM-1 clustering at the cell surface, and restored adhesion of T cells to ET-1-treated endothelial cells. ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody abrogated the effect of ETBR blockade to promote T-cell adhesion to endothelium in vitro ( 87 ). These observations indicate that the endothelin system is crucial for controlling lymphocyte homing in tumors and that endothelial ETBR overexpression, which can sway the vascular ETAR/ETBR balance toward ETBR hyperactivity, results in suppression of T-cell homing. This evidence is substantiated by complementary data in lung inflammation; ETAR activation is required for endotoxin-induced inflammation ( 23 ), whereas T-cell homing to lungs in response to an inflammatory stimulus is abrogated by ETAR blockade ( 24 , 25 ). Thus, vascular ETAR activation results in increased T-cell homing, whereas increased ETBR signaling facilitates immune privileged status. ET<sub>B</sub>R blockade in cancer immune therapy To test the activity of ETBR in controlling T-cell homing to tumors and the effects of its blockade in vivo in the context of immunotherapy, vaccine approaches that have no efficacy in delaying tumor growth were used. It was found that vaccine failure was associated with poor accumulation of T cells at the tumor site, in spite of detectable systemic antitumor immune response. ETBR blockade with specific antagonist BQ-788 greatly enhanced the efficacy of prevention and therapeutic vaccines. BQ-788 did not increase systemic immune response to the vaccine in vivo , but rather greatly enhanced T-cell infiltration in tumors following vaccine ( 87 ). This was attenuated by ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody, confirming the requirement for adhesive interactions mediated by ICAM-1 following ETBR blockade in vivo . Furthermore, BQ-788 markedly increased homing of T-cells to tumors after adoptive transfer in mice. Thus, in many tumors there is hyperactivation of a paracrine ET-1/ETBR axis established between tumor cells and endothelium, whereby tumor cells overexpress and release ET-1 whereas the tumor endothelium overexpresses ETBR. This axis tonically suppresses T-cell homing (even in the presence of tumor inflammation), and can be disrupted by ETBR blockade, which in vivo markedly enhances tumor immune therapy ( 87 ). This mechanism may not be unique to ovarian cancer. For example, ETBR is also overexpressed in breast cancer vasculature ( 86 ). Interestingly, ETBR upregulation predicts poor outcome both in breast and ovarian cancer ( 47 , 90 ). The mechanisms underlying ETBR overexpression in tumor endothelium are not fully understood, but VEGF may be implicated ( 91 , 92 ). Our results argue that ETBR antagonists warrant testing in combination with passive or adoptive immunotherapy. There are unique features that render ETBR blockade an attractive strategy in cancer immunotherapy. First, as outlined above, the axis ET-1/ETBR seems to be selectively upregulated in the tumor compartment but not in normal tissues. Indeed, in mouse experiments, ETBR blockade by BQ-788 did not result in systemic inflammation or illness, and frequency of CD45+ lymphocytes or CD3+ T cells in liver, spleen, lungs, or kidneys after vaccine or adoptive T-cell transfer was not affected by BQ-788 ( 87 ). This is in contrast to current immunomodulatory approaches, which achieve systemic activation of effector cells by attenuating peripheral tolerance or other homeostatic checkpoint mechanisms and can result in significant autoimmune toxicity ( 93 ). Second, ETB R -selective antagonists, including BQ-788, have been tested in humans and are well tolerated even in patients with cardiovascular disease ( 94 – 96 ). Thus, ETBR can be pharmacologically perturbed with existing drugs to enhance the efficacy of immune therapy. Third, ETBR blockade is likely to have also direct antiangiogenic effects through suppression of endothelial nitric oxide. Unlike in patients with sepsis ( 97 ), NO inhibition is safe and has been well tolerated in cancer patients ( 98 ). Although the anticancer effect of ETBR (or NO) blockade as monotherapy may be modest, the concomitant administration of immunotherapy may act synergistically against angiogenesis ( 86 , 99 ). Implications for pure ET<sub>A</sub>R antagonists Currently, on the basis of results obtained mostly with xenograft tumor models in immunodeficient mice, cancer therapy targeting ET is focused on ETAR blockade. However, previous evidence shows that ETAR signaling is required for T-cell homing ( 24 , 25 ), whereas our work indicates that increased ETBR activity in tumor endothelium results in reduced T-cell homing and ETBR blockade is required to improve T-cell homing to tumors. Because of the tonic antagonism between ETAR and ETBR signaling in the vasculature, pharmacologic ETAR blockade could tilt the balance toward increased ETBR signaling in the tumor vasculature. This could possibly result in increased angiogenesis and, on the basis of our work, could suppress T-cell homing to tumors. It has been previously shown that patients with ovarian cancer whose tumors are infiltrated by intraepithelial T cells survive longer ( 88 ), a concept validated by several groups ( 100 – 103 ). Similar observations were made in other solid tumors. In colon cancer, tumor-infiltrating T cells predict survival better than conventional anatomical staging ( 104 ), whereas in prostate cancer TIL represent a strong independent prognosticator of longer survival ( 105 ). Although the function of tumor-infiltrating T cells is not fully understood, it is possible that they contribute to controlling tumor growth during or after conventional cancer therapy. For example, the long-term therapeutic effects of VEGF receptor 2 blockade, a major antiangiogenic pharmacologic intervention, were fully depended on CD8+ T cell infiltration in tumors ( 106 ). Furthermore, conventional chemotherapy agents have immunomodulatory effects and their long term efficacy may depend in part on immune effector mechanisms ( 107 ). If this were the case, ETAR blockade alone might increase ETBR signaling and reduce T-cell infiltration in tumors. This could negate some of the potential efficacy of cancer therapies and explain in part the failure of pure ETAR antagonists to produce significant clinical results in tumors in which TIL may affect survival. Our results argue that ETAR/ETBR mixed antagonists might offer the advantage of simultaneously targeting the tumor cell (through ETAR) and enhancing antitumor immune mechanisms (through vascular ETBR) and should be the focus of future therapy.  Clinical-Translational Advances ET<sub>A</sub>R and ET<sub>B</sub>R antagonists in cancer therapy ETAR and ETBR represent interesting targets for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. Many receptor antagonists have been developed and undergone preclinical and clinical testing. Some compounds have preferential A or B receptor inhibitory activity, whereas others exhibit mixed A and B antagonism. Given the prominent role of ETAR in tumor cell biology, ETA R -selective antagonists have been developed more extensively than ETBR antagonists to treat malignancy (see Table 1 ). The first ETA R -selective peptide antagonist, BQ-123 ( 77 ), was shown to inhibit cervical cancer growth in preclinical models ( 78 ). Furthermore, nonpeptide ETAR antagonists such as Atrasentan, ZD4054, and YM598 have been shown to have a static effect on ovarian tumor growth in xenograft models ( 79 ); to delay progression of prostate cancer ( 80 , 81 ); and to attenuate growth and metastasis of human gastric carcinoma ( 82 ). ETAR inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical testing for various cancer indications. A list of endothelin antagonists under preclinical or clinical development for cancer and various other indications is provided in Table 1 . Notably, phase II results with Atrasentan in hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC) were encouraging ( 83 ). However, subsequent phase III trials in metastatic and nonmetastatic HRPC showed no significant therapeutic effects despite evidence of biologic effects on serum markers of disease burden ( 84 , 85 ). Large geographic differences in the median time to progression were also noted; U.S. patients showed less gain in time to progression relative to non-U.S. patients ( 85 ). Given the role of ETBR in melanoma cells, ETBR antagonists have been tested in melanoma, in which they proved efficacious ( 67 , 68 ). Interestingly, IRL1620, an ETBR agonist, was shown to improve both delivery and therapeutic efficacy of paclitaxel in breast tumor-bearing mice ( 86 ). ET<sub>B</sub>R and the tumor endothelial barrier to T-cell homing The focus of cancer therapy targeting ET-1 to date has been to antagonize the autocrine-paracrine effects of ET-1 on tumor cells, mediated mainly by ETAR. Our laboratory recently showed a novel application of ETBR blockade in tumor therapy. Specifically, ETBR blockade at the tumor endothelium proved to be therapeutically efficient for tumor immune therapy ( Fig. 1 ) (ref. 87 ). The success of immune therapy depends on the ability of effector T cells to infiltrate tumors. Although current tumor vaccines have proven effective in producing an antitumor immune response as measured by blood assays, they have fallen short of clinical expectations. Endothelium is a crucial controller of T-cell trafficking in homeostasis, autoimmunity, and transplantation in humans. We showed that the endothelial barrier also exists in tumors and is partly mediated by ETBR. This mechanism was uncovered in human ovarian cancer, in which endothelial cells were microdissected from tumors with brisk tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and tumors lacking TILs, to examine differences in their molecular profile. ETBR emerged as one of the few genes overexpressed in tumor endothelial cells from tumors lacking TILs by Affymetrix array analysis ( 87 ). ETBR was mostly localized to the endothelium and some stroma cells by immunostaining in human ovarian cancers. ETBR mRNA or protein overexpression was associated with absence or paucity of TILs, especially of intraepithelial (also called intratumoral) T cells ( 87 ). These are T cells infiltrating the epithelial component of the tumor (tumor islets), which predict longer survival in ovarian cancer ( 88 ). ET-1 is overexpressed in ovarian cancer cells ( 34 ), and it was found that ET-1 mRNA was significantly higher in microdissected (cytokeratin-positive) tumor cells from tumors lacking TILs relative to tumors with brisk TILs. Thus, the entire ET-1/ETBR (tumor-endothelial) paracrine axis seems upregulated in ovarian cancers lacking TILs. Importantly, we showed that recombinant human ET-1 blocks adhesion of activated T cells to human umbilical vein endothelial cells in vitro . These results establish a vascular mechanism of tumor immune evasion mediated by the endothelin system ( 87 ). TNF-? is a major inflammatory cytokine implicated in carcinogenesis, tumor angiogenesis, and progression, and it is up-regulated in ovarian cancer ( 89 ). It has been previously reported that the overall TNF-? mRNA levels are similar in ovarian tumors with or without intraepithelial T cells ( 88 ). This was counterintuitive, as TNF-? is a major factor activating endothelium and promoting adhesion of T cells. It has been now found that ET-1 efficiently blocks adhesion of T cells to endothelial cells even when endothelial cells are activated with TNF-? ( 87 ). This observation explains the paradox of how tumors may exhibit inflammation yet be prohibitive to T-cell infiltration, thus establishing immune privilege even in the face of inflammation. ET-1 was found to abrogate T-cell adhesion to endothelium via ETBR and through suppression of endothelial intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression at base line as well as following endothelial activation with TNF-?. Furthermore, it was found that ETB R -induced suppression of ICAM-1 expression and surface clustering was mediated by nitric oxide (NO). ETBR blockade with the selective antagonist BQ-788 upregulated endothelial ICAM-1 expression, promoted ICAM-1 clustering at the cell surface, and restored adhesion of T cells to ET-1-treated endothelial cells. ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody abrogated the effect of ETBR blockade to promote T-cell adhesion to endothelium in vitro ( 87 ). These observations indicate that the endothelin system is crucial for controlling lymphocyte homing in tumors and that endothelial ETBR overexpression, which can sway the vascular ETAR/ETBR balance toward ETBR hyperactivity, results in suppression of T-cell homing. This evidence is substantiated by complementary data in lung inflammation; ETAR activation is required for endotoxin-induced inflammation ( 23 ), whereas T-cell homing to lungs in response to an inflammatory stimulus is abrogated by ETAR blockade ( 24 , 25 ). Thus, vascular ETAR activation results in increased T-cell homing, whereas increased ETBR signaling facilitates immune privileged status. ET<sub>B</sub>R blockade in cancer immune therapy To test the activity of ETBR in controlling T-cell homing to tumors and the effects of its blockade in vivo in the context of immunotherapy, vaccine approaches that have no efficacy in delaying tumor growth were used. It was found that vaccine failure was associated with poor accumulation of T cells at the tumor site, in spite of detectable systemic antitumor immune response. ETBR blockade with specific antagonist BQ-788 greatly enhanced the efficacy of prevention and therapeutic vaccines. BQ-788 did not increase systemic immune response to the vaccine in vivo , but rather greatly enhanced T-cell infiltration in tumors following vaccine ( 87 ). This was attenuated by ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody, confirming the requirement for adhesive interactions mediated by ICAM-1 following ETBR blockade in vivo . Furthermore, BQ-788 markedly increased homing of T-cells to tumors after adoptive transfer in mice. Thus, in many tumors there is hyperactivation of a paracrine ET-1/ETBR axis established between tumor cells and endothelium, whereby tumor cells overexpress and release ET-1 whereas the tumor endothelium overexpresses ETBR. This axis tonically suppresses T-cell homing (even in the presence of tumor inflammation), and can be disrupted by ETBR blockade, which in vivo markedly enhances tumor immune therapy ( 87 ). This mechanism may not be unique to ovarian cancer. For example, ETBR is also overexpressed in breast cancer vasculature ( 86 ). Interestingly, ETBR upregulation predicts poor outcome both in breast and ovarian cancer ( 47 , 90 ). The mechanisms underlying ETBR overexpression in tumor endothelium are not fully understood, but VEGF may be implicated ( 91 , 92 ). Our results argue that ETBR antagonists warrant testing in combination with passive or adoptive immunotherapy. There are unique features that render ETBR blockade an attractive strategy in cancer immunotherapy. First, as outlined above, the axis ET-1/ETBR seems to be selectively upregulated in the tumor compartment but not in normal tissues. Indeed, in mouse experiments, ETBR blockade by BQ-788 did not result in systemic inflammation or illness, and frequency of CD45+ lymphocytes or CD3+ T cells in liver, spleen, lungs, or kidneys after vaccine or adoptive T-cell transfer was not affected by BQ-788 ( 87 ). This is in contrast to current immunomodulatory approaches, which achieve systemic activation of effector cells by attenuating peripheral tolerance or other homeostatic checkpoint mechanisms and can result in significant autoimmune toxicity ( 93 ). Second, ETB R -selective antagonists, including BQ-788, have been tested in humans and are well tolerated even in patients with cardiovascular disease ( 94 – 96 ). Thus, ETBR can be pharmacologically perturbed with existing drugs to enhance the efficacy of immune therapy. Third, ETBR blockade is likely to have also direct antiangiogenic effects through suppression of endothelial nitric oxide. Unlike in patients with sepsis ( 97 ), NO inhibition is safe and has been well tolerated in cancer patients ( 98 ). Although the anticancer effect of ETBR (or NO) blockade as monotherapy may be modest, the concomitant administration of immunotherapy may act synergistically against angiogenesis ( 86 , 99 ). Implications for pure ET<sub>A</sub>R antagonists Currently, on the basis of results obtained mostly with xenograft tumor models in immunodeficient mice, cancer therapy targeting ET is focused on ETAR blockade. However, previous evidence shows that ETAR signaling is required for T-cell homing ( 24 , 25 ), whereas our work indicates that increased ETBR activity in tumor endothelium results in reduced T-cell homing and ETBR blockade is required to improve T-cell homing to tumors. Because of the tonic antagonism between ETAR and ETBR signaling in the vasculature, pharmacologic ETAR blockade could tilt the balance toward increased ETBR signaling in the tumor vasculature. This could possibly result in increased angiogenesis and, on the basis of our work, could suppress T-cell homing to tumors. It has been previously shown that patients with ovarian cancer whose tumors are infiltrated by intraepithelial T cells survive longer ( 88 ), a concept validated by several groups ( 100 – 103 ). Similar observations were made in other solid tumors. In colon cancer, tumor-infiltrating T cells predict survival better than conventional anatomical staging ( 104 ), whereas in prostate cancer TIL represent a strong independent prognosticator of longer survival ( 105 ). Although the function of tumor-infiltrating T cells is not fully understood, it is possible that they contribute to controlling tumor growth during or after conventional cancer therapy. For example, the long-term therapeutic effects of VEGF receptor 2 blockade, a major antiangiogenic pharmacologic intervention, were fully depended on CD8+ T cell infiltration in tumors ( 106 ). Furthermore, conventional chemotherapy agents have immunomodulatory effects and their long term efficacy may depend in part on immune effector mechanisms ( 107 ). If this were the case, ETAR blockade alone might increase ETBR signaling and reduce T-cell infiltration in tumors. This could negate some of the potential efficacy of cancer therapies and explain in part the failure of pure ETAR antagonists to produce significant clinical results in tumors in which TIL may affect survival. Our results argue that ETAR/ETBR mixed antagonists might offer the advantage of simultaneously targeting the tumor cell (through ETAR) and enhancing antitumor immune mechanisms (through vascular ETBR) and should be the focus of future therapy.  ET<sub>A</sub>R and ET<sub>B</sub>R antagonists in cancer therapy ETAR and ETBR represent interesting targets for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. Many receptor antagonists have been developed and undergone preclinical and clinical testing. Some compounds have preferential A or B receptor inhibitory activity, whereas others exhibit mixed A and B antagonism. Given the prominent role of ETAR in tumor cell biology, ETA R -selective antagonists have been developed more extensively than ETBR antagonists to treat malignancy (see Table 1 ). The first ETA R -selective peptide antagonist, BQ-123 ( 77 ), was shown to inhibit cervical cancer growth in preclinical models ( 78 ). Furthermore, nonpeptide ETAR antagonists such as Atrasentan, ZD4054, and YM598 have been shown to have a static effect on ovarian tumor growth in xenograft models ( 79 ); to delay progression of prostate cancer ( 80 , 81 ); and to attenuate growth and metastasis of human gastric carcinoma ( 82 ). ETAR inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical testing for various cancer indications. A list of endothelin antagonists under preclinical or clinical development for cancer and various other indications is provided in Table 1 . Notably, phase II results with Atrasentan in hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC) were encouraging ( 83 ). However, subsequent phase III trials in metastatic and nonmetastatic HRPC showed no significant therapeutic effects despite evidence of biologic effects on serum markers of disease burden ( 84 , 85 ). Large geographic differences in the median time to progression were also noted; U.S. patients showed less gain in time to progression relative to non-U.S. patients ( 85 ). Given the role of ETBR in melanoma cells, ETBR antagonists have been tested in melanoma, in which they proved efficacious ( 67 , 68 ). Interestingly, IRL1620, an ETBR agonist, was shown to improve both delivery and therapeutic efficacy of paclitaxel in breast tumor-bearing mice ( 86 ).  ET<sub>A</sub>R and ET<sub>B</sub>R antagonists in cancer therapy ETAR and ETBR represent interesting targets for cancer chemoprevention and therapy. Many receptor antagonists have been developed and undergone preclinical and clinical testing. Some compounds have preferential A or B receptor inhibitory activity, whereas others exhibit mixed A and B antagonism. Given the prominent role of ETAR in tumor cell biology, ETA R -selective antagonists have been developed more extensively than ETBR antagonists to treat malignancy (see Table 1 ). The first ETA R -selective peptide antagonist, BQ-123 ( 77 ), was shown to inhibit cervical cancer growth in preclinical models ( 78 ). Furthermore, nonpeptide ETAR antagonists such as Atrasentan, ZD4054, and YM598 have been shown to have a static effect on ovarian tumor growth in xenograft models ( 79 ); to delay progression of prostate cancer ( 80 , 81 ); and to attenuate growth and metastasis of human gastric carcinoma ( 82 ). ETAR inhibitors are currently undergoing clinical testing for various cancer indications. A list of endothelin antagonists under preclinical or clinical development for cancer and various other indications is provided in Table 1 . Notably, phase II results with Atrasentan in hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC) were encouraging ( 83 ). However, subsequent phase III trials in metastatic and nonmetastatic HRPC showed no significant therapeutic effects despite evidence of biologic effects on serum markers of disease burden ( 84 , 85 ). Large geographic differences in the median time to progression were also noted; U.S. patients showed less gain in time to progression relative to non-U.S. patients ( 85 ). Given the role of ETBR in melanoma cells, ETBR antagonists have been tested in melanoma, in which they proved efficacious ( 67 , 68 ). Interestingly, IRL1620, an ETBR agonist, was shown to improve both delivery and therapeutic efficacy of paclitaxel in breast tumor-bearing mice ( 86 ).  ET<sub>B</sub>R and the tumor endothelial barrier to T-cell homing The focus of cancer therapy targeting ET-1 to date has been to antagonize the autocrine-paracrine effects of ET-1 on tumor cells, mediated mainly by ETAR. Our laboratory recently showed a novel application of ETBR blockade in tumor therapy. Specifically, ETBR blockade at the tumor endothelium proved to be therapeutically efficient for tumor immune therapy ( Fig. 1 ) (ref. 87 ). The success of immune therapy depends on the ability of effector T cells to infiltrate tumors. Although current tumor vaccines have proven effective in producing an antitumor immune response as measured by blood assays, they have fallen short of clinical expectations. Endothelium is a crucial controller of T-cell trafficking in homeostasis, autoimmunity, and transplantation in humans. We showed that the endothelial barrier also exists in tumors and is partly mediated by ETBR. This mechanism was uncovered in human ovarian cancer, in which endothelial cells were microdissected from tumors with brisk tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and tumors lacking TILs, to examine differences in their molecular profile. ETBR emerged as one of the few genes overexpressed in tumor endothelial cells from tumors lacking TILs by Affymetrix array analysis ( 87 ). ETBR was mostly localized to the endothelium and some stroma cells by immunostaining in human ovarian cancers. ETBR mRNA or protein overexpression was associated with absence or paucity of TILs, especially of intraepithelial (also called intratumoral) T cells ( 87 ). These are T cells infiltrating the epithelial component of the tumor (tumor islets), which predict longer survival in ovarian cancer ( 88 ). ET-1 is overexpressed in ovarian cancer cells ( 34 ), and it was found that ET-1 mRNA was significantly higher in microdissected (cytokeratin-positive) tumor cells from tumors lacking TILs relative to tumors with brisk TILs. Thus, the entire ET-1/ETBR (tumor-endothelial) paracrine axis seems upregulated in ovarian cancers lacking TILs. Importantly, we showed that recombinant human ET-1 blocks adhesion of activated T cells to human umbilical vein endothelial cells in vitro . These results establish a vascular mechanism of tumor immune evasion mediated by the endothelin system ( 87 ). TNF-? is a major inflammatory cytokine implicated in carcinogenesis, tumor angiogenesis, and progression, and it is up-regulated in ovarian cancer ( 89 ). It has been previously reported that the overall TNF-? mRNA levels are similar in ovarian tumors with or without intraepithelial T cells ( 88 ). This was counterintuitive, as TNF-? is a major factor activating endothelium and promoting adhesion of T cells. It has been now found that ET-1 efficiently blocks adhesion of T cells to endothelial cells even when endothelial cells are activated with TNF-? ( 87 ). This observation explains the paradox of how tumors may exhibit inflammation yet be prohibitive to T-cell infiltration, thus establishing immune privilege even in the face of inflammation. ET-1 was found to abrogate T-cell adhesion to endothelium via ETBR and through suppression of endothelial intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression at base line as well as following endothelial activation with TNF-?. Furthermore, it was found that ETB R -induced suppression of ICAM-1 expression and surface clustering was mediated by nitric oxide (NO). ETBR blockade with the selective antagonist BQ-788 upregulated endothelial ICAM-1 expression, promoted ICAM-1 clustering at the cell surface, and restored adhesion of T cells to ET-1-treated endothelial cells. ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody abrogated the effect of ETBR blockade to promote T-cell adhesion to endothelium in vitro ( 87 ). These observations indicate that the endothelin system is crucial for controlling lymphocyte homing in tumors and that endothelial ETBR overexpression, which can sway the vascular ETAR/ETBR balance toward ETBR hyperactivity, results in suppression of T-cell homing. This evidence is substantiated by complementary data in lung inflammation; ETAR activation is required for endotoxin-induced inflammation ( 23 ), whereas T-cell homing to lungs in response to an inflammatory stimulus is abrogated by ETAR blockade ( 24 , 25 ). Thus, vascular ETAR activation results in increased T-cell homing, whereas increased ETBR signaling facilitates immune privileged status.  ET<sub>B</sub>R and the tumor endothelial barrier to T-cell homing The focus of cancer therapy targeting ET-1 to date has been to antagonize the autocrine-paracrine effects of ET-1 on tumor cells, mediated mainly by ETAR. Our laboratory recently showed a novel application of ETBR blockade in tumor therapy. Specifically, ETBR blockade at the tumor endothelium proved to be therapeutically efficient for tumor immune therapy ( Fig. 1 ) (ref. 87 ). The success of immune therapy depends on the ability of effector T cells to infiltrate tumors. Although current tumor vaccines have proven effective in producing an antitumor immune response as measured by blood assays, they have fallen short of clinical expectations. Endothelium is a crucial controller of T-cell trafficking in homeostasis, autoimmunity, and transplantation in humans. We showed that the endothelial barrier also exists in tumors and is partly mediated by ETBR. This mechanism was uncovered in human ovarian cancer, in which endothelial cells were microdissected from tumors with brisk tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and tumors lacking TILs, to examine differences in their molecular profile. ETBR emerged as one of the few genes overexpressed in tumor endothelial cells from tumors lacking TILs by Affymetrix array analysis ( 87 ). ETBR was mostly localized to the endothelium and some stroma cells by immunostaining in human ovarian cancers. ETBR mRNA or protein overexpression was associated with absence or paucity of TILs, especially of intraepithelial (also called intratumoral) T cells ( 87 ). These are T cells infiltrating the epithelial component of the tumor (tumor islets), which predict longer survival in ovarian cancer ( 88 ). ET-1 is overexpressed in ovarian cancer cells ( 34 ), and it was found that ET-1 mRNA was significantly higher in microdissected (cytokeratin-positive) tumor cells from tumors lacking TILs relative to tumors with brisk TILs. Thus, the entire ET-1/ETBR (tumor-endothelial) paracrine axis seems upregulated in ovarian cancers lacking TILs. Importantly, we showed that recombinant human ET-1 blocks adhesion of activated T cells to human umbilical vein endothelial cells in vitro . These results establish a vascular mechanism of tumor immune evasion mediated by the endothelin system ( 87 ). TNF-? is a major inflammatory cytokine implicated in carcinogenesis, tumor angiogenesis, and progression, and it is up-regulated in ovarian cancer ( 89 ). It has been previously reported that the overall TNF-? mRNA levels are similar in ovarian tumors with or without intraepithelial T cells ( 88 ). This was counterintuitive, as TNF-? is a major factor activating endothelium and promoting adhesion of T cells. It has been now found that ET-1 efficiently blocks adhesion of T cells to endothelial cells even when endothelial cells are activated with TNF-? ( 87 ). This observation explains the paradox of how tumors may exhibit inflammation yet be prohibitive to T-cell infiltration, thus establishing immune privilege even in the face of inflammation. ET-1 was found to abrogate T-cell adhesion to endothelium via ETBR and through suppression of endothelial intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression at base line as well as following endothelial activation with TNF-?. Furthermore, it was found that ETB R -induced suppression of ICAM-1 expression and surface clustering was mediated by nitric oxide (NO). ETBR blockade with the selective antagonist BQ-788 upregulated endothelial ICAM-1 expression, promoted ICAM-1 clustering at the cell surface, and restored adhesion of T cells to ET-1-treated endothelial cells. ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody abrogated the effect of ETBR blockade to promote T-cell adhesion to endothelium in vitro ( 87 ). These observations indicate that the endothelin system is crucial for controlling lymphocyte homing in tumors and that endothelial ETBR overexpression, which can sway the vascular ETAR/ETBR balance toward ETBR hyperactivity, results in suppression of T-cell homing. This evidence is substantiated by complementary data in lung inflammation; ETAR activation is required for endotoxin-induced inflammation ( 23 ), whereas T-cell homing to lungs in response to an inflammatory stimulus is abrogated by ETAR blockade ( 24 , 25 ). Thus, vascular ETAR activation results in increased T-cell homing, whereas increased ETBR signaling facilitates immune privileged status.  ET<sub>B</sub>R blockade in cancer immune therapy To test the activity of ETBR in controlling T-cell homing to tumors and the effects of its blockade in vivo in the context of immunotherapy, vaccine approaches that have no efficacy in delaying tumor growth were used. It was found that vaccine failure was associated with poor accumulation of T cells at the tumor site, in spite of detectable systemic antitumor immune response. ETBR blockade with specific antagonist BQ-788 greatly enhanced the efficacy of prevention and therapeutic vaccines. BQ-788 did not increase systemic immune response to the vaccine in vivo , but rather greatly enhanced T-cell infiltration in tumors following vaccine ( 87 ). This was attenuated by ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody, confirming the requirement for adhesive interactions mediated by ICAM-1 following ETBR blockade in vivo . Furthermore, BQ-788 markedly increased homing of T-cells to tumors after adoptive transfer in mice. Thus, in many tumors there is hyperactivation of a paracrine ET-1/ETBR axis established between tumor cells and endothelium, whereby tumor cells overexpress and release ET-1 whereas the tumor endothelium overexpresses ETBR. This axis tonically suppresses T-cell homing (even in the presence of tumor inflammation), and can be disrupted by ETBR blockade, which in vivo markedly enhances tumor immune therapy ( 87 ). This mechanism may not be unique to ovarian cancer. For example, ETBR is also overexpressed in breast cancer vasculature ( 86 ). Interestingly, ETBR upregulation predicts poor outcome both in breast and ovarian cancer ( 47 , 90 ). The mechanisms underlying ETBR overexpression in tumor endothelium are not fully understood, but VEGF may be implicated ( 91 , 92 ). Our results argue that ETBR antagonists warrant testing in combination with passive or adoptive immunotherapy. There are unique features that render ETBR blockade an attractive strategy in cancer immunotherapy. First, as outlined above, the axis ET-1/ETBR seems to be selectively upregulated in the tumor compartment but not in normal tissues. Indeed, in mouse experiments, ETBR blockade by BQ-788 did not result in systemic inflammation or illness, and frequency of CD45+ lymphocytes or CD3+ T cells in liver, spleen, lungs, or kidneys after vaccine or adoptive T-cell transfer was not affected by BQ-788 ( 87 ). This is in contrast to current immunomodulatory approaches, which achieve systemic activation of effector cells by attenuating peripheral tolerance or other homeostatic checkpoint mechanisms and can result in significant autoimmune toxicity ( 93 ). Second, ETB R -selective antagonists, including BQ-788, have been tested in humans and are well tolerated even in patients with cardiovascular disease ( 94 – 96 ). Thus, ETBR can be pharmacologically perturbed with existing drugs to enhance the efficacy of immune therapy. Third, ETBR blockade is likely to have also direct antiangiogenic effects through suppression of endothelial nitric oxide. Unlike in patients with sepsis ( 97 ), NO inhibition is safe and has been well tolerated in cancer patients ( 98 ). Although the anticancer effect of ETBR (or NO) blockade as monotherapy may be modest, the concomitant administration of immunotherapy may act synergistically against angiogenesis ( 86 , 99 ).  ET<sub>B</sub>R blockade in cancer immune therapy To test the activity of ETBR in controlling T-cell homing to tumors and the effects of its blockade in vivo in the context of immunotherapy, vaccine approaches that have no efficacy in delaying tumor growth were used. It was found that vaccine failure was associated with poor accumulation of T cells at the tumor site, in spite of detectable systemic antitumor immune response. ETBR blockade with specific antagonist BQ-788 greatly enhanced the efficacy of prevention and therapeutic vaccines. BQ-788 did not increase systemic immune response to the vaccine in vivo , but rather greatly enhanced T-cell infiltration in tumors following vaccine ( 87 ). This was attenuated by ICAM-1 neutralizing antibody, confirming the requirement for adhesive interactions mediated by ICAM-1 following ETBR blockade in vivo . Furthermore, BQ-788 markedly increased homing of T-cells to tumors after adoptive transfer in mice. Thus, in many tumors there is hyperactivation of a paracrine ET-1/ETBR axis established between tumor cells and endothelium, whereby tumor cells overexpress and release ET-1 whereas the tumor endothelium overexpresses ETBR. This axis tonically suppresses T-cell homing (even in the presence of tumor inflammation), and can be disrupted by ETBR blockade, which in vivo markedly enhances tumor immune therapy ( 87 ). This mechanism may not be unique to ovarian cancer. For example, ETBR is also overexpressed in breast cancer vasculature ( 86 ). Interestingly, ETBR upregulation predicts poor outcome both in breast and ovarian cancer ( 47 , 90 ). The mechanisms underlying ETBR overexpression in tumor endothelium are not fully understood, but VEGF may be implicated ( 91 , 92 ). Our results argue that ETBR antagonists warrant testing in combination with passive or adoptive immunotherapy. There are unique features that render ETBR blockade an attractive strategy in cancer immunotherapy. First, as outlined above, the axis ET-1/ETBR seems to be selectively upregulated in the tumor compartment but not in normal tissues. Indeed, in mouse experiments, ETBR blockade by BQ-788 did not result in systemic inflammation or illness, and frequency of CD45+ lymphocytes or CD3+ T cells in liver, spleen, lungs, or kidneys after vaccine or adoptive T-cell transfer was not affected by BQ-788 ( 87 ). This is in contrast to current immunomodulatory approaches, which achieve systemic activation of effector cells by attenuating peripheral tolerance or other homeostatic checkpoint mechanisms and can result in significant autoimmune toxicity ( 93 ). Second, ETB R -selective antagonists, including BQ-788, have been tested in humans and are well tolerated even in patients with cardiovascular disease ( 94 – 96 ). Thus, ETBR can be pharmacologically perturbed with existing drugs to enhance the efficacy of immune therapy. Third, ETBR blockade is likely to have also direct antiangiogenic effects through suppression of endothelial nitric oxide. Unlike in patients with sepsis ( 97 ), NO inhibition is safe and has been well tolerated in cancer patients ( 98 ). Although the anticancer effect of ETBR (or NO) blockade as monotherapy may be modest, the concomitant administration of immunotherapy may act synergistically against angiogenesis ( 86 , 99 ).  Implications for pure ET<sub>A</sub>R antagonists Currently, on the basis of results obtained mostly with xenograft tumor models in immunodeficient mice, cancer therapy targeting ET is focused on ETAR blockade. However, previous evidence shows that ETAR signaling is required for T-cell homing ( 24 , 25 ), whereas our work indicates that increased ETBR activity in tumor endothelium results in reduced T-cell homing and ETBR blockade is required to improve T-cell homing to tumors. Because of the tonic antagonism between ETAR and ETBR signaling in the vasculature, pharmacologic ETAR blockade could tilt the balance toward increased ETBR signaling in the tumor vasculature. This could possibly result in increased angiogenesis and, on the basis of our work, could suppress T-cell homing to tumors. It has been previously shown that patients with ovarian cancer whose tumors are infiltrated by intraepithelial T cells survive longer ( 88 ), a concept validated by several groups ( 100 – 103 ). Similar observations were made in other solid tumors. In colon cancer, tumor-infiltrating T cells predict survival better than conventional anatomical staging ( 104 ), whereas in prostate cancer TIL represent a strong independent prognosticator of longer survival ( 105 ). Although the function of tumor-infiltrating T cells is not fully understood, it is possible that they contribute to controlling tumor growth during or after conventional cancer therapy. For example, the long-term therapeutic effects of VEGF receptor 2 blockade, a major antiangiogenic pharmacologic intervention, were fully depended on CD8+ T cell infiltration in tumors ( 106 ). Furthermore, conventional chemotherapy agents have immunomodulatory effects and their long term efficacy may depend in part on immune effector mechanisms ( 107 ). If this were the case, ETAR blockade alone might increase ETBR signaling and reduce T-cell infiltration in tumors. This could negate some of the potential efficacy of cancer therapies and explain in part the failure of pure ETAR antagonists to produce significant clinical results in tumors in which TIL may affect survival. Our results argue that ETAR/ETBR mixed antagonists might offer the advantage of simultaneously targeting the tumor cell (through ETAR) and enhancing antitumor immune mechanisms (through vascular ETBR) and should be the focus of future therapy.  Implications for pure ET<sub>A</sub>R antagonists Currently, on the basis of results obtained mostly with xenograft tumor models in immunodeficient mice, cancer therapy targeting ET is focused on ETAR blockade. However, previous evidence shows that ETAR signaling is required for T-cell homing ( 24 , 25 ), whereas our work indicates that increased ETBR activity in tumor endothelium results in reduced T-cell homing and ETBR blockade is required to improve T-cell homing to tumors. Because of the tonic antagonism between ETAR and ETBR signaling in the vasculature, pharmacologic ETAR blockade could tilt the balance toward increased ETBR signaling in the tumor vasculature. This could possibly result in increased angiogenesis and, on the basis of our work, could suppress T-cell homing to tumors. It has been previously shown that patients with ovarian cancer whose tumors are infiltrated by intraepithelial T cells survive longer ( 88 ), a concept validated by several groups ( 100 – 103 ). Similar observations were made in other solid tumors. In colon cancer, tumor-infiltrating T cells predict survival better than conventional anatomical staging ( 104 ), whereas in prostate cancer TIL represent a strong independent prognosticator of longer survival ( 105 ). Although the function of tumor-infiltrating T cells is not fully understood, it is possible that they contribute to controlling tumor growth during or after conventional cancer therapy. For example, the long-term therapeutic effects of VEGF receptor 2 blockade, a major antiangiogenic pharmacologic intervention, were fully depended on CD8+ T cell infiltration in tumors ( 106 ). Furthermore, conventional chemotherapy agents have immunomodulatory effects and their long term efficacy may depend in part on immune effector mechanisms ( 107 ). If this were the case, ETAR blockade alone might increase ETBR signaling and reduce T-cell infiltration in tumors. This could negate some of the potential efficacy of cancer therapies and explain in part the failure of pure ETAR antagonists to produce significant clinical results in tumors in which TIL may affect survival. Our results argue that ETAR/ETBR mixed antagonists might offer the advantage of simultaneously targeting the tumor cell (through ETAR) and enhancing antitumor immune mechanisms (through vascular ETBR) and should be the focus of future therapy.  Figure and Table Fig. 1 Control of T-cell homing to tumors by endothelin 1 expressed by tumor cells. Opposite paracrine effects are exerted by endothelin on tumor endothelium through ETAR and ETBR. The balance between ETAR and ETBR determines the fate of antitumor T-cell response. Overexpression of ETBR in tumor endothelium results in increased angiogenesis but also suppression of ICAM-1 expression on endothelial cells, and inhibition of T-cell transendothelial migration and homing. This effect is largely mediated by NO. NO donors and possibly ETAR inhibitors exert similar effects. ETBR blockade results in increased expression of endothelial ICAM-1 and increased binding and transendothelial migration of T cells to the tumor. NO antagonists and TNF-? exert similar effects. Additional tumor-promoting autocrine effects of endothelin are established by binding to ETAR on tumor cells, resulting in enhanced tumor cell survival, proliferation, migration, and invasion. Each of these effects entail multiple signaling pathways. Table 1 Endothelin targeting agents and their indications Compound Target Dosing Clinical testing-indication Phase Cancer preclinical testing Company Atrasentan ETAR Oral Prostate cancer II–III 51, 79, 80 Abbott Renal carcinoma II Ovarian cancer II FT cancer II Brain tumors I NSCLC III–IV Malignant glioma I ED III HT II CVD Approved Ambrisentan ETAR Oral PAH Approved — Gilead Sciences IPF II USS I Avosentan ETAR Oral CVD II — Speedel DN I–II BQ123 ETAR IV HI I 36, 108, 109 Merck Biosciences PAH II MI II CKD I HT I Clazosentan ETAR IV SAH Approved — Actelion Darusentan ETAR Oral HT III — Gilead Sciences CAD II ED II Edonentan ETAR Oral CHF II — Bristol-Myers Squibb END II Sitaxsentan ETAR IV-Oral PAH III — Encysive Pharmaceuticals/ICOS Texas Biotech CHF II S-0139 ETAR Oral CHF II — Shionogi-GSK TBC-3711 ETAR Oral HT II — Encysive Pharmaceuticals YM598 ETAR Oral Prostate II 82, 110 Astellas Pharma US ZD4054 ETAR Oral Prostate cancer III 111, 112 AstraZeneca Bone metastasis II NSCLC II BQ788 ETBR IV CVD I 67, 69, 113, 114 Merck Biosciences IRL-1620 ETBR agonist IV — — 86, 99 Sigma SPI-1620 ETBR agonist IV Carcinoma I — Spectrum Pharmaceuticals Short cervix III Enrasentan ETAR/ETBR Oral AHF III — GlaxoSmithKline Bosentan ETAR/ETBR Oral Metastatic melanoma II 115, 116 Actelion HT II PAH Approved J104132 ETAR/ETBR Oral CHF-HT II — Banyu/Merck Abbreviations: AHF, acute heart failure; CAD, coronary artery disease; CHF, congestive heart failure; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular diseases; DN, diabetic nephropathy; ED, erectile dysfunction; END, endothelial dysfunction; FT, fallopian tube; HD, heart disease; HI, hyperinsulinemia; HT, hypertension; IPF, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, MD, microvascular dysfunction, MI, myocardial infarction; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PC, prostate cancer, PH, pulmonary hypertension; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage; USS, ulcer scleroderma, systemic.  Figure and Table Fig. 1 Control of T-cell homing to tumors by endothelin 1 expressed by tumor cells. Opposite paracrine effects are exerted by endothelin on tumor endothelium through ETAR and ETBR. The balance between ETAR and ETBR determines the fate of antitumor T-cell response. Overexpression of ETBR in tumor endothelium results in increased angiogenesis but also suppression of ICAM-1 expression on endothelial cells, and inhibition of T-cell transendothelial migration and homing. This effect is largely mediated by NO. NO donors and possibly ETAR inhibitors exert similar effects. ETBR blockade results in increased expression of endothelial ICAM-1 and increased binding and transendothelial migration of T cells to the tumor. NO antagonists and TNF-? exert similar effects. Additional tumor-promoting autocrine effects of endothelin are established by binding to ETAR on tumor cells, resulting in enhanced tumor cell survival, proliferation, migration, and invasion. Each of these effects entail multiple signaling pathways. Table 1 Endothelin targeting agents and their indications Compound Target Dosing Clinical testing-indication Phase Cancer preclinical testing Company Atrasentan ETAR Oral Prostate cancer II–III 51, 79, 80 Abbott Renal carcinoma II Ovarian cancer II FT cancer II Brain tumors I NSCLC III–IV Malignant glioma I ED III HT II CVD Approved Ambrisentan ETAR Oral PAH Approved — Gilead Sciences IPF II USS I Avosentan ETAR Oral CVD II — Speedel DN I–II BQ123 ETAR IV HI I 36, 108, 109 Merck Biosciences PAH II MI II CKD I HT I Clazosentan ETAR IV SAH Approved — Actelion Darusentan ETAR Oral HT III — Gilead Sciences CAD II ED II Edonentan ETAR Oral CHF II — Bristol-Myers Squibb END II Sitaxsentan ETAR IV-Oral PAH III — Encysive Pharmaceuticals/ICOS Texas Biotech CHF II S-0139 ETAR Oral CHF II — Shionogi-GSK TBC-3711 ETAR Oral HT II — Encysive Pharmaceuticals YM598 ETAR Oral Prostate II 82, 110 Astellas Pharma US ZD4054 ETAR Oral Prostate cancer III 111, 112 AstraZeneca Bone metastasis II NSCLC II BQ788 ETBR IV CVD I 67, 69, 113, 114 Merck Biosciences IRL-1620 ETBR agonist IV — — 86, 99 Sigma SPI-1620 ETBR agonist IV Carcinoma I — Spectrum Pharmaceuticals Short cervix III Enrasentan ETAR/ETBR Oral AHF III — GlaxoSmithKline Bosentan ETAR/ETBR Oral Metastatic melanoma II 115, 116 Actelion HT II PAH Approved J104132 ETAR/ETBR Oral CHF-HT II — Banyu/Merck Abbreviations: AHF, acute heart failure; CAD, coronary artery disease; CHF, congestive heart failure; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular diseases; DN, diabetic nephropathy; ED, erectile dysfunction; END, endothelial dysfunction; FT, fallopian tube; HD, heart disease; HI, hyperinsulinemia; HT, hypertension; IPF, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, MD, microvascular dysfunction, MI, myocardial infarction; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PC, prostate cancer, PH, pulmonary hypertension; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage; USS, ulcer scleroderma, systemic. 