Functional RET G691S Polymorphism in Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma RET proto-oncogene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase whose ligand is glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and its polymorphism at G691S juxtamembrane region ( RET p) is a germline polymorphism. Cutaneous melanomas, particularly the desmoplastic subtype, are highly neurotropic; thus we sought to determine the frequency of RET p in cutaneous melanoma and its functional responsiveness to GDNF. RET p was assessed in 71 non-desmoplastic cutaneous melanomas (non-DMs) and 70 desmoplastic melanomas (DMs). Melanoma cell lines with RET p, RET wild-type ( RET wt), BRAF V600E mutation ( BRAF mt) or BRAF wild-type ( BRAF wt) were assessed for functional activity. RET p frequency was significantly higher in DMs (61%) than in non-DMs (31%, P <0.001). BRAF mt was detected in only 11% of DMs. GDNF stimulation significantly amplified cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in RET p, but not in RET wt melanoma cells. GDNF stimulation of RET p cell lines enhanced phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and Akt of the RET-RAS-RAF-ERK and RET-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathways, respectively. GDNF response of RET p cells in signal transduction and other functional studies were not affected by BRAF mt. The study demonstrates that RET p are frequently found in cutaneous melanoma, particularly desmoplastic subtypes, and responds to GDNF inducing events favorable for tumor progression.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines All 11 melanoma lines (ME1, ME2, ME3, ME5, ME7, ME8, ME10, ME13, ME20, M16, and M20) used in the present study were established and characterized at the John Wayne Cancer Institute (JWCI) and cultured as described previously ( Goto et al., 2008 ; Shinozaki et al., 2007 ). Six cell lines (ME1, ME3, ME5, ME7, ME10, and M16) were selected for functional assays based on the presence of RET p, RET wt, BRAF mt, and BRAF wt. MIAPaCa-2, PANC-1 (human pancreatic cancer), and MCF-7 (human breast cancer) were obtained from American Type Culture Collection. Human normal melanocytes (HMC) and normal brain tissues (B36929, B37876) were purchased from Cascade Biologics, Inc. and Cooperative Human Tissue Network, respectively. Tissue specimens Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissues were obtained from non-DM (n=71) and DM patients (n=70). All patients had undergone surgical treatment for primary or metastatic melanoma at Saint John’s Health Center (SJHC) or Sydney Melanoma Unit (SMU), and the use of human specimens was approved by the respective institutional review boards. DNA extraction For the preparation of melanoma line DNA, cells were lysed in DNAzol® Genomic DNA Isolation Reagent (Molecular Research Center), and DNA precipitated by 100% ethanol was measured by UV spectrophotometry ( Fujiwara et al., 1999 ). For the preparation of melanoma tissue DNA, 8µm sections were cut from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks and mounted on glass slides. Sections were stained with H&E for microscopic analysis to confirm histopathology. Tumor and normal tissues were isolated separately by microdissection under light microscopy, as previously described ( Umetani et al., 2005 ). Dissected tissues were digested with Proteinase K (QIAGEN)-containing lysis buffer at 50°C overnight and inactivated by heat at 75°C for 15min. DNA was then purified with phenol-chloroform-isoamyl-alcohol, precipitated by ethanol, and quantified by PicoGreen® dsDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen) for double-stranded DNA ( Umetani et al., 2005 ). mRNA expression analysis The sequence of primers and fluorescence resonance energy transfer probes (FRET) used for the quantitative real-time PCR (qRT) assay of RET, GFR?1, GFR?3, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) are shown in Supplemental Table 1S . Reverse transcription (RT) reactions were performed with Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Promega) with oligo (dT) primer. The qRT assay was performed in an iCycler iQ® Real-Time Thermocycler Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories). 5µl of cDNA generated from 250ng of total RNA through RT was added to a 96-well plate (Fisher) in which 0.5µM of each primer, 0.3µM FRET probe, 1U of Ampli Taq Gold® polymerase (Applied Biosystems), and PCR reagents were added ( Koyanagi et al., 2005 ). Amplification of samples consisted of a precycling hold at 95°C for 9 min, then 45 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1min, annealing for 1min (at 55°C for GAPDH , 58°C for RET , 63°C for GFR?1 , 58°C for GFR?3 ), and extension at 72°C for 1 min. Specific plasmid controls for each marker were synthesized as described previously ( Goto et al., 2006 ), and copy number calibration curves was generated using threshold cycles of six serially diluted of plasmid templates (101–106). To quantify the copy number, the cycle time (Ct) was interpolated from the calibration curve for each sample and mRNA copy number was calculated using Bio-Rad software. GAPDH was used as a control housekeeping gene and the relative mRNA copies were obtained as absolute mRNA copies of each gene / absolute mRNA copies of GAPDH ( Koyanagi et al., 2005 ). Each assay was performed at least twice, and mean copy numbers were used for analysis. <italic>RET</italic>p and <italic>BRAF</italic>mt analysis We used a peptide nucleic acid (PNA) clamped method to detect RET p and BRAF mt polymorphism in melanoma lines and paraffin-embedded melanomas as previously described ( Sawai et al., 2005 ; Shinozaki et al., 2007 ). Briefly, PCR was performed with the primers, and probes (LNA and PNA) shown as RET (#1) and BRAF in Supplemental Table 1S . The PCR assay was performed using iCycler iQ® real-time PCR. Genomic DNA (?2.5 ng) was applied to a final volume of 25µl containing each PCR primer, probe (PNA and LNA in BRAF mt detection), each dNTP, MgCl2, PCR buffer, and Ampli Taq Gold® Polymerase. PCR for RET was subjected to a precycling hold at 95°C for 12min, followed by 55 cycles at 94°C for 1min, 70°C for 50sec, 58°C for 50sec, and 72°C for 1min. PCR for BRAF was subjected to a precycling hold at 95°C for 10min, followed by 45 cycles at 95°C for 1min, 72°C for 50sec, 53°C for 50sec, and 72°C for 1min. MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 were used as RET p and RET wt controls, respectively ( Sawai et al., 2005 ). DNA of ME2 and MCF7 were used as BRAF mt and BRAF wt controls, respectively ( Shinozaki et al., 2007 ). Sequencing To confirm the results of the PNA clamp assay, we performed direct sequencing on representative samples, as previously described ( Sawai et al., 2005 ). RET coding regions were amplified by PCR using genomic DNA of melanoma cells and tumor tissues. The primer pair flanking exon 11 of RET genomic DNA was designed as RET (#2) ( Supplemental Table 1S ). PCR sequencing fragments were applied and read with CEQ™ 8000XL Genetic Analysis System (Beckman Coulter) and analyzed by the CEQ™ 8000XL Series Genetic Analysis System Software (version 8.0). RET IHC analysis Sections (5µm) were obtained from archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded non-DMs and DMs. After deparaffinization, endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched by 0.3% H2O2 and non-specific binding sites were blocked with 5% BSA. Sections were treated with boiling citrate buffer for heat-induced epitope retrieval. Goat anti-human polyclonal RET-specific Ab (R&D Systems) or non-specific goat IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) as a control (15µg/ml in blocking buffer), was added to the sections for immunostaining and incubated at 4°C for 1hr. Ab binding sites were detected by avidin-biotin peroxidase complex solution (LSAB® Kit) and 3,3’-diaminobenzidine as a chromogen (DAKO). Counterstaining was performed with hematoxylin and assessed by light microscopy. Western blotting Cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and dissolved in solubilizing buffer (pH 7.5, 20mM Tris-HCL, 12.5mM ?-glycerophosphate, 2mM EGTA, 10mM NaF, 1mM benzamide, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 1mM Na3VO4, and protease inhibitor mix (Roche Diagnostics)) after treatment with 25µg human recombinant GDNF (Chemicon International). Each aliquot of protein (10µg) was subjected to Western blotting analysis. After electrophoresis on 12.5% polyacrylamide gels, the protein was transblotted to Hybond™-P (Amersham Life Sciences, Inc.). The blots were blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk, and then incubated with anti-ERK1/2 rabbit polyclonal Ab or anti-phosphorylated ERK1/2 rabbit polyclonal Ab (1:1000, Phosphoplus®p44/42 MAP Kinase Thr202/Tyr204, Cell Signaling Technology), and then incubated with an horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG Ab (1:2000, Cell Signaling Technology). For Western blotting of Akt, anti-Akt rabbit polyclonal Ab or anti-phosphorylated Akt rabbit polyclonal Ab (1:500, Phosphoplus®Akt Ser473, Cell Signaling Technology) and a secondary Ab, HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG Ab (1:1000), were used. Subsequently, the blots were developed with ECL Plus Western blotting Detection system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). For Western blot of RET protein, lysate was prepared in RIPA buffer (PIERCE) and electrophoresed on NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen). Blot was probed with anti-RET polyclonal Ab (Ret (C-19; Santa Cruz) and visualized using Pierce Supersignal WestFemto chemiluminescence. Loading control was with ?-Actin. Cell proliferation assay Cell proliferation 48 and 72hrs after GDNF treatment (5, 25 or 50ng/ml, dissolved in water) in serum-free medium was analyzed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) and direct cell counting with a light microscope, respectively. MTT (0.4mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) was added into culture wells after washing with PBS. The converted dye was dissolved with DMSO 2hrs after incubation at 37°C and the absorbance was measured (550nm) with a microplate reader (Bio-Rad). For cell counting, cells were harvested after washing with PBS and the number of cells was counted using a hemocytometer. In blocking assays, cells were pre-treated with 10µM of a MEK1 inhibitor, PD98059 (Cell Signaling Technology), or 100nM of a PI3K inhibitor, wortmannin (Cell Signaling Technology), for 60min before treatment of GDNF as indicated in the manufacturer’s instructions, and followed by 25ng/ml of GDNF treatment for 72hrs. To avoid the effect of the delivery agent on cells, PD98059 and wortmannin were dissolved in PBS, and the same amount of PBS was added to control (GDNF(-)) and GDNF-treated cells. Each assay was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed. Migration Assay Migration ability of the melanoma cells was determined with a modified technique using a Transwell® chamber with a microporous membrane (pore-size 8µm, CORNING) ( Gumireddy et al., 2007 ). Melanoma cells were seeded in the upper chamber with RPMI 1640 culture medium (Invitrogen) with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The lower chamber contained RPMI 1640 culture medium with 2% FBS and 5 or 25ng/ml of GDNF. The cells that migrated through the membrane and adhered to the bottom of lower chamber were fixed with 80% ethanol and stained with hematoxylin 48hrs after incubation at 37°C. The number of stained cells was counted in 5 fields under a microscope with 200x magnification. In blocking assays, cells were pre-treated with wortmannin (100nM) for 60min before treatment of GDNF as instructions indicated, and followed by treatment with 25ng/ml GDNF for 48hrs. To avoid the effect of the delivery agent on cells, wortmannin or PD98059 was dissolved in PBS, and the same amount of PBS was added to control (without GDNF) and GDNF-treated cells. Each assay was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed. Invasion Assay Invasion ability of the melanoma cells was analyzed using QCM™ Collagen-based Invasion Assay (MILLIPORE), as described in previous reports ( Goto et al., 2006 ; Gumireddy et al., 2007 ). Cells were seeded in the upper chamber with RPMI 1640 culture medium (Invitrogen) with 2% FBS containing GDNF (25ng/ml). The lower chamber contained RPMI 1640 with 5% FBS and GDNF (25ng/ml). Cells invading the collagen-coated membrane were fixed and stained 60hrs after incubation at 37°C with reagents. Stained cells were dissolved with a provided reagent and measured at a 550nm wavelength. In the blocking assay, cells were pre-treated with 1µg/ml of a goat anti-human polyclonal RET-specific Ab, which binds to the extracellular domain of RET (R&D Systems), or 1µg/ml control goat IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) as a control 60min before treatment with GDNF and followed by treatment with 25ng/ml GDNF for 60hrs. Each assay was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed. RNA interference A siRNA against RET and non-specific control siRNA were designed and synthesized by Dharmacon, Inc. RET p melanoma cells (ME1) were seeded into a 96 well plate (1×104 cells/well) without antibiotics. The siRNA was transfected with DharmaFECT™1 Transfection Reagent. The suppression of RET mRNA was confirmed with qRT assay 24 and 48hrs after transfection. Each assay using siRNA was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed. Actin polymers staining by Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin Melanoma cells were seeded in BD BioCoat™ CultureSlides (BD Biosciences). Cells were washed twice with PBS and fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde solution for 10min at room temperature after a 48hr incubation with GDNF (10ng/ml) at 37°C. Fixed cells were stained with 1U/200 µl of PBS Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin (Invitrogen) for 20min at room temperature. After washing twice with PBS, actin polymers were observed using fluorescence microscopy with 400x magnification. Biostatistical Analysis The correlation of RET p and BRAF mt frequency in DMs and non-DMs was assessed by the Chi squared test. In functional assays, statistical analyses were performed by Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test and unpaired t test. Results are shown as mean + SD. A P -value of <0.05 (two-tailed) was considered significant. All statistical analyses were done using JMP® software (SAS).  Cell lines All 11 melanoma lines (ME1, ME2, ME3, ME5, ME7, ME8, ME10, ME13, ME20, M16, and M20) used in the present study were established and characterized at the John Wayne Cancer Institute (JWCI) and cultured as described previously ( Goto et al., 2008 ; Shinozaki et al., 2007 ). Six cell lines (ME1, ME3, ME5, ME7, ME10, and M16) were selected for functional assays based on the presence of RET p, RET wt, BRAF mt, and BRAF wt. MIAPaCa-2, PANC-1 (human pancreatic cancer), and MCF-7 (human breast cancer) were obtained from American Type Culture Collection. Human normal melanocytes (HMC) and normal brain tissues (B36929, B37876) were purchased from Cascade Biologics, Inc. and Cooperative Human Tissue Network, respectively.  Tissue specimens Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor tissues were obtained from non-DM (n=71) and DM patients (n=70). All patients had undergone surgical treatment for primary or metastatic melanoma at Saint John’s Health Center (SJHC) or Sydney Melanoma Unit (SMU), and the use of human specimens was approved by the respective institutional review boards.  DNA extraction For the preparation of melanoma line DNA, cells were lysed in DNAzol® Genomic DNA Isolation Reagent (Molecular Research Center), and DNA precipitated by 100% ethanol was measured by UV spectrophotometry ( Fujiwara et al., 1999 ). For the preparation of melanoma tissue DNA, 8µm sections were cut from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks and mounted on glass slides. Sections were stained with H&E for microscopic analysis to confirm histopathology. Tumor and normal tissues were isolated separately by microdissection under light microscopy, as previously described ( Umetani et al., 2005 ). Dissected tissues were digested with Proteinase K (QIAGEN)-containing lysis buffer at 50°C overnight and inactivated by heat at 75°C for 15min. DNA was then purified with phenol-chloroform-isoamyl-alcohol, precipitated by ethanol, and quantified by PicoGreen® dsDNA Assay Kit (Invitrogen) for double-stranded DNA ( Umetani et al., 2005 ).  mRNA expression analysis The sequence of primers and fluorescence resonance energy transfer probes (FRET) used for the quantitative real-time PCR (qRT) assay of RET, GFR?1, GFR?3, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) are shown in Supplemental Table 1S . Reverse transcription (RT) reactions were performed with Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Promega) with oligo (dT) primer. The qRT assay was performed in an iCycler iQ® Real-Time Thermocycler Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories). 5µl of cDNA generated from 250ng of total RNA through RT was added to a 96-well plate (Fisher) in which 0.5µM of each primer, 0.3µM FRET probe, 1U of Ampli Taq Gold® polymerase (Applied Biosystems), and PCR reagents were added ( Koyanagi et al., 2005 ). Amplification of samples consisted of a precycling hold at 95°C for 9 min, then 45 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1min, annealing for 1min (at 55°C for GAPDH , 58°C for RET , 63°C for GFR?1 , 58°C for GFR?3 ), and extension at 72°C for 1 min. Specific plasmid controls for each marker were synthesized as described previously ( Goto et al., 2006 ), and copy number calibration curves was generated using threshold cycles of six serially diluted of plasmid templates (101–106). To quantify the copy number, the cycle time (Ct) was interpolated from the calibration curve for each sample and mRNA copy number was calculated using Bio-Rad software. GAPDH was used as a control housekeeping gene and the relative mRNA copies were obtained as absolute mRNA copies of each gene / absolute mRNA copies of GAPDH ( Koyanagi et al., 2005 ). Each assay was performed at least twice, and mean copy numbers were used for analysis.  <italic>RET</italic>p and <italic>BRAF</italic>mt analysis We used a peptide nucleic acid (PNA) clamped method to detect RET p and BRAF mt polymorphism in melanoma lines and paraffin-embedded melanomas as previously described ( Sawai et al., 2005 ; Shinozaki et al., 2007 ). Briefly, PCR was performed with the primers, and probes (LNA and PNA) shown as RET (#1) and BRAF in Supplemental Table 1S . The PCR assay was performed using iCycler iQ® real-time PCR. Genomic DNA (?2.5 ng) was applied to a final volume of 25µl containing each PCR primer, probe (PNA and LNA in BRAF mt detection), each dNTP, MgCl2, PCR buffer, and Ampli Taq Gold® Polymerase. PCR for RET was subjected to a precycling hold at 95°C for 12min, followed by 55 cycles at 94°C for 1min, 70°C for 50sec, 58°C for 50sec, and 72°C for 1min. PCR for BRAF was subjected to a precycling hold at 95°C for 10min, followed by 45 cycles at 95°C for 1min, 72°C for 50sec, 53°C for 50sec, and 72°C for 1min. MIAPaCa-2 and PANC-1 were used as RET p and RET wt controls, respectively ( Sawai et al., 2005 ). DNA of ME2 and MCF7 were used as BRAF mt and BRAF wt controls, respectively ( Shinozaki et al., 2007 ).  Sequencing To confirm the results of the PNA clamp assay, we performed direct sequencing on representative samples, as previously described ( Sawai et al., 2005 ). RET coding regions were amplified by PCR using genomic DNA of melanoma cells and tumor tissues. The primer pair flanking exon 11 of RET genomic DNA was designed as RET (#2) ( Supplemental Table 1S ). PCR sequencing fragments were applied and read with CEQ™ 8000XL Genetic Analysis System (Beckman Coulter) and analyzed by the CEQ™ 8000XL Series Genetic Analysis System Software (version 8.0).  RET IHC analysis Sections (5µm) were obtained from archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded non-DMs and DMs. After deparaffinization, endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched by 0.3% H2O2 and non-specific binding sites were blocked with 5% BSA. Sections were treated with boiling citrate buffer for heat-induced epitope retrieval. Goat anti-human polyclonal RET-specific Ab (R&D Systems) or non-specific goat IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) as a control (15µg/ml in blocking buffer), was added to the sections for immunostaining and incubated at 4°C for 1hr. Ab binding sites were detected by avidin-biotin peroxidase complex solution (LSAB® Kit) and 3,3’-diaminobenzidine as a chromogen (DAKO). Counterstaining was performed with hematoxylin and assessed by light microscopy.  Western blotting Cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and dissolved in solubilizing buffer (pH 7.5, 20mM Tris-HCL, 12.5mM ?-glycerophosphate, 2mM EGTA, 10mM NaF, 1mM benzamide, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 1mM Na3VO4, and protease inhibitor mix (Roche Diagnostics)) after treatment with 25µg human recombinant GDNF (Chemicon International). Each aliquot of protein (10µg) was subjected to Western blotting analysis. After electrophoresis on 12.5% polyacrylamide gels, the protein was transblotted to Hybond™-P (Amersham Life Sciences, Inc.). The blots were blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk, and then incubated with anti-ERK1/2 rabbit polyclonal Ab or anti-phosphorylated ERK1/2 rabbit polyclonal Ab (1:1000, Phosphoplus®p44/42 MAP Kinase Thr202/Tyr204, Cell Signaling Technology), and then incubated with an horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG Ab (1:2000, Cell Signaling Technology). For Western blotting of Akt, anti-Akt rabbit polyclonal Ab or anti-phosphorylated Akt rabbit polyclonal Ab (1:500, Phosphoplus®Akt Ser473, Cell Signaling Technology) and a secondary Ab, HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG Ab (1:1000), were used. Subsequently, the blots were developed with ECL Plus Western blotting Detection system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). For Western blot of RET protein, lysate was prepared in RIPA buffer (PIERCE) and electrophoresed on NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen). Blot was probed with anti-RET polyclonal Ab (Ret (C-19; Santa Cruz) and visualized using Pierce Supersignal WestFemto chemiluminescence. Loading control was with ?-Actin.  Cell proliferation assay Cell proliferation 48 and 72hrs after GDNF treatment (5, 25 or 50ng/ml, dissolved in water) in serum-free medium was analyzed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) and direct cell counting with a light microscope, respectively. MTT (0.4mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) was added into culture wells after washing with PBS. The converted dye was dissolved with DMSO 2hrs after incubation at 37°C and the absorbance was measured (550nm) with a microplate reader (Bio-Rad). For cell counting, cells were harvested after washing with PBS and the number of cells was counted using a hemocytometer. In blocking assays, cells were pre-treated with 10µM of a MEK1 inhibitor, PD98059 (Cell Signaling Technology), or 100nM of a PI3K inhibitor, wortmannin (Cell Signaling Technology), for 60min before treatment of GDNF as indicated in the manufacturer’s instructions, and followed by 25ng/ml of GDNF treatment for 72hrs. To avoid the effect of the delivery agent on cells, PD98059 and wortmannin were dissolved in PBS, and the same amount of PBS was added to control (GDNF(-)) and GDNF-treated cells. Each assay was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed.  Migration Assay Migration ability of the melanoma cells was determined with a modified technique using a Transwell® chamber with a microporous membrane (pore-size 8µm, CORNING) ( Gumireddy et al., 2007 ). Melanoma cells were seeded in the upper chamber with RPMI 1640 culture medium (Invitrogen) with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The lower chamber contained RPMI 1640 culture medium with 2% FBS and 5 or 25ng/ml of GDNF. The cells that migrated through the membrane and adhered to the bottom of lower chamber were fixed with 80% ethanol and stained with hematoxylin 48hrs after incubation at 37°C. The number of stained cells was counted in 5 fields under a microscope with 200x magnification. In blocking assays, cells were pre-treated with wortmannin (100nM) for 60min before treatment of GDNF as instructions indicated, and followed by treatment with 25ng/ml GDNF for 48hrs. To avoid the effect of the delivery agent on cells, wortmannin or PD98059 was dissolved in PBS, and the same amount of PBS was added to control (without GDNF) and GDNF-treated cells. Each assay was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed.  Invasion Assay Invasion ability of the melanoma cells was analyzed using QCM™ Collagen-based Invasion Assay (MILLIPORE), as described in previous reports ( Goto et al., 2006 ; Gumireddy et al., 2007 ). Cells were seeded in the upper chamber with RPMI 1640 culture medium (Invitrogen) with 2% FBS containing GDNF (25ng/ml). The lower chamber contained RPMI 1640 with 5% FBS and GDNF (25ng/ml). Cells invading the collagen-coated membrane were fixed and stained 60hrs after incubation at 37°C with reagents. Stained cells were dissolved with a provided reagent and measured at a 550nm wavelength. In the blocking assay, cells were pre-treated with 1µg/ml of a goat anti-human polyclonal RET-specific Ab, which binds to the extracellular domain of RET (R&D Systems), or 1µg/ml control goat IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) as a control 60min before treatment with GDNF and followed by treatment with 25ng/ml GDNF for 60hrs. Each assay was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed.  RNA interference A siRNA against RET and non-specific control siRNA were designed and synthesized by Dharmacon, Inc. RET p melanoma cells (ME1) were seeded into a 96 well plate (1×104 cells/well) without antibiotics. The siRNA was transfected with DharmaFECT™1 Transfection Reagent. The suppression of RET mRNA was confirmed with qRT assay 24 and 48hrs after transfection. Each assay using siRNA was performed at least three times and the mean values were analyzed.  Actin polymers staining by Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin Melanoma cells were seeded in BD BioCoat™ CultureSlides (BD Biosciences). Cells were washed twice with PBS and fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde solution for 10min at room temperature after a 48hr incubation with GDNF (10ng/ml) at 37°C. Fixed cells were stained with 1U/200 µl of PBS Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin (Invitrogen) for 20min at room temperature. After washing twice with PBS, actin polymers were observed using fluorescence microscopy with 400x magnification.  Biostatistical Analysis The correlation of RET p and BRAF mt frequency in DMs and non-DMs was assessed by the Chi squared test. In functional assays, statistical analyses were performed by Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test and unpaired t test. Results are shown as mean + SD. A P -value of <0.05 (two-tailed) was considered significant. All statistical analyses were done using JMP® software (SAS).  Supplementary Material 1 Supplementary information is available at Oncogene’s website. 2 3 4 5 6  RESULTS Expression of <italic>RET, GFR?1</italic>, and <italic>GFR?3</italic> To confirm the existence of GDNF-RET signaling pathway in melanoma, the mRNA expressions of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 were analyzed in melanoma lines using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT). All melanoma lines expressed mRNA of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 ( Figure 1A ). The patterns of mRNA expression were independent of RET p presence ( RET p status of cells shown below). Normal human brain tissues (B36929, B37876) served as positive controls for GFR?1 and GFR?3 mRNA, and normal human melanocytes (HMC) were used as a control. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to confirm the expression of the RET in melanoma tissues. IHC analysis of both non-DMs and DMs demonstrated that RET was expressed independently of RET p status in melanoma tissue ( Figure 1B ). There were no significant increase in RET protein expression in RET wild-type ( RET wt) versus RET p melanomas. RET expression in melanoma cell lines was shown by Western blot analysis ( Figure 1C ). Analyses of <italic>RET</italic>p and <italic>BRAF</italic>mt Since BRAF is downstream of the signaling pathway of RET, and BRAF mt may influence the signaling activation of RET ( Davies et al., 2002 ; Takahashi, 2001 ), we investigated RET p ( RET G691S polymorphism), BRAF mt ( BRAF V600E mutation), RET wt, and BRAF wild-type ( BRAF wt) in melanoma lines. Melanoma lines were assayed for both RET p (G691S) and BRAF mt (V600E): ME1 was RET p and BRAF mt; ME5 and ME7 were RET p and BRAF wt; ME3 and ME10 were RET wt and BRAF wt; and M16 was RET wt and BRAF mt. For RET p detection, the results were also validated using direct sequencing. The sequence of RET wt had a single polymorphic nucleotide change (GGT ? AGT) to RETp ( Supplemental Figure 1S ). RET p and BRAF mt DNA analyses were performed on histopathologically-verified surgical tissues of non-DMs (n=71) and DMs (n=70). The frequency of RET p was about twice as high in DMs (61%) as compared to non-DMs (31%) ( P <0.001, Table 1 ). BRAF mt was significantly ( P <0.001) higher in non-DM (39%) than DM tumors (11%). The reduced frequency of BRAF mt in DMs was striking and has important implications as to the role of BRAF mt in highly sun-exposed sites of cutaneous melanomas overall. Details of RET p and BRAF mt analysis of primary and metastatic tumors were assessed ( Table 1 ). BRAF mt was detected more frequently in metastatic than in primary tumors in both non-DMs and DMs. However, this was not the case in RET p for non-DMs and DMs. Effect on GDNF induced proliferation The effects of RET p and BRAF mt on GDNF-induced cell proliferation were analyzed. A 48-hr exposure to GDNF enhanced proliferation of RET p melanoma cells but not RET wt melanoma cells ( Figure 2A ). GDNF did not differentially enhance the proliferation of BRAF mt and BRAF wt cells ( Figure 2A ). MTT assay results were confirmed by a direct cell-counting assay performed 72hr after administration of GDNF ( Figure 2B ). We selected 25ng/ml of GDNF as the optimal working dose for assessing cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). The pathway for GDNF-induced proliferation was confirmed by using agents that block components of the two important pathways for RET signaling. PD98059 is a MEK1 inhibitor that targets the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK pathway. Wortmannin is a PI3K inhibitor that targets RET-PI3K-Akt pathway. PD98059 treatment completely suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation. Wortmannin partially suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation in ME7 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 2C ). This suggested that the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway plays a more predominant role than the RET-PI3K-Akt pathway with respect to GDNF-induced cell proliferation in RET p melanoma cells. To exclude the possibility that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways, we transfected small interfering RNA (siRNA) against RET in RET p cells (ME1), and GDNF induced cell proliferation was assessed. The RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) reduced expression of RET mRNA 24 and 48hrs after transfection by 77% and 76%, respectively compared to the vehicle-treated cells (control) ( Figure 2D ). The non-specific siRNA control did not significantly affect mRNA expression of RET ( Figure 2D ). RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) suppressed > 80% of cell proliferation induced by GDNF (25ng/ml) 48hrs after stimulation, whereas non-specific control siRNA did not ( Figure 2E ). These results suggest that cross-talk signaling through other receptors is not involved in the RET pathways activated by GDNF. GDNF effect on <italic>RET</italic>p cell migration and invasion Next, to assess whether RET p affects cell migration or invasion induced by GDNF via the RET-PI3K pathway, migration and invasion assays were performed using microporous-membrane and collagen-coated chambers, respectively. RET p cells showed more vigorous migration and invasion than RET wt cells after GDNF stimulation ( Figure 3A, B ). BRAF mt cells demonstrated no difference on cell migration and invasion after GDNF treatment ( Figure 3A, B ). Wortmannin significantly suppressed cell migration induced by GDNF in ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 3C ), whereas PD98059 did not ( Figure 3D ). These results suggest that the RET-PI3K signaling pathway plays an important role in cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p melanoma cells. The invasion ability of ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt) enhanced by GDNF was significantly suppressed with RET-specific antibody (Ab) ( Figure 3E ). Non-specific purified anti-goat IgG was used as a control and did not show any effects ( Figure 3E ). These results confirmed that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are not significantly involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways. Phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt by GDNF To assess the effect of RET p activation on downstream factors of the RET signaling pathway, we analyzed whether RET p or BRAF mt enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt using Western blotting since RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt are the major signaling pathways activated by GDNF stimulation leading to cell proliferation ( Takahashi, 2001 ). In a representative cell line, ME3 ( RET wt/ BRAF wt), GDNF showed weak phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt. In contrast, GDNF strongly phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Akt within 15min after treatment in ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt), ME7 and ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt); and the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt lasted for 60min ( Figures 4A–D ). These results confirm that RET p enhanced the response of both RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt signaling pathways after GDNF stimulation. Actin polymerization in melanoma cells by GDNF Morphological alterations occurred during migration of melanoma cells after GDNF treatment. Actin polymerization on the cell surface was observed to confirm cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p cells. Based on the migration assays, we selected 10ng/ml of GDNF for assessment of cell motility. Actin polymerization, such as filopodia, necessary for cell migration, was visualized using Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin staining. Administration of GDNF induced filopodia in RET p cell lines (ME1, ME7), but not in the RET wt cell line (ME3) ( Supplemental Figure 2S ). The findings support the cell migration/invasion assays.  RESULTS Expression of <italic>RET, GFR?1</italic>, and <italic>GFR?3</italic> To confirm the existence of GDNF-RET signaling pathway in melanoma, the mRNA expressions of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 were analyzed in melanoma lines using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT). All melanoma lines expressed mRNA of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 ( Figure 1A ). The patterns of mRNA expression were independent of RET p presence ( RET p status of cells shown below). Normal human brain tissues (B36929, B37876) served as positive controls for GFR?1 and GFR?3 mRNA, and normal human melanocytes (HMC) were used as a control. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to confirm the expression of the RET in melanoma tissues. IHC analysis of both non-DMs and DMs demonstrated that RET was expressed independently of RET p status in melanoma tissue ( Figure 1B ). There were no significant increase in RET protein expression in RET wild-type ( RET wt) versus RET p melanomas. RET expression in melanoma cell lines was shown by Western blot analysis ( Figure 1C ). Analyses of <italic>RET</italic>p and <italic>BRAF</italic>mt Since BRAF is downstream of the signaling pathway of RET, and BRAF mt may influence the signaling activation of RET ( Davies et al., 2002 ; Takahashi, 2001 ), we investigated RET p ( RET G691S polymorphism), BRAF mt ( BRAF V600E mutation), RET wt, and BRAF wild-type ( BRAF wt) in melanoma lines. Melanoma lines were assayed for both RET p (G691S) and BRAF mt (V600E): ME1 was RET p and BRAF mt; ME5 and ME7 were RET p and BRAF wt; ME3 and ME10 were RET wt and BRAF wt; and M16 was RET wt and BRAF mt. For RET p detection, the results were also validated using direct sequencing. The sequence of RET wt had a single polymorphic nucleotide change (GGT ? AGT) to RETp ( Supplemental Figure 1S ). RET p and BRAF mt DNA analyses were performed on histopathologically-verified surgical tissues of non-DMs (n=71) and DMs (n=70). The frequency of RET p was about twice as high in DMs (61%) as compared to non-DMs (31%) ( P <0.001, Table 1 ). BRAF mt was significantly ( P <0.001) higher in non-DM (39%) than DM tumors (11%). The reduced frequency of BRAF mt in DMs was striking and has important implications as to the role of BRAF mt in highly sun-exposed sites of cutaneous melanomas overall. Details of RET p and BRAF mt analysis of primary and metastatic tumors were assessed ( Table 1 ). BRAF mt was detected more frequently in metastatic than in primary tumors in both non-DMs and DMs. However, this was not the case in RET p for non-DMs and DMs. Effect on GDNF induced proliferation The effects of RET p and BRAF mt on GDNF-induced cell proliferation were analyzed. A 48-hr exposure to GDNF enhanced proliferation of RET p melanoma cells but not RET wt melanoma cells ( Figure 2A ). GDNF did not differentially enhance the proliferation of BRAF mt and BRAF wt cells ( Figure 2A ). MTT assay results were confirmed by a direct cell-counting assay performed 72hr after administration of GDNF ( Figure 2B ). We selected 25ng/ml of GDNF as the optimal working dose for assessing cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). The pathway for GDNF-induced proliferation was confirmed by using agents that block components of the two important pathways for RET signaling. PD98059 is a MEK1 inhibitor that targets the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK pathway. Wortmannin is a PI3K inhibitor that targets RET-PI3K-Akt pathway. PD98059 treatment completely suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation. Wortmannin partially suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation in ME7 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 2C ). This suggested that the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway plays a more predominant role than the RET-PI3K-Akt pathway with respect to GDNF-induced cell proliferation in RET p melanoma cells. To exclude the possibility that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways, we transfected small interfering RNA (siRNA) against RET in RET p cells (ME1), and GDNF induced cell proliferation was assessed. The RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) reduced expression of RET mRNA 24 and 48hrs after transfection by 77% and 76%, respectively compared to the vehicle-treated cells (control) ( Figure 2D ). The non-specific siRNA control did not significantly affect mRNA expression of RET ( Figure 2D ). RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) suppressed > 80% of cell proliferation induced by GDNF (25ng/ml) 48hrs after stimulation, whereas non-specific control siRNA did not ( Figure 2E ). These results suggest that cross-talk signaling through other receptors is not involved in the RET pathways activated by GDNF. GDNF effect on <italic>RET</italic>p cell migration and invasion Next, to assess whether RET p affects cell migration or invasion induced by GDNF via the RET-PI3K pathway, migration and invasion assays were performed using microporous-membrane and collagen-coated chambers, respectively. RET p cells showed more vigorous migration and invasion than RET wt cells after GDNF stimulation ( Figure 3A, B ). BRAF mt cells demonstrated no difference on cell migration and invasion after GDNF treatment ( Figure 3A, B ). Wortmannin significantly suppressed cell migration induced by GDNF in ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 3C ), whereas PD98059 did not ( Figure 3D ). These results suggest that the RET-PI3K signaling pathway plays an important role in cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p melanoma cells. The invasion ability of ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt) enhanced by GDNF was significantly suppressed with RET-specific antibody (Ab) ( Figure 3E ). Non-specific purified anti-goat IgG was used as a control and did not show any effects ( Figure 3E ). These results confirmed that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are not significantly involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways. Phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt by GDNF To assess the effect of RET p activation on downstream factors of the RET signaling pathway, we analyzed whether RET p or BRAF mt enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt using Western blotting since RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt are the major signaling pathways activated by GDNF stimulation leading to cell proliferation ( Takahashi, 2001 ). In a representative cell line, ME3 ( RET wt/ BRAF wt), GDNF showed weak phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt. In contrast, GDNF strongly phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Akt within 15min after treatment in ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt), ME7 and ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt); and the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt lasted for 60min ( Figures 4A–D ). These results confirm that RET p enhanced the response of both RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt signaling pathways after GDNF stimulation. Actin polymerization in melanoma cells by GDNF Morphological alterations occurred during migration of melanoma cells after GDNF treatment. Actin polymerization on the cell surface was observed to confirm cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p cells. Based on the migration assays, we selected 10ng/ml of GDNF for assessment of cell motility. Actin polymerization, such as filopodia, necessary for cell migration, was visualized using Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin staining. Administration of GDNF induced filopodia in RET p cell lines (ME1, ME7), but not in the RET wt cell line (ME3) ( Supplemental Figure 2S ). The findings support the cell migration/invasion assays.  Expression of <italic>RET, GFR?1</italic>, and <italic>GFR?3</italic> To confirm the existence of GDNF-RET signaling pathway in melanoma, the mRNA expressions of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 were analyzed in melanoma lines using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT). All melanoma lines expressed mRNA of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 ( Figure 1A ). The patterns of mRNA expression were independent of RET p presence ( RET p status of cells shown below). Normal human brain tissues (B36929, B37876) served as positive controls for GFR?1 and GFR?3 mRNA, and normal human melanocytes (HMC) were used as a control. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to confirm the expression of the RET in melanoma tissues. IHC analysis of both non-DMs and DMs demonstrated that RET was expressed independently of RET p status in melanoma tissue ( Figure 1B ). There were no significant increase in RET protein expression in RET wild-type ( RET wt) versus RET p melanomas. RET expression in melanoma cell lines was shown by Western blot analysis ( Figure 1C ).  Expression of <italic>RET, GFR?1</italic>, and <italic>GFR?3</italic> To confirm the existence of GDNF-RET signaling pathway in melanoma, the mRNA expressions of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 were analyzed in melanoma lines using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT). All melanoma lines expressed mRNA of RET, GFR?1 , and GFR?3 ( Figure 1A ). The patterns of mRNA expression were independent of RET p presence ( RET p status of cells shown below). Normal human brain tissues (B36929, B37876) served as positive controls for GFR?1 and GFR?3 mRNA, and normal human melanocytes (HMC) were used as a control. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to confirm the expression of the RET in melanoma tissues. IHC analysis of both non-DMs and DMs demonstrated that RET was expressed independently of RET p status in melanoma tissue ( Figure 1B ). There were no significant increase in RET protein expression in RET wild-type ( RET wt) versus RET p melanomas. RET expression in melanoma cell lines was shown by Western blot analysis ( Figure 1C ).  Analyses of <italic>RET</italic>p and <italic>BRAF</italic>mt Since BRAF is downstream of the signaling pathway of RET, and BRAF mt may influence the signaling activation of RET ( Davies et al., 2002 ; Takahashi, 2001 ), we investigated RET p ( RET G691S polymorphism), BRAF mt ( BRAF V600E mutation), RET wt, and BRAF wild-type ( BRAF wt) in melanoma lines. Melanoma lines were assayed for both RET p (G691S) and BRAF mt (V600E): ME1 was RET p and BRAF mt; ME5 and ME7 were RET p and BRAF wt; ME3 and ME10 were RET wt and BRAF wt; and M16 was RET wt and BRAF mt. For RET p detection, the results were also validated using direct sequencing. The sequence of RET wt had a single polymorphic nucleotide change (GGT ? AGT) to RETp ( Supplemental Figure 1S ). RET p and BRAF mt DNA analyses were performed on histopathologically-verified surgical tissues of non-DMs (n=71) and DMs (n=70). The frequency of RET p was about twice as high in DMs (61%) as compared to non-DMs (31%) ( P <0.001, Table 1 ). BRAF mt was significantly ( P <0.001) higher in non-DM (39%) than DM tumors (11%). The reduced frequency of BRAF mt in DMs was striking and has important implications as to the role of BRAF mt in highly sun-exposed sites of cutaneous melanomas overall. Details of RET p and BRAF mt analysis of primary and metastatic tumors were assessed ( Table 1 ). BRAF mt was detected more frequently in metastatic than in primary tumors in both non-DMs and DMs. However, this was not the case in RET p for non-DMs and DMs.  Analyses of <italic>RET</italic>p and <italic>BRAF</italic>mt Since BRAF is downstream of the signaling pathway of RET, and BRAF mt may influence the signaling activation of RET ( Davies et al., 2002 ; Takahashi, 2001 ), we investigated RET p ( RET G691S polymorphism), BRAF mt ( BRAF V600E mutation), RET wt, and BRAF wild-type ( BRAF wt) in melanoma lines. Melanoma lines were assayed for both RET p (G691S) and BRAF mt (V600E): ME1 was RET p and BRAF mt; ME5 and ME7 were RET p and BRAF wt; ME3 and ME10 were RET wt and BRAF wt; and M16 was RET wt and BRAF mt. For RET p detection, the results were also validated using direct sequencing. The sequence of RET wt had a single polymorphic nucleotide change (GGT ? AGT) to RETp ( Supplemental Figure 1S ). RET p and BRAF mt DNA analyses were performed on histopathologically-verified surgical tissues of non-DMs (n=71) and DMs (n=70). The frequency of RET p was about twice as high in DMs (61%) as compared to non-DMs (31%) ( P <0.001, Table 1 ). BRAF mt was significantly ( P <0.001) higher in non-DM (39%) than DM tumors (11%). The reduced frequency of BRAF mt in DMs was striking and has important implications as to the role of BRAF mt in highly sun-exposed sites of cutaneous melanomas overall. Details of RET p and BRAF mt analysis of primary and metastatic tumors were assessed ( Table 1 ). BRAF mt was detected more frequently in metastatic than in primary tumors in both non-DMs and DMs. However, this was not the case in RET p for non-DMs and DMs.  Effect on GDNF induced proliferation The effects of RET p and BRAF mt on GDNF-induced cell proliferation were analyzed. A 48-hr exposure to GDNF enhanced proliferation of RET p melanoma cells but not RET wt melanoma cells ( Figure 2A ). GDNF did not differentially enhance the proliferation of BRAF mt and BRAF wt cells ( Figure 2A ). MTT assay results were confirmed by a direct cell-counting assay performed 72hr after administration of GDNF ( Figure 2B ). We selected 25ng/ml of GDNF as the optimal working dose for assessing cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). The pathway for GDNF-induced proliferation was confirmed by using agents that block components of the two important pathways for RET signaling. PD98059 is a MEK1 inhibitor that targets the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK pathway. Wortmannin is a PI3K inhibitor that targets RET-PI3K-Akt pathway. PD98059 treatment completely suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation. Wortmannin partially suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation in ME7 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 2C ). This suggested that the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway plays a more predominant role than the RET-PI3K-Akt pathway with respect to GDNF-induced cell proliferation in RET p melanoma cells. To exclude the possibility that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways, we transfected small interfering RNA (siRNA) against RET in RET p cells (ME1), and GDNF induced cell proliferation was assessed. The RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) reduced expression of RET mRNA 24 and 48hrs after transfection by 77% and 76%, respectively compared to the vehicle-treated cells (control) ( Figure 2D ). The non-specific siRNA control did not significantly affect mRNA expression of RET ( Figure 2D ). RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) suppressed > 80% of cell proliferation induced by GDNF (25ng/ml) 48hrs after stimulation, whereas non-specific control siRNA did not ( Figure 2E ). These results suggest that cross-talk signaling through other receptors is not involved in the RET pathways activated by GDNF.  Effect on GDNF induced proliferation The effects of RET p and BRAF mt on GDNF-induced cell proliferation were analyzed. A 48-hr exposure to GDNF enhanced proliferation of RET p melanoma cells but not RET wt melanoma cells ( Figure 2A ). GDNF did not differentially enhance the proliferation of BRAF mt and BRAF wt cells ( Figure 2A ). MTT assay results were confirmed by a direct cell-counting assay performed 72hr after administration of GDNF ( Figure 2B ). We selected 25ng/ml of GDNF as the optimal working dose for assessing cell proliferation ( Figure 2A ). The pathway for GDNF-induced proliferation was confirmed by using agents that block components of the two important pathways for RET signaling. PD98059 is a MEK1 inhibitor that targets the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK pathway. Wortmannin is a PI3K inhibitor that targets RET-PI3K-Akt pathway. PD98059 treatment completely suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation. Wortmannin partially suppressed GDNF-induced proliferation in ME7 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 2C ). This suggested that the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway plays a more predominant role than the RET-PI3K-Akt pathway with respect to GDNF-induced cell proliferation in RET p melanoma cells. To exclude the possibility that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways, we transfected small interfering RNA (siRNA) against RET in RET p cells (ME1), and GDNF induced cell proliferation was assessed. The RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) reduced expression of RET mRNA 24 and 48hrs after transfection by 77% and 76%, respectively compared to the vehicle-treated cells (control) ( Figure 2D ). The non-specific siRNA control did not significantly affect mRNA expression of RET ( Figure 2D ). RET siRNA significantly ( P <0.05) suppressed > 80% of cell proliferation induced by GDNF (25ng/ml) 48hrs after stimulation, whereas non-specific control siRNA did not ( Figure 2E ). These results suggest that cross-talk signaling through other receptors is not involved in the RET pathways activated by GDNF.  GDNF effect on <italic>RET</italic>p cell migration and invasion Next, to assess whether RET p affects cell migration or invasion induced by GDNF via the RET-PI3K pathway, migration and invasion assays were performed using microporous-membrane and collagen-coated chambers, respectively. RET p cells showed more vigorous migration and invasion than RET wt cells after GDNF stimulation ( Figure 3A, B ). BRAF mt cells demonstrated no difference on cell migration and invasion after GDNF treatment ( Figure 3A, B ). Wortmannin significantly suppressed cell migration induced by GDNF in ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 3C ), whereas PD98059 did not ( Figure 3D ). These results suggest that the RET-PI3K signaling pathway plays an important role in cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p melanoma cells. The invasion ability of ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt) enhanced by GDNF was significantly suppressed with RET-specific antibody (Ab) ( Figure 3E ). Non-specific purified anti-goat IgG was used as a control and did not show any effects ( Figure 3E ). These results confirmed that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are not significantly involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways.  GDNF effect on <italic>RET</italic>p cell migration and invasion Next, to assess whether RET p affects cell migration or invasion induced by GDNF via the RET-PI3K pathway, migration and invasion assays were performed using microporous-membrane and collagen-coated chambers, respectively. RET p cells showed more vigorous migration and invasion than RET wt cells after GDNF stimulation ( Figure 3A, B ). BRAF mt cells demonstrated no difference on cell migration and invasion after GDNF treatment ( Figure 3A, B ). Wortmannin significantly suppressed cell migration induced by GDNF in ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt) ( Figure 3C ), whereas PD98059 did not ( Figure 3D ). These results suggest that the RET-PI3K signaling pathway plays an important role in cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p melanoma cells. The invasion ability of ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt) enhanced by GDNF was significantly suppressed with RET-specific antibody (Ab) ( Figure 3E ). Non-specific purified anti-goat IgG was used as a control and did not show any effects ( Figure 3E ). These results confirmed that cross-talk signaling pathways via other receptors are not significantly involved in GDNF activation of RET signaling pathways.  Phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt by GDNF To assess the effect of RET p activation on downstream factors of the RET signaling pathway, we analyzed whether RET p or BRAF mt enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt using Western blotting since RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt are the major signaling pathways activated by GDNF stimulation leading to cell proliferation ( Takahashi, 2001 ). In a representative cell line, ME3 ( RET wt/ BRAF wt), GDNF showed weak phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt. In contrast, GDNF strongly phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Akt within 15min after treatment in ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt), ME7 and ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt); and the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt lasted for 60min ( Figures 4A–D ). These results confirm that RET p enhanced the response of both RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt signaling pathways after GDNF stimulation.  Phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt by GDNF To assess the effect of RET p activation on downstream factors of the RET signaling pathway, we analyzed whether RET p or BRAF mt enhanced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt using Western blotting since RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt are the major signaling pathways activated by GDNF stimulation leading to cell proliferation ( Takahashi, 2001 ). In a representative cell line, ME3 ( RET wt/ BRAF wt), GDNF showed weak phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt. In contrast, GDNF strongly phosphorylated ERK1/2 and Akt within 15min after treatment in ME1 ( RET p/ BRAF mt), ME7 and ME5 ( RET p/ BRAF wt); and the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and Akt lasted for 60min ( Figures 4A–D ). These results confirm that RET p enhanced the response of both RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt signaling pathways after GDNF stimulation.  Actin polymerization in melanoma cells by GDNF Morphological alterations occurred during migration of melanoma cells after GDNF treatment. Actin polymerization on the cell surface was observed to confirm cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p cells. Based on the migration assays, we selected 10ng/ml of GDNF for assessment of cell motility. Actin polymerization, such as filopodia, necessary for cell migration, was visualized using Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin staining. Administration of GDNF induced filopodia in RET p cell lines (ME1, ME7), but not in the RET wt cell line (ME3) ( Supplemental Figure 2S ). The findings support the cell migration/invasion assays.  Actin polymerization in melanoma cells by GDNF Morphological alterations occurred during migration of melanoma cells after GDNF treatment. Actin polymerization on the cell surface was observed to confirm cell motility induced by GDNF in RET p cells. Based on the migration assays, we selected 10ng/ml of GDNF for assessment of cell motility. Actin polymerization, such as filopodia, necessary for cell migration, was visualized using Alexa Fluor® 568 phalloidin staining. Administration of GDNF induced filopodia in RET p cell lines (ME1, ME7), but not in the RET wt cell line (ME3) ( Supplemental Figure 2S ). The findings support the cell migration/invasion assays.  DISCUSSION RET gene expression has been detected primarily in human tumors of neural crest origin, such as neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma, and medullary thyroid carcinoma ( Takahashi, 2001 ). RET p was originally found in radiation-induced thyroid tumors and sporadic medullary thyroid cancers ( Bounacer et al., 2002 ; Elisei et al., 2004 ). In this report, we identified high frequency of RET p in cutaneous melanomas, particularly and more frequently in DMs (non-DMs: 31%, DMs: 61%), whereas RET p has been detected in only 15–20% of the normal population ( Bounacer et al., 2002 ; Ceccherini et al., 1994 ; Elisei et al., 2004 ; Stephens et al., 2005 ). As not all DMs are neurotropic, we did not find RET p in all DMs. Previously, it was demonstrated that the G691S RET p was present in pancreas and thyroid cancers ( Elisei et al., 2004 ; Sawai et al., 2005 ). Only certain RET-expressing tissues, such as the thyroid gland, have been shown to have RET gene rearrangements that lead to physiological changes ( Airaksinen & Saarma, 2002 ; Runeberg-Roos & Saarma, 2007 ). This is the first report demonstrating GDNF’s significant effects in promoting proliferation, migration, and invasion of RET p versus RET wt melanoma cells. These findings suggest that RET p melanoma may be more aggressive when in the vicinity of GDNF releasing neural and other tissues. Peripheral neural tissues secrete GDNF and are invaded by cutaneous melanomas. Brain metastasis is one of the major causes of death for melanoma patients ( Selek et al., 2004 ); GDNF secreted by glial cells in the brain could significantly contribute to proliferation and migration of RET p melanoma cells. The observation that RET p is more frequent in DMs and responsive to the neurotrophic factor GDNF in non-DMs suggests that this RTK may play a significant role in melanoma progression. RET p-GDNF enhanced and prolonged the phosphorylation of the ERK and Akt. PD98059, a MEK1 inhibitor, significantly blocked the cell proliferation induced by GDNF, whereas wortmannin, a PI3K inhibitor, suppressed GDNF-enhanced proliferation of RET p cells to some extent. These results suggested that both pathways of RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt ( Kodama et al., 2005 ) can be activated through RET p-GDNF induction and are inline with the results of proliferation assays, in which GDNF only enhanced cell proliferation in RET p cells. The results of migration and invasion assays showed that RET-PI3K pathway played a significant role in GDNF induced cell motility. A recent report has shown that Akt-induced phosphorylation plays an integral role in the vertical growth of melanoma ( Govindarajan et al., 2007 ). It is possible that GDNF induced cell motility is the result of activation of both RET-PI3K-RAC and RET-PI3K-Akt pathways. The assessment of the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK pathway becomes complicated as it is known that signal transduction through the BRAF mt (V600E), a member of this pathway, is quite frequent in melanomas; signal transduction through NRAS mutation occurs to a much lesser extent ( Curtin et al., 2006 ). We demonstrated that GDNF stimulation of RET p cells was not significantly influenced by BRAF mt presence. We demonstrated that BRAF mt in melanoma cells does not significantly effect GDNF-induced proliferation, migration and invasion.. Although BRAF mt phosphorylates downstream factors such as MEK or ERK without ligand stimulation ( Davies et al., 2002 ; Satyamoorthy et al., 2003 ), GDNF induced more intense phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in RET p/ BRAF mt cells (ME1). This suggests that BRAF mt only partially phosphorylates the ERK pathway and its downstream factors, and consequently, cells bearing BRAF mt may not exhibit ERK phosphorylation after GDNF stimulation which is compatible with our results. These data also confirm our previous finding that BRAF mt is more frequent in metastasis than primary melanomas ( Shinozaki et al., 2004 ). Our studies suggest that BRAF mt is not a significant progression factor for all types of cutaneous melanomas. Linkage of sun exposure to BRAF mt may not be valid for all cutaneous melanomas since DMs are known to be more frequently found in highly sun-exposed areas ( Quinn et al., 1998 ). DMs had a significantly lower level (>3 fold) of BRAF mt compared to non-DMs. This finding supports a previous report on BRAF mt in DMs in a small cohort of patients ( Davison et al., 2005 ). There are several new therapeutic agents of RTK inhibitors affecting RET in clinical trials. Sorafenib (BAY 43-9006, serine/threonine kinase RAF1, and BRAF inhibitor) and semaxanib (SU5416, vascular endothelial cell growth factor receptor inhibitor) are RTK inhibitors that can block RET signaling and suppress growth of RET p thyroid cancers ( Carlomagno et al., 2006 ; Mologni et al., 2006 ). Sorafenib directly suppresses the kinase activity of RET, and promotes lysosomal degradation of RET protein ( Plaza-Menacho et al., 2007 ). RET p melanomas may be appropriate targets for using these RTK inhibitors, particularly those showing neurotropism. Our findings of melanoma cells with RET p/wt and BRAF mt/wt in combination suggest that some of the current clinical trials with these inhibitors may be working through the RETp pathway. To date, the association of BRAF mt in melanoma with response to Sorafenib alone has not been demonstrated. RET p could be a key factor in the proliferation and invasion of malignant melanoma cells, and its high incidence in DM may explain why this malignancy often exhibits neurotropism. In our study, inhibition of RET signaling suppressed all proliferation and invasion in melanomas. This suggests that RET p could be a new RTK target for treatment of malignant melanomas. Regimens based on RTK inhibitors selective for RET may be particularly promising when, unfortunately, metastatic melanoma therapeutic treatments beyond surgery have had limited success to date.  DISCUSSION RET gene expression has been detected primarily in human tumors of neural crest origin, such as neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma, and medullary thyroid carcinoma ( Takahashi, 2001 ). RET p was originally found in radiation-induced thyroid tumors and sporadic medullary thyroid cancers ( Bounacer et al., 2002 ; Elisei et al., 2004 ). In this report, we identified high frequency of RET p in cutaneous melanomas, particularly and more frequently in DMs (non-DMs: 31%, DMs: 61%), whereas RET p has been detected in only 15–20% of the normal population ( Bounacer et al., 2002 ; Ceccherini et al., 1994 ; Elisei et al., 2004 ; Stephens et al., 2005 ). As not all DMs are neurotropic, we did not find RET p in all DMs. Previously, it was demonstrated that the G691S RET p was present in pancreas and thyroid cancers ( Elisei et al., 2004 ; Sawai et al., 2005 ). Only certain RET-expressing tissues, such as the thyroid gland, have been shown to have RET gene rearrangements that lead to physiological changes ( Airaksinen & Saarma, 2002 ; Runeberg-Roos & Saarma, 2007 ). This is the first report demonstrating GDNF’s significant effects in promoting proliferation, migration, and invasion of RET p versus RET wt melanoma cells. These findings suggest that RET p melanoma may be more aggressive when in the vicinity of GDNF releasing neural and other tissues. Peripheral neural tissues secrete GDNF and are invaded by cutaneous melanomas. Brain metastasis is one of the major causes of death for melanoma patients ( Selek et al., 2004 ); GDNF secreted by glial cells in the brain could significantly contribute to proliferation and migration of RET p melanoma cells. The observation that RET p is more frequent in DMs and responsive to the neurotrophic factor GDNF in non-DMs suggests that this RTK may play a significant role in melanoma progression. RET p-GDNF enhanced and prolonged the phosphorylation of the ERK and Akt. PD98059, a MEK1 inhibitor, significantly blocked the cell proliferation induced by GDNF, whereas wortmannin, a PI3K inhibitor, suppressed GDNF-enhanced proliferation of RET p cells to some extent. These results suggested that both pathways of RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK and RET-PI3K-Akt ( Kodama et al., 2005 ) can be activated through RET p-GDNF induction and are inline with the results of proliferation assays, in which GDNF only enhanced cell proliferation in RET p cells. The results of migration and invasion assays showed that RET-PI3K pathway played a significant role in GDNF induced cell motility. A recent report has shown that Akt-induced phosphorylation plays an integral role in the vertical growth of melanoma ( Govindarajan et al., 2007 ). It is possible that GDNF induced cell motility is the result of activation of both RET-PI3K-RAC and RET-PI3K-Akt pathways. The assessment of the RET-RAS-BRAF-MEK-ERK pathway becomes complicated as it is known that signal transduction through the BRAF mt (V600E), a member of this pathway, is quite frequent in melanomas; signal transduction through NRAS mutation occurs to a much lesser extent ( Curtin et al., 2006 ). We demonstrated that GDNF stimulation of RET p cells was not significantly influenced by BRAF mt presence. We demonstrated that BRAF mt in melanoma cells does not significantly effect GDNF-induced proliferation, migration and invasion.. Although BRAF mt phosphorylates downstream factors such as MEK or ERK without ligand stimulation ( Davies et al., 2002 ; Satyamoorthy et al., 2003 ), GDNF induced more intense phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in RET p/ BRAF mt cells (ME1). This suggests that BRAF mt only partially phosphorylates the ERK pathway and its downstream factors, and consequently, cells bearing BRAF mt may not exhibit ERK phosphorylation after GDNF stimulation which is compatible with our results. These data also confirm our previous finding that BRAF mt is more frequent in metastasis than primary melanomas ( Shinozaki et al., 2004 ). Our studies suggest that BRAF mt is not a significant progression factor for all types of cutaneous melanomas. Linkage of sun exposure to BRAF mt may not be valid for all cutaneous melanomas since DMs are known to be more frequently found in highly sun-exposed areas ( Quinn et al., 1998 ). DMs had a significantly lower level (>3 fold) of BRAF mt compared to non-DMs. This finding supports a previous report on BRAF mt in DMs in a small cohort of patients ( Davison et al., 2005 ). There are several new therapeutic agents of RTK inhibitors affecting RET in clinical trials. Sorafenib (BAY 43-9006, serine/threonine kinase RAF1, and BRAF inhibitor) and semaxanib (SU5416, vascular endothelial cell growth factor receptor inhibitor) are RTK inhibitors that can block RET signaling and suppress growth of RET p thyroid cancers ( Carlomagno et al., 2006 ; Mologni et al., 2006 ). Sorafenib directly suppresses the kinase activity of RET, and promotes lysosomal degradation of RET protein ( Plaza-Menacho et al., 2007 ). RET p melanomas may be appropriate targets for using these RTK inhibitors, particularly those showing neurotropism. Our findings of melanoma cells with RET p/wt and BRAF mt/wt in combination suggest that some of the current clinical trials with these inhibitors may be working through the RETp pathway. To date, the association of BRAF mt in melanoma with response to Sorafenib alone has not been demonstrated. RET p could be a key factor in the proliferation and invasion of malignant melanoma cells, and its high incidence in DM may explain why this malignancy often exhibits neurotropism. In our study, inhibition of RET signaling suppressed all proliferation and invasion in melanomas. This suggests that RET p could be a new RTK target for treatment of malignant melanomas. Regimens based on RTK inhibitors selective for RET may be particularly promising when, unfortunately, metastatic melanoma therapeutic treatments beyond surgery have had limited success to date. 