Tamoxifen and the Risk of Ovarian Cancer in BRCA1 Mutation Carriers Objective BRCA1 mutation carriers have a high rate of both breast and ovarian cancer. Tamoxifen is a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), which is used for the treatment of primary breast cancer and for the prevention of contralateral breast cancer. Our objective is to assess if tamoxifen treatment is associated with an increase in the subsequent risk of ovarian cancer among women with a BRCA1 mutation. Methods A matched case-control study was performed. Cases were 154 women with ovarian cancer and a previous history of breast cancer. Controls were 560 women with no ovarian cancer and a history of breast cancer. All cases and controls carry a deleterious BRCA1 mutation. Cases and controls were matched for year of birth, age at diagnosis of breast cancer and country of residence. The effect of tamoxifen treatment on the risk of subsequent ovarian cancer was estimated using conditional logistic regression. Results The unadjusted odds ratio for ovarian cancer, given previous tamoxifen treatment was 0.89 (95% CI 0.54–1.49, p = 0.66). After adjusting for other treatments, the odds ratio was 0.78 (95% CI 0.46–1.33, p = 0.36). Conclusion Tamoxifen treatment for breast cancer does not appear to increase the risk of ovarian cancer in BRCA1 mutation carriers.  Patients and Methods Study population Eligible study participants were women who carry a deleterious mutation in the BRCA1 gene. Women were identified at the clinical genetics centers of affiliated hospitals in eight participating countries: Canada, France, Israel, Italy, Norway, Poland, UK and the USA. All women provided written informed consent. BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation testing was performed in their country of residence. The participants completed a risk-factor questionnaire, which included information on their reproductive and medical histories. For women with a past history of breast cancer, this included type of surgery, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, including tamoxifen and radiotherapy. Lifestyle factors including the use of oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy were also collected. The majority of participants completed the questionnaire during an outpatient visit to their genetics clinic. However, some completed it at home and mailed it to the study center. The ethics committees of all participating centers approved the study. We restricted the study to 3038 women with a previous history of breast cancer (very few women without breast cancer had taken tamoxifen for chemoprevention). We excluded women who had ovarian cancer diagnosed before breast cancer ( n = 59). We also excluded 421 subjects for whom data was missing on one or more key variables (tamoxifen use, year of breast or ovarian cancer diagnosis, oophorectomy or year of oophorectomy). The remaining 2558 women are the subjects of the present study. We did not include women with a BRCA2 mutation in this study due to the small number of women with ovarian cancer and a previous history of breast cancer. Among these breast cancer patients, cases were defined as women who had a subsequent diagnosis of ovarian cancer and controls were defined as women who did not later develop ovarian cancer. For each case, one or more control was selected; matched on date of birth (± three years), age at diagnosis of breast cancer (± three years) and country of residence. By this process, we generated 154 matched sets, comprised of 154 case patients with breast and ovarian cancer and 560 control patients with breast cancer only.  Study population Eligible study participants were women who carry a deleterious mutation in the BRCA1 gene. Women were identified at the clinical genetics centers of affiliated hospitals in eight participating countries: Canada, France, Israel, Italy, Norway, Poland, UK and the USA. All women provided written informed consent. BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation testing was performed in their country of residence. The participants completed a risk-factor questionnaire, which included information on their reproductive and medical histories. For women with a past history of breast cancer, this included type of surgery, chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, including tamoxifen and radiotherapy. Lifestyle factors including the use of oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy were also collected. The majority of participants completed the questionnaire during an outpatient visit to their genetics clinic. However, some completed it at home and mailed it to the study center. The ethics committees of all participating centers approved the study. We restricted the study to 3038 women with a previous history of breast cancer (very few women without breast cancer had taken tamoxifen for chemoprevention). We excluded women who had ovarian cancer diagnosed before breast cancer ( n = 59). We also excluded 421 subjects for whom data was missing on one or more key variables (tamoxifen use, year of breast or ovarian cancer diagnosis, oophorectomy or year of oophorectomy). The remaining 2558 women are the subjects of the present study. We did not include women with a BRCA2 mutation in this study due to the small number of women with ovarian cancer and a previous history of breast cancer. Among these breast cancer patients, cases were defined as women who had a subsequent diagnosis of ovarian cancer and controls were defined as women who did not later develop ovarian cancer. For each case, one or more control was selected; matched on date of birth (± three years), age at diagnosis of breast cancer (± three years) and country of residence. By this process, we generated 154 matched sets, comprised of 154 case patients with breast and ovarian cancer and 560 control patients with breast cancer only.  Methods Cases and controls were compared for a number of variables, including date of birth, date of diagnosis of breast cancer, age at diagnosis of breast cancer, treatment for breast cancer (surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy) oral contraceptive use, hormone replacement treatment use and parity ( Table 1 ). Student’s t test was used to test for statistical significance for continuous variables and the chi-square test was used for categorical variables. We calculated the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for ovarian cancer, given tamoxifen use, with unconditional logistic regression. A multivariable odds ratio was then estimated, adjusting for radiotherapy treatment (yes/no), chemotherapy (yes/no), type of breast cancer surgery (mastectomy vs. lumpectomy), age at diagnosis of breast cancer (trend), oral contraceptive use (yes/no), hormone replacement therapy use (yes/no) and parity (0, 1, 2, 3, 4+). The multivariable adjusted odds ratios and 95% CI were estimated using of SAS (version 9.1.3) and p < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.  Results Cases and controls are compared in Table 1 . No differences were found in the average year of birth or age at diagnosis between the cases and controls. The distribution of types of treatments was similar for cases and controls. Approximately 20% of all the patients had been treated with tamoxifen. We performed univariable and multivariable analyses to assess the association between tamoxifen treatment and the risk of subsequent ovarian cancer. The odds ratio for ovarian cancer, given tamoxifen treatment was 0.89 (95% CI 0.54–1.49, p = 0.66) in the univariable analysis ( Table 2 ). In the multivariable analysis, we adjusted for radiotherapy, chemotherapy, breast cancer surgery (mastectomy vs. lumpectomy), age at diagnosis of breast cancer, oral contraceptive use, hormone replacement therapy use and parity. The odds ratio for ovarian cancer associated with tamoxifen treatment was 0.78 (95% CI 0.46–1.33, p = 0.36).  Results Cases and controls are compared in Table 1 . No differences were found in the average year of birth or age at diagnosis between the cases and controls. The distribution of types of treatments was similar for cases and controls. Approximately 20% of all the patients had been treated with tamoxifen. We performed univariable and multivariable analyses to assess the association between tamoxifen treatment and the risk of subsequent ovarian cancer. The odds ratio for ovarian cancer, given tamoxifen treatment was 0.89 (95% CI 0.54–1.49, p = 0.66) in the univariable analysis ( Table 2 ). In the multivariable analysis, we adjusted for radiotherapy, chemotherapy, breast cancer surgery (mastectomy vs. lumpectomy), age at diagnosis of breast cancer, oral contraceptive use, hormone replacement therapy use and parity. The odds ratio for ovarian cancer associated with tamoxifen treatment was 0.78 (95% CI 0.46–1.33, p = 0.36).  Discussion Tamoxifen has been shown to reduce the risk of distal recurrence in women with estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer by almost one-half, and to reduce the breast cancer mortality rate in these patients by one-third [ 10 ]. Tamoxifen has also been associated with a reduction in the risk of contralateral breast cancer in the general population and in BRCA1 carriers [ 11 ] and [ 12 ]. In our study, tamoxifen treatment for breast cancer was not associated with an increase in the subsequent risk of ovarian cancer. It is important to address this question because BRCA1 carriers are at increased risk for cancer at both sites. Metcalfe et al. found the 10-year actuarial risk of ovarian cancer after breast cancer in BRCA1 patients to be 12.7% [ 4 ]. The physiology of tamoxifen is complex; for example it has the properties of an estrogen antagonist in the breast epithelium, and as an agonist in the endometrium. This state of hyperestrogenism in the endometrium is known to cause hyperplasia and cancer. The physiological effect of tamoxifen on the ovary is less clear. Exogenous estrogen appears to increase the risk of ovarian cancer in post-menopausal women [ 8 ] and [ 9 ]and it is a concern that tamoxifen may exert a similar effect. Many ovarian cancers have been shown to be estrogen dependent with approximately 60% expressing estrogen receptors [ 13 ] and [ 14 ]. In vitro , estrogen has been shown to mediate proliferation in human ovarian cell lines [ 15 ]. Tamoxifen is thought to have pro-estrogenic effects on the ovaries and currently is used to treat patients with recurrent, or persistent ovarian tumors. Hatch et al. treated 105 patients with advanced ovarian cancer with tamoxifen, whose disease had persisted or recurred after primary surgery and first-line chemotherapy [ 16 ]. They found a 10% complete response rate and an 8% partial response rate. Additional studies including previously treated patients with advanced ovarian cancer [ 17 ], [ 18 ] and [ 19 ] and asymptomatic patients with recurrent small-volume cancer[ 20 ] found more modest response rates to tamoxifen treatment. Cohen et al. reported an incidence of ovarian cancers of 5.7% (10/175) in post-menopausal breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen, a rate 4–5 times the expected [ 21 ]. However, this was not confirmed in several additional studies, among them the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study in which patients were randomized to tamoxifen or placebo [ 6 ], [ 22 ] and [ 23 ] All incident cancers were noted and no difference in the incidence of ovarian cancer was found. Our study is the first to evaluate the risk of ovarian cancer with tamoxifen treatment in BRCA1 mutation carriers. The strength of our paper is access to a unique population of women who are susceptible to both types of cancer. Currently, the majority of carriers of BRCA1 mutations undergo an oophorectomy to reduce their risk of ovarian cancer, but as many as 30–40% of women with BRCA1 mutations do not elect to undergo the procedure [ 24 ]. Hence, it is important to study factors which potentially influence the risk of developing ovarian cancer. In conclusion, these data suggest that tamoxifen treatment can be offered to BRCA1 carriers for treatment or prophylaxis without increasing their risk of ovarian cancer.  Discussion Tamoxifen has been shown to reduce the risk of distal recurrence in women with estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer by almost one-half, and to reduce the breast cancer mortality rate in these patients by one-third [ 10 ]. Tamoxifen has also been associated with a reduction in the risk of contralateral breast cancer in the general population and in BRCA1 carriers [ 11 ] and [ 12 ]. In our study, tamoxifen treatment for breast cancer was not associated with an increase in the subsequent risk of ovarian cancer. It is important to address this question because BRCA1 carriers are at increased risk for cancer at both sites. Metcalfe et al. found the 10-year actuarial risk of ovarian cancer after breast cancer in BRCA1 patients to be 12.7% [ 4 ]. The physiology of tamoxifen is complex; for example it has the properties of an estrogen antagonist in the breast epithelium, and as an agonist in the endometrium. This state of hyperestrogenism in the endometrium is known to cause hyperplasia and cancer. The physiological effect of tamoxifen on the ovary is less clear. Exogenous estrogen appears to increase the risk of ovarian cancer in post-menopausal women [ 8 ] and [ 9 ]and it is a concern that tamoxifen may exert a similar effect. Many ovarian cancers have been shown to be estrogen dependent with approximately 60% expressing estrogen receptors [ 13 ] and [ 14 ]. In vitro , estrogen has been shown to mediate proliferation in human ovarian cell lines [ 15 ]. Tamoxifen is thought to have pro-estrogenic effects on the ovaries and currently is used to treat patients with recurrent, or persistent ovarian tumors. Hatch et al. treated 105 patients with advanced ovarian cancer with tamoxifen, whose disease had persisted or recurred after primary surgery and first-line chemotherapy [ 16 ]. They found a 10% complete response rate and an 8% partial response rate. Additional studies including previously treated patients with advanced ovarian cancer [ 17 ], [ 18 ] and [ 19 ] and asymptomatic patients with recurrent small-volume cancer[ 20 ] found more modest response rates to tamoxifen treatment. Cohen et al. reported an incidence of ovarian cancers of 5.7% (10/175) in post-menopausal breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen, a rate 4–5 times the expected [ 21 ]. However, this was not confirmed in several additional studies, among them the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project P-1 Study in which patients were randomized to tamoxifen or placebo [ 6 ], [ 22 ] and [ 23 ] All incident cancers were noted and no difference in the incidence of ovarian cancer was found. Our study is the first to evaluate the risk of ovarian cancer with tamoxifen treatment in BRCA1 mutation carriers. The strength of our paper is access to a unique population of women who are susceptible to both types of cancer. Currently, the majority of carriers of BRCA1 mutations undergo an oophorectomy to reduce their risk of ovarian cancer, but as many as 30–40% of women with BRCA1 mutations do not elect to undergo the procedure [ 24 ]. Hence, it is important to study factors which potentially influence the risk of developing ovarian cancer. In conclusion, these data suggest that tamoxifen treatment can be offered to BRCA1 carriers for treatment or prophylaxis without increasing their risk of ovarian cancer. 