The Role of Src in Solid Tumors The proto-oncogene c-Src (Src) is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase whose expression and activity is correlated with advanced malignancy and poor prognosis in a variety of human cancers. Nine additional enzymes with homology to Src have been identified and collectively are referred to as the Src family kinases (SFKs). Together, SFKs represent the largest family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases and interact directly with receptor tyrosine kinases, G-protein-coupled receptors, steroid receptors, signal transducers and activators of transcription and molecules involved in cell adhesion and migration. These interactions lead to a diverse array of biological functions including proliferation, cell growth, differentiation, cell shape, motility, migration, angiogenesis, and survival. Studies investigating mutational activation of Src in human cancers suggest this may be a rare event and wild-type Src is weakly oncogenic. Thus, the role of Src in the development and progression of human cancer has remained unclear. Recently, it has been suggested that increased SFK protein levels and, more importantly, SFK tyrosine kinase activity is linked to cancer progression and metastatic disease by facilitating the action of other signaling proteins. This accumulating body of evidence indicates that SFKs may represent a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of solid tumors. This review discusses the role of SFKs in solid tumors and the recent therapeutic advances aimed at targeting this family of tyrosine kinases in cancer.  Conclusions and Future Directions Accumulating evidence suggests an important role for SFKs in solid tumors from a variety of tissues. The array of receptors that trigger SFK activity and the subsequent activation of downstream effectors present a compelling therapeutic target for treatment modalities in cancer management. SFK directed TKIs have potential use as single-agent therapy in some disease states. However in other forms of cancer, like malignancies of the breast, there is only a limited amount of evidence obtained that implicates single-agent SFK inhibition as a potentially effective intervention. Src’s involvement with numerous growth and cell metabolism functions suggests combinations with chemotherapeutics is worth additional evaluation. Preclinical and early phase trial data suggest compelling combination regimens with targeted therapies, such as a Src/SFK inhibitor and an EGFR inhibitor, would warrant further investigation. The array of tyrosine kinase inhibitors with activity against Src and other SFKs is noteworthy ( Table 2 ), and presents a considerable possibility for future investigation. These agents also feature different affinities for Src/SFK inhibition, as well as separate inhibitory activity against other molecules, suggesting variations in binding potential as well as mechanism of action within the class. Dasatinib is FDA approved for the treatment of imatinib-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and Philadelphia chromosome positive acute lymphocytic leukemia (Ph+ ALL). Bosutinib is currently in phase II/III clinical trials and will likely be available for future clinical usage in the near future. AZD-0530 and XL-99 are currently being investigated in phase II trials. These drugs, coupled with existing molecular targeting agents or other molecules, cytotoxins, radiotherapy, and surgical interventions present a wide array of new therapeutic approaches to evaluate. Ongoing work continues to highlight the most effective of these that will control the aberrant intracellular signaling that is the hallmark of oncogenesis. 