MMTV mouse models and the diagnostic values of MMTV-like sequences in human breast cancer Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) long terminal repeat (LTR)-driven transgenic mice are excellent models for breast cancer as they allow for the targeted expression of various oncogenes and growth factors in neoplastic transformation of mammary glands. Numerous MMTV-LTR-driven transgenic mouse models of breast cancer have been created in the past three decades, including MMTV-neu/ErbB2, cyclin D1, cyclin E, Ras, Myc, int-1 and c-rel. These transgenic mice develop mammary tumors with different latency, histology and invasiveness, reflecting the oncogenic pathways activated by the transgene. Recently, homologous sequences of the env gene of MMTV have been identified in approximately 40% of human breast cancers, but not in normal breast or other types of cancers, suggesting possible involvement of mammary tumor virus in human breast carcinogenesis. Accumulating evidence demonstrates the association of MMTV provirus with progesterone receptor, p53 mutations and advanced-stage breast cancer. Thus, the detection of MMTV-like sequences may have diagnostic value to predict the clinical outcome of breast cancer patients.  Expert commentary Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in women. Despite major advances in its diagnosis and treatment, several major clinical and scientific problems remain unsolved. It is of critical importance to identify genetic alterations responsible for the initiation of malignant transformation of the breast epithelium in order to identify targets for novel drug discovery. Overexpression of HER2/neu, cyclin D1, cyclin E, c-Myc and WNT1, and mutation of Ras have been reported in human breast cancer and, in the case of HER2/neu, cyclin D1, cyclin E and c-Myc, are associated with poor prognosis of patients. In mouse models of human breast cancer, the MMTV-LTR promoter has most frequently been used, and among MMTV LTR-driven mouse models, MMTV- neu/ErbB2 , - cyclin D1 , - Ras , - Myc and - int-1 models have been especially well studied and characterized. These transgenic models of breast cancer have provided invaluable insights into the molecular mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis and tumor progression. It was concluded by a panel of experts in mammary gland pathology that these genetically engineered mouse models often develop breast carcinomas that are indistinguishable from human neoplasia. However, there are critical differences between mice and humans. Approximately 50% of human breast cancers are positive for ER? and responsive to estrogen, while tumors that arise in genetically engineered mice are usually ER?-negative and hormone-independent. The exception is MMTV- cyclin D1T286A mice, which are ER-positive. Another issue is that mouse mammary tumors are much less fibroblastic compared with human breast carcinomas (i.e., human mammary glands consist mainly of connective tissue stroma while mouse mammary glands are mainly composed of adipose tissues). Moreover, most mammary gland-induced tumors metastasize to the lung in mice, while breast cancer metastases tend to appear in the lymph nodes, lungs, bones and liver in approximately the same proportion in humans. Since metastatic disease is usually the cause of breast cancer-related death, generation of mouse models that reflect metastatic site preference of human breast cancer remains to be established. Published studies report detection of the env -like DNA sequence of MMTV in 35–40% of human breast cancer samples but only in 0–2% of normal tissues. Based on these studies, the viral sequence is highly specific to breast cancer and, thus, the MMTV env -like gene could be an excellent molecular marker for breast cancer. Indeed, several studies have shown that the presence of MMTV-like sequences was associated with progesterone receptor, nuclear p53 and advanced clinical stages. However, the frequency of detection of MMTV-like sequences greatly varies from 0 to 100% depending on the specimen, the country where the study is conducted, and the methods used. Scientists have tried PCR followed by Southern blotting, nested PCR or FN-PCR with laser microdissection to detect MMTV env -like and other sequences, but so far there is no general consensus which method is the best for the detection of HMTV in human breast cancer samples. Thus, the establishment of highly sensitive and reproducible methods for HMTV provirus DNA detection is essential to determine the diagnostic values of HMTV in human breast cancer.  Five-year view Constitutive transgenic mouse models that depend on mammary-specific promoters to control transgene expression provide invaluable information on the signaling pathways involved in breast cancer development. However, they may have limited utility for studying the effect of developmental events on breast cancer risk since the hormonal signals governing these events also influence transgene expression levels. Novel transgenic mouse systems that use the MMTV-LTR to drive expression of the rt TA and the regular tetracycline-dependent transactivator ( t TA) have recently been reported and reviewed in this paper [ 104 – 107 , 138 ]. Transgene expression using these tet -controlled systems can be rapidly induced and de-induced, are highly specific to mammary glands and are reproducibly determined over a wide range of expression levels. These tet -controlled systems will be more widely used in the near future to study the effects of oncoprotein expression in mammary glands. Another future direction is the use of the Cre-LoxP1 recombination system. With this system, it has now become possible to delete tumor-suppressor genes selectively in the mammary gland [ 139 , 140 ]. With these techniques, more physiological models of breast cancer will be created within the next 5 years. Notwithstanding these technical advances, the value of MMTV-LTR-driven mouse models of breast cancer has been re-evaluated since the discovery of MMTV env -like sequences in the DNA from human breast carcinomas, which are typically absent in normal breast tissues or other types of cancers. Although the entire 9.9-kb proviral structure has been clarified for HMTV, cloning of HMTV insertion sites in human carcinomas has not been reported. This can potentially be attributed to the technical difficulties encountered in the associated studies. Identification of HMTV target genes and creation of mouse models for the candidate gene will be essential for understanding the roles of HMTV in human breast carcinogenesis. The prognostic value of MMTV env -like sequences, envelope protein gp52 and LTR superantigen should be determined in a large prospective study since a significant percentage of breast cancers are positive for these markers. If some human breast cancers have been caused by integration of MMTV-like retrovirus, the tumor cells will exhibit viral antigens both internally and on their surface. As a consequence, viral antigens in tumors will represent a potential antigenic target that is clearly different from normal tissues. As a matter of fact, MMTV- env -like sequences have not been detected in normal tissues. If HMTV is found to possess a bona fide role in human breast cancer development in the near future, the possibility of developing vaccines to prevent infection against such a virus becomes reasonable. This is potentially an extremely exciting discovery that may lead to a reduction in morbidity and mortality from human breast cancers. Key issues Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-transgenic mice are invaluable models for human breast cancer. There are three different breast cancer models for neu/ErbB2 mice. They show different latency for tumor development and invasiveness dependent on the gene expressed (mutant or wild-type ErbB2) and on the promoter used ( MMTV-LTR or endogenous ErbB2 promoter). Similar to HER2-positive human breast carcinomas, mammary tumorigenesis in mice requires gene amplification and elevated expression of the ErbB2 gene. MMTV- cyclin D1 mice show much longer latency for breast tumor development (?22 months) than MMTV- neu or MMTV- ErbB2 mice, but the tumorigenesis is significantly accelerated in the MMTV- D1T286A strain that expresses stable cyclin D1. LMW cyclin E overexpression strongly selects for spontaneous inactivation of the Arf-p53 pathway in vivo , thereby canceling its protective checkpoint function and accelerating progression to breast cancer. Bitransgenic mice expressing both c- Myc and activated Ras under the control of MMTV-LTR developed focal mammary carcinomas with a dramatically shortened latency period, indicating c- Myc and activated Ras cooperate to accelerate mammary tumor development with pronounced malignancy. The int genes were originally identified as oncogenes activated by the insertion of MMTV in virus-induced mammary adenocarcinomas. MMTV- int-1 transgenic mice exhibit stochastically developed mammary carcinomas, suggesting that additional events are necessary for tumorigenesis. MMTV env -like sequences have been isolated from approximately 38% of human breast cancer DNA, but not in normal breast tissues or other types of carcinomas. A 9.9-kb HMTV provirus with 95% homology to MMTV has been amplified from two human breast cancer samples. MMTV-like LTR superantigen was reported to be present in 42% of human breast cancer, suggesting a role in human breast carcinogenesis. The association of MMTV-like DNA sequences with progesterone receptor, nuclear p53 accumulation suggestive of p53 mutation, and advanced stage of breast cancer indicates that tumors with MMTV-like sequences are associated with hormonal response and prognosis of patients.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Signaling pathways involving target proteins overexpressed in mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) breast cancer models HER2/neu is an orphan receptor that can be activated by overexpression or mutation of the transactivating domain (rat neu). Overexpression of HER2/neu results in enhanced cell survival and mitogenicity and its deregulation can lead to breast tumorigenesis. Erk activation by the Ras–Raf pathway leads to cell proliferation through the activation of a number of nuclear targets. Activation of the PI3K–Akt pathway results in enhanced survival through inhibition of proapoptosis proteins, such as Bad, GSK3 and the transcription factor FKHR-L1. A major mitogenic player acting downstream of ErbB2 is cyclin D1 [ 46 ]. Once bound by Wnt, the Frizzled/LDL-related protein (LRP) coreceptor complex activates the canonical signaling pathway. Frizzled interacts with Dsh, a cytoplasmic protein that functions upstream of ?-catenin and the kinase GSK3?. Wnt signaling controls phosphorylation of Dsh. Wnts are thought to induce the phosphorylation of LRP by GSK3? and CK1?, thus regulating the docking of Axin. The recruitment of Axin away from the destruction complex leads to the stabilization of ?-catenin. In the nucleus, ?-catenin displaces Groucho from Tcf/Lef to promote the transcription of Wnt target genes, one of which is cyclin D1. As indicated, a number of pathways lead from the receptors to enhanced activation of cyclin D1, thereby promoting cell cycle progression. c-Myc is one of the direct targets of E2Fs. Although both c-Myc and cyclin D1 rescue the CSF-1 response and regulate each other [ 141 ], MMTV- Myc -induced breast cancer development is not dependent on cyclin D1 [ 46 ]. Dmp1 is a unique transcription factor that regulates the Arf-Mdm2-p53 tumor surveillance pathway [ 142 – 151 ]. APC: Adenomatosis polyposis coli; Cdc25: Cell division cycle 25; Dsh: Dishevelled; DHFR: Dihydrofolate reductase; GSK3?: Glycogen synthase kinase 3?; IKK: I?B kinase; LEF: Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor; Pol?: DNA polymerase ?; TCF: T-cell factor; TK: Thymidine kinase; TS: Thymidylate synthase. Figure 2 Breast cancers found in mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-<italic>neu</italic> mice Wild-type MMTV- neu (rat neu with mutation of the transmembrane domain) mice develop multiple breast tumors at approximately 7 months in FVB/NJ background. Breast carcinogenesis is accelerated to 4–5 months when both alleles contain the mutant neu transgene. Induction of cyclin D1 and Cdk4 plays critical roles in breast carcinogenesis by neu . (A & B) Macroscopic picture of a tumor-bearing MMTV- neu mouse. (C) H&E staining of breast tumors. (D–F) Detection of (D) cyclin D1, (E) Cdk4 and (F) Ki67. Both cyclin D1 and Cdk4 are induced by c-ErbB2/neu and play essential roles in breast carcinogenesis. Magnification: ×40. Table 1 Tumor-free survival, accelerating factors and histopathology of mouse mammary tumor virus transgenic breast cancer models Transgene Mouse model Tumor-free survival (months) Tumor formation in compound mice Pathology Ref. neu/ErbB2 MMTV- neu (mutant) 5–10 Adenocarcinoma, multifocal, metastatic [ 26 – 28 ] MMTV- ErbB2 (wild-type) 7–12 (205–367 days) * 5 months in WAP- p53–172H Adenocarcinoma [ 31 , 32 ] No change in Ink4a/Arf +/- [ 33 ] ErbB2 knock-in (mutant) 14.7 Adenocarcinoma, rare metastasis [ 34 ] cyclin D1 MMTV- cyclin D1 18–22 Papillary adenocarcinoma [ 43 , 44 ] MMTV- cyclin D1T286A 18 Secretory glandular adenocarcinoma, multifocal [ 44 ] cyclin E MMTV- cyclin E 17 10.4% adenocarcinoma, 14.3% metastasis [ 58 ] MMTV- cyclin E EL1/EL4 18.6 11.6 months in p53 +/- 27.4% adenocarcinoma, 16.7% metastasis MMTV- cyclin E T1 17.2 10.7 months in p53 +/- 30.2% adenocarcinoma, 25% metastasis Ha-Ras MMTV- Ras 5.6 (168 days) ‡ 1.5 months with MMTV-c- Myc Adenocarcinoma [ 64 ] 9.0 ‡ 2.3 months in p53 -/- Higher histological grade, genomic instability [ 65 ] 5.1 (154 days) ‡ 3.1 months in p21cip1 -/- [ 67 ] 10.0 ‡ 6 months in p21cip1 -/- [ 69 ] c-Myc MMTV- c-Myc 10.8 (325 days) Adenocarcinoma [ 74 ] 7 No change in p21cip1 -/- [ 75 ] int-1/Wnt1 MMTV- int-1 5–6 (virgin females) 2.9 months in p53 -/- Stochastically develop adenocarcinoma [ 93 , 94 ] 4 (breeding females) [ 94 ] c-rel MMTV- c-rel 20 (32% of transgenics) Adenocarcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, spindle cell, papillary carcinoma [ 102 ] The results for cross of MMTV mammary tumor models with other transgenic mouse models (WAP- p53–172H ; MMTV-c- Myc ) or tumor-suppressor gene-knockout mice ( Ink4a/Arf -null, p53 -null or p21 cip1 -null) are shown in the column of ‘Tumor formation in compound mice’. * Tumor-free survival of MMTV- ErbB2 mice is dependent on the strain (i.e., 205 days in N#202, 261 days in N#721 and 367 days in N#510). ‡ There are a significant differences in tumor-free survival of MMTV- Ras mice dependent on the genetic background. The mean tumor onset is 5–6 months in FVB/N and 9–10 months in FVB/N × C57BL/6/× BALB/c mixed genetic background. MMTV: Mouse mammary tumor virus. Table 2 Tumor spectra and the frequency of extra-mammary gland tumors reported in mouse mammary tumor virus transgenic models Transgene Mouse model Other types of tumors Ref. neu/ErbB2 MMTV- neu (mutant) Salivary gland hyperplasia and hypertrophy (TG.NA, TG.NF) Papillary hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the epididymis (TG.NA, TG.NB, TG.NF) Harderian gland dysplasia (TG.NA, TG.NB, TG.NF) [ 26 ] MMTV- ErbB2 (wild-type) Not reported [ 31 , 32 ] ErbB2 knock-in (mutant) Not reported [ 34 ] cyclin D1 MMTV- cyclin D1 Not reported [ 43 , 44 ] MMTV- cyclin D1T286A Not reported [ 44 ] cyclin E MMTV- cyclin E MMTV- cyclin E EL1/EL4 MMTV- cyclin E T1 Not reported [ 58 ] Ha-Ras MMTV- Ras Harderian gland hyperplasia, 20% in TG.SH and 14% in TG.SQ Salivary gland adenocarcinoma: 17% Lymphoblastic lymphoma: 3% [ 64 ] c-Myc MMTV- c-Myc Not reported [ 64 ] c-Myc/Ras MMTV- c-Myc/Ras B-cell lymphoma: 38% Salivary gland adenocarcinoma: 19% Harderian gland hyperplasia: 19% Seminal vesicle neoplasm: 5% 1 out of 21 mice showed triple neoplasia 1 out of 21 mice showed quadruple neoplasia [ 64 ] int-1/Wnt1 MMTV- int-1 Salivary gland adenocarcinoma in 1 out of 24 females (line 303) [ 93 , 94 ] c-rel MMTV- c-rel Not reported [ 102 ] MMTV-LTR has been shown to be active in the salivary glands, Harderian glands and epididymis, and contributes to tumor formation in these tissues. In addition, increased occurrence of lymphomas has also been reported in c-Myc/Ras double transgenics. These extramammary gland tumors have not been reported in MMTV- ErbB2 (wild-type, mutant knock-in), cyclin D1 (wild-type, T286A) cyclin E , c-Myc or c-rel mice. 