Epidemiologic evaluation of pharmaceuticals with limited evidence of carcinogenicity Thorough review by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has resulted in classifying many substances, including pharmaceuticals, as probably or possibly carcinogenic to humans, based on experiments on animals or limited data on humans. We evaluated nine such pharmaceuticals for evidence of carcinogenicity in patients receiving them in a large medical care program with automated pharmacy records and a cancer registry. Nested case-control analyses were performed in a cohort of 6.5 million subscribers with up to 12 years of follow-up, focusing on cancer sites suggested by previous evidence and other sites with odds ratio of at least 1.50, p < 0.01, and some evidence of dose-response.. Unmeasured confounding was estimated in sensitivity analyses. We found some supportive evidence for carcinogenicity of griseofulvin, metronidazole, and phenytoin and for the known carcinogen, cyclophosphamide, which was added for validation of our data and analyses. Findings for chloramphenicol, iron-dextran complex, phenoxybenzamine, and phenobarbital were essentially non-contributory. Confounding by cigarette smoking and prior thyroid disease could account, respectively, for associations of oxazepam with lung cancer and propylthiouracil with thyroid cancer. Although not definitive, these findings should be considered in the evaluations of these pharmaceuticals.  Methods Setting The study setting is the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program in northern California (KPMCP). The KPMCP is an integrated prepaid health care delivery system that provides comprehensive inpatient and outpatient care, including pharmacy services to over 3 million current members, who comprise about 30 percent of the residents of the areas served surrounding San Francisco Bay and in the Central Valley. The membership is fairly representative of the local population except for some under-representation of both extremes of the economic spectrum ( 11 ). Reflecting their local communities, the members are ethnically diverse. In the 2005 Member Health Survey ( http://www.dor.kaiser.org/dor/mhsnet/public/pdf_05_public/mhs05reg-html_e.htm ) adults age 20 years and older were: 62% white non-Hispanic, 17% Asian non-Hispanic, 12% Latino/Hispanic, 6% African-American, and 3% other ethnicities. Pharmaceuticals Ascertainment of pharmaceutical use was based on the program’s Pharmacy Information Management System (PIMS), which records all prescriptions dispensed to outpatients. Surveys of subscribers with drug coverage, i.e., at least partial payment for prescriptions by KPMCP, indicate that they fill nearly 100% of their prescriptions at KPMCP pharmacies ( 12 ). A total of 6,465,309 KPMCP subscribers with drug coverage during the period of study, defined below, were identified and constitute the study cohort. The numbers of recipients of each drug studied are shown in Table 1 . The classes and indications for the drugs studied are as follows: chloramphenicol—antibacterial, now just used topically in our setting, mainly as eye drops; cyclophosphamide—cancer chemotherapy and for auto-immune conditions and immune suppression in organ transplant patients; griseovulvin—anti-fungal; iron-dextran complex—injected for iron deficiency anemia; metronidazole—anti-infective used to treat protozoal and susceptible anaerobic bacterial infections; oxazepam—tranquillizer; phenobarbital—sedative, hypnotic and anti-convulsive; phenoxybenzamine—anti-adrenergic used to treat pheochromocytoma and hypertensive crisis; phenytoin—anti-convulsive; propylthiouracil—anti-thyroid drug. These drugs are available only by prescription in our program. Cancer occurrence Occurrence of invasive cancer, plus non-invasive cancers of the urinary bladder, was ascertained through KPMCP’s Cancer Registry, which covers all subscribers and contributes to the local Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program ( 13 ). The period of study for both prescription dispensing and cancer occurrence was from August 1994, when PIMS was implemented in all facilities, through June 2006. Altogether there were 131,743 patients with at least one incident cancer in this database. The numbers of patients with cancer at each site included in this report are shown in Table 2 . We grouped cancers of the tongue, floor of mouth, gum, tonsil, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and other oral/pharynx into one category, mouth/pharynx and analyzed cancers of the lip, tonsil and nasopharynx each as separate sites. The index date for analysis was the date of first diagnosis of the cancer of interest. Control selection For each of the case-patients, ten control subscribers free of the cancer of interest on the date of the case’s diagnosis were randomly selected from all of the program’s subscribers of the same sex, same year of birth and same year of starting drug coverage. Controls were not excluded if they developed the same cancer later and they could be included more than once for different cancer cases but not for the same case. Fewer than ten matched controls could be found for some very elderly cancer patients. For example, three women, age 99, 100, and 101 years at breast cancer diagnosis, could be matched with only 2, 8, and 3 controls, respectively. The index date for controls was the date in the same year as their matched case’s diagnosis, which provided equal follow-back time. Analyses For these analyses we used a nested case-control approach with risk-set controls ( 14 ). The odds ratio of cancer at 56 sites including unspecified and all cancers combined was estimated by conditional logistic regression using the SAS system ( 15 ). The three comparisons made were: any use vs. no use before index date, any use vs. no use at least two years before index date to rule out pre-diagnostic prescribing for symptoms possibly related to cancer (“2-year lag”), and one, two, and at least three prescriptions dispensed vs. no use to ascertain possibly greater risk for longer use. Statistical significance is claimed for odds ratio estimates if their 95% confidence intervals do not overlap 1.0. The findings presented for the cancer sites previously associated with the drugs based on animal experiments and/or limited data in humans ( Table 3 ) are for two-year lag and three or more prescriptions dispensed. To reduce the probability of false positive findings due to chance or confounding, for a newly associated site to be presented ( Table 4 ) the two-year lag/three or more dispensings odds ratio had to be at least 1.50, with p < 0.01, and greater than the odds ratio for one dispensing as some indication of dose-response. The matching variables, age, sex, and length of time with drug coverage in the program, were the only characteristics available on the entire study population. Increased risk of cancer of the anus and other skin (sometimes Kaposi’s sarcoma) was noted for cyclophosphamide and metronidazole. Since HIV-positive patients are at increased risk for these cancers, analyses for these two drugs were repeated excluding 1) any case-control sets with cases listed in the program’s HIV registry and 2) any controls so listed regardless of set. Sensitivity analysis Due to our inability to control for most cancer risk factors we conducted sensitivity analyses, using the method of external adjustment of Schneeweiss ( 16 ), to estimate bias in our risk estimates that might be due to unknown and uncontrolled confounding. The method requires specification of the risk of cancer associated with the confounder, the prevalence of the confounder and of users of the drug in the study population, and the strength of association between the confounder and the drug. Since this method allows adjustment for only a single variable, we assumed that confounding from all sources combined entailed a dichotomy of cancer risk in our subjects, ranging in risk ratios from 3.0 to 0.33. Compared to weaker associations with cancer, these two values had the most effect and were used to set upper and lower sensitivity analysis limits on the odds ratio. When the prevalence of the increased/decreased cancer risk subgroup was set at 10%, 25% and 50%, we found that 25% for positive confounding and 50% for negative confounding yielded the largest change in the observed odds ratio and they were used to set the sensitivity limits. The odds ratio for the association of use of the drug with the subgroup was set at 2.0. Varying the prevalence of use of the drug in the population between 10% and 0.1% produced virtually the same result; 1% was used here. The spreadsheet program (available for downloading at www.drugepi.org ) generates the percent bias under these various assumptions, which is applied to the observed odds ratio. For example, if the percent bias is +10% and the observed odds ratio is 1.50, the adjusted odds ratio is 1.50/1.10 = 1.36. With the assumptions used, the percent bias was always approximately 20.0% for positive confounding and 16.8% for negative confounding, which is equivalent to decreasing/increasing the odds ratio by approximately 16.8%. When positive associations were noted with lung cancer, we accounted for the possibility that cigarette smoking might be a confounder and applied a 10-fold, instead of the 3-fold, positive confounder-cancer relationship to set the lower sensitivity limit for that site, which decreased the odds ratio by 41.6%.  Setting The study setting is the Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program in northern California (KPMCP). The KPMCP is an integrated prepaid health care delivery system that provides comprehensive inpatient and outpatient care, including pharmacy services to over 3 million current members, who comprise about 30 percent of the residents of the areas served surrounding San Francisco Bay and in the Central Valley. The membership is fairly representative of the local population except for some under-representation of both extremes of the economic spectrum ( 11 ). Reflecting their local communities, the members are ethnically diverse. In the 2005 Member Health Survey ( http://www.dor.kaiser.org/dor/mhsnet/public/pdf_05_public/mhs05reg-html_e.htm ) adults age 20 years and older were: 62% white non-Hispanic, 17% Asian non-Hispanic, 12% Latino/Hispanic, 6% African-American, and 3% other ethnicities.  Pharmaceuticals Ascertainment of pharmaceutical use was based on the program’s Pharmacy Information Management System (PIMS), which records all prescriptions dispensed to outpatients. Surveys of subscribers with drug coverage, i.e., at least partial payment for prescriptions by KPMCP, indicate that they fill nearly 100% of their prescriptions at KPMCP pharmacies ( 12 ). A total of 6,465,309 KPMCP subscribers with drug coverage during the period of study, defined below, were identified and constitute the study cohort. The numbers of recipients of each drug studied are shown in Table 1 . The classes and indications for the drugs studied are as follows: chloramphenicol—antibacterial, now just used topically in our setting, mainly as eye drops; cyclophosphamide—cancer chemotherapy and for auto-immune conditions and immune suppression in organ transplant patients; griseovulvin—anti-fungal; iron-dextran complex—injected for iron deficiency anemia; metronidazole—anti-infective used to treat protozoal and susceptible anaerobic bacterial infections; oxazepam—tranquillizer; phenobarbital—sedative, hypnotic and anti-convulsive; phenoxybenzamine—anti-adrenergic used to treat pheochromocytoma and hypertensive crisis; phenytoin—anti-convulsive; propylthiouracil—anti-thyroid drug. These drugs are available only by prescription in our program.  Cancer occurrence Occurrence of invasive cancer, plus non-invasive cancers of the urinary bladder, was ascertained through KPMCP’s Cancer Registry, which covers all subscribers and contributes to the local Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program ( 13 ). The period of study for both prescription dispensing and cancer occurrence was from August 1994, when PIMS was implemented in all facilities, through June 2006. Altogether there were 131,743 patients with at least one incident cancer in this database. The numbers of patients with cancer at each site included in this report are shown in Table 2 . We grouped cancers of the tongue, floor of mouth, gum, tonsil, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and other oral/pharynx into one category, mouth/pharynx and analyzed cancers of the lip, tonsil and nasopharynx each as separate sites. The index date for analysis was the date of first diagnosis of the cancer of interest.  Control selection For each of the case-patients, ten control subscribers free of the cancer of interest on the date of the case’s diagnosis were randomly selected from all of the program’s subscribers of the same sex, same year of birth and same year of starting drug coverage. Controls were not excluded if they developed the same cancer later and they could be included more than once for different cancer cases but not for the same case. Fewer than ten matched controls could be found for some very elderly cancer patients. For example, three women, age 99, 100, and 101 years at breast cancer diagnosis, could be matched with only 2, 8, and 3 controls, respectively. The index date for controls was the date in the same year as their matched case’s diagnosis, which provided equal follow-back time.  Analyses For these analyses we used a nested case-control approach with risk-set controls ( 14 ). The odds ratio of cancer at 56 sites including unspecified and all cancers combined was estimated by conditional logistic regression using the SAS system ( 15 ). The three comparisons made were: any use vs. no use before index date, any use vs. no use at least two years before index date to rule out pre-diagnostic prescribing for symptoms possibly related to cancer (“2-year lag”), and one, two, and at least three prescriptions dispensed vs. no use to ascertain possibly greater risk for longer use. Statistical significance is claimed for odds ratio estimates if their 95% confidence intervals do not overlap 1.0. The findings presented for the cancer sites previously associated with the drugs based on animal experiments and/or limited data in humans ( Table 3 ) are for two-year lag and three or more prescriptions dispensed. To reduce the probability of false positive findings due to chance or confounding, for a newly associated site to be presented ( Table 4 ) the two-year lag/three or more dispensings odds ratio had to be at least 1.50, with p < 0.01, and greater than the odds ratio for one dispensing as some indication of dose-response. The matching variables, age, sex, and length of time with drug coverage in the program, were the only characteristics available on the entire study population. Increased risk of cancer of the anus and other skin (sometimes Kaposi’s sarcoma) was noted for cyclophosphamide and metronidazole. Since HIV-positive patients are at increased risk for these cancers, analyses for these two drugs were repeated excluding 1) any case-control sets with cases listed in the program’s HIV registry and 2) any controls so listed regardless of set.  Sensitivity analysis Due to our inability to control for most cancer risk factors we conducted sensitivity analyses, using the method of external adjustment of Schneeweiss ( 16 ), to estimate bias in our risk estimates that might be due to unknown and uncontrolled confounding. The method requires specification of the risk of cancer associated with the confounder, the prevalence of the confounder and of users of the drug in the study population, and the strength of association between the confounder and the drug. Since this method allows adjustment for only a single variable, we assumed that confounding from all sources combined entailed a dichotomy of cancer risk in our subjects, ranging in risk ratios from 3.0 to 0.33. Compared to weaker associations with cancer, these two values had the most effect and were used to set upper and lower sensitivity analysis limits on the odds ratio. When the prevalence of the increased/decreased cancer risk subgroup was set at 10%, 25% and 50%, we found that 25% for positive confounding and 50% for negative confounding yielded the largest change in the observed odds ratio and they were used to set the sensitivity limits. The odds ratio for the association of use of the drug with the subgroup was set at 2.0. Varying the prevalence of use of the drug in the population between 10% and 0.1% produced virtually the same result; 1% was used here. The spreadsheet program (available for downloading at www.drugepi.org ) generates the percent bias under these various assumptions, which is applied to the observed odds ratio. For example, if the percent bias is +10% and the observed odds ratio is 1.50, the adjusted odds ratio is 1.50/1.10 = 1.36. With the assumptions used, the percent bias was always approximately 20.0% for positive confounding and 16.8% for negative confounding, which is equivalent to decreasing/increasing the odds ratio by approximately 16.8%. When positive associations were noted with lung cancer, we accounted for the possibility that cigarette smoking might be a confounder and applied a 10-fold, instead of the 3-fold, positive confounder-cancer relationship to set the lower sensitivity limit for that site, which decreased the odds ratio by 41.6%.  Results Chloramphenicol Because of past concerns about its causing aplastic anemia and leukemia ( 8 ) this antibiotic was prescribed almost exclusively in topical form, mostly to apply to eyes or ears. No cancer sites showed positive associations that met our criteria for reporting of screening analyses. One case of myeloid leukemia was observed among recipients of just one prescription of chloramphenicol after two years of lag, yielding a non-significant odds ratio with wide confidence interal, 2.00 (0.23–17.12). There were none after more than one prescription. Cyclophosphamide Two cancers for which carcinogenicity in humans has been established ( 2 ), that of urinary bladder and non-lymphocytic leukemia showed positive findings ( Table 3 . Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and all cancers combined also showed notable associations with this drug ( Table 4 ). We were able to ascertain the indications for cyclophosphamide prescriptions from computer storage for about half of the site-specific patients in the tables and none had received it for the associated cancer. The only notable effect of excluding subjects in the HIV registry was to delete the two cases with anal cancer, both after two prescriptions, and thus any findings for this site. Griseofulvin Of the previously-reported cancer sites, increased risk for breast cancer noted previously in this setting ( 17 ) was confirmed, but increased risk for liver cancer and thyroid cancer were not. However, the small number of cases and wide confidence intervals did not provide reliable evidence against those associations ( Table 3 ). No other sites met our screening criteria. Iron-dextran complex No soft-tissue cancers ( 2 ) were observed among the 1,042 recipients and no other sites met our screening criteria. Metronidazole Several sites, both previously suspected ( 8 ) ( Table 3 ) and unsuspected ( Table 4 ) were positively associated. Removing subjects listed in the HIV registry, reduced moderately the associations with anal cancer but had virtually no effect on the odds ratios for other sites. The odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for anal cancer among HIV-free subjects became 1.94 (1.02–3.69) based on 12 cases, compared to 2.39 (1.33–4.30) ( Table 4 ) based on 15 cases but still met our screening criteria Oxazepam Positive associations were noted for the suspected cancer sites, liver and thyroid, but these were not statistically significant ( Table 3 ) Screening other sites yielded an association with lung cancer ( Table 4 ). Phenobarbital This drug was studied in its pure form, not in commonly prescribed mixtures such as phenobarbital and belladonna. No statistically significant associations were noted with cancers of the previously suspected sites, gallbladder, lung, ovary, and brain ( 6 , 8 ).. Our previous finding of reduced risk for urinary bladder cancer ( 8 ) was neither well-supported nor contradicted; the odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for three or more prescriptions, two-year lag, was 0.91 (0.62–1.34). An association with cancer of the small intestine was noted on screening ( Table 4 ). Phenoxybenzamine The previously suspected association with lung cancer ( 1 ) did not receive statistically significant confirmation but risk appeared elevated and there were few cases. There were no cases of the previously suspected peritoneal cancer ( 1 ). No other sites met our screening criteria. Phenytoin Previously reported associations were confirmed for cancers of the esophagus, liver, lung and lymphocytic leukemia, but not for breast cancer or non-Hodgkin lymphoma ( 4 , 8 ). A positive association was noted with brain cancer ( Table 4 ). Propylthiouracil A non-significant association with thyroid cancer ( 6 ) was noted ( Table 3 ). Suspicion of a connection with anterior pituitary tumors ( 6 ) was not confirmed, in that no propylthiouracil user developed a cancer diagnosed as “other endocrine”.  Results Chloramphenicol Because of past concerns about its causing aplastic anemia and leukemia ( 8 ) this antibiotic was prescribed almost exclusively in topical form, mostly to apply to eyes or ears. No cancer sites showed positive associations that met our criteria for reporting of screening analyses. One case of myeloid leukemia was observed among recipients of just one prescription of chloramphenicol after two years of lag, yielding a non-significant odds ratio with wide confidence interal, 2.00 (0.23–17.12). There were none after more than one prescription. Cyclophosphamide Two cancers for which carcinogenicity in humans has been established ( 2 ), that of urinary bladder and non-lymphocytic leukemia showed positive findings ( Table 3 . Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and all cancers combined also showed notable associations with this drug ( Table 4 ). We were able to ascertain the indications for cyclophosphamide prescriptions from computer storage for about half of the site-specific patients in the tables and none had received it for the associated cancer. The only notable effect of excluding subjects in the HIV registry was to delete the two cases with anal cancer, both after two prescriptions, and thus any findings for this site. Griseofulvin Of the previously-reported cancer sites, increased risk for breast cancer noted previously in this setting ( 17 ) was confirmed, but increased risk for liver cancer and thyroid cancer were not. However, the small number of cases and wide confidence intervals did not provide reliable evidence against those associations ( Table 3 ). No other sites met our screening criteria. Iron-dextran complex No soft-tissue cancers ( 2 ) were observed among the 1,042 recipients and no other sites met our screening criteria. Metronidazole Several sites, both previously suspected ( 8 ) ( Table 3 ) and unsuspected ( Table 4 ) were positively associated. Removing subjects listed in the HIV registry, reduced moderately the associations with anal cancer but had virtually no effect on the odds ratios for other sites. The odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for anal cancer among HIV-free subjects became 1.94 (1.02–3.69) based on 12 cases, compared to 2.39 (1.33–4.30) ( Table 4 ) based on 15 cases but still met our screening criteria Oxazepam Positive associations were noted for the suspected cancer sites, liver and thyroid, but these were not statistically significant ( Table 3 ) Screening other sites yielded an association with lung cancer ( Table 4 ). Phenobarbital This drug was studied in its pure form, not in commonly prescribed mixtures such as phenobarbital and belladonna. No statistically significant associations were noted with cancers of the previously suspected sites, gallbladder, lung, ovary, and brain ( 6 , 8 ).. Our previous finding of reduced risk for urinary bladder cancer ( 8 ) was neither well-supported nor contradicted; the odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for three or more prescriptions, two-year lag, was 0.91 (0.62–1.34). An association with cancer of the small intestine was noted on screening ( Table 4 ). Phenoxybenzamine The previously suspected association with lung cancer ( 1 ) did not receive statistically significant confirmation but risk appeared elevated and there were few cases. There were no cases of the previously suspected peritoneal cancer ( 1 ). No other sites met our screening criteria. Phenytoin Previously reported associations were confirmed for cancers of the esophagus, liver, lung and lymphocytic leukemia, but not for breast cancer or non-Hodgkin lymphoma ( 4 , 8 ). A positive association was noted with brain cancer ( Table 4 ). Propylthiouracil A non-significant association with thyroid cancer ( 6 ) was noted ( Table 3 ). Suspicion of a connection with anterior pituitary tumors ( 6 ) was not confirmed, in that no propylthiouracil user developed a cancer diagnosed as “other endocrine”.  Chloramphenicol Because of past concerns about its causing aplastic anemia and leukemia ( 8 ) this antibiotic was prescribed almost exclusively in topical form, mostly to apply to eyes or ears. No cancer sites showed positive associations that met our criteria for reporting of screening analyses. One case of myeloid leukemia was observed among recipients of just one prescription of chloramphenicol after two years of lag, yielding a non-significant odds ratio with wide confidence interal, 2.00 (0.23–17.12). There were none after more than one prescription.  Chloramphenicol Because of past concerns about its causing aplastic anemia and leukemia ( 8 ) this antibiotic was prescribed almost exclusively in topical form, mostly to apply to eyes or ears. No cancer sites showed positive associations that met our criteria for reporting of screening analyses. One case of myeloid leukemia was observed among recipients of just one prescription of chloramphenicol after two years of lag, yielding a non-significant odds ratio with wide confidence interal, 2.00 (0.23–17.12). There were none after more than one prescription.  Cyclophosphamide Two cancers for which carcinogenicity in humans has been established ( 2 ), that of urinary bladder and non-lymphocytic leukemia showed positive findings ( Table 3 . Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and all cancers combined also showed notable associations with this drug ( Table 4 ). We were able to ascertain the indications for cyclophosphamide prescriptions from computer storage for about half of the site-specific patients in the tables and none had received it for the associated cancer. The only notable effect of excluding subjects in the HIV registry was to delete the two cases with anal cancer, both after two prescriptions, and thus any findings for this site.  Cyclophosphamide Two cancers for which carcinogenicity in humans has been established ( 2 ), that of urinary bladder and non-lymphocytic leukemia showed positive findings ( Table 3 . Non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and all cancers combined also showed notable associations with this drug ( Table 4 ). We were able to ascertain the indications for cyclophosphamide prescriptions from computer storage for about half of the site-specific patients in the tables and none had received it for the associated cancer. The only notable effect of excluding subjects in the HIV registry was to delete the two cases with anal cancer, both after two prescriptions, and thus any findings for this site.  Griseofulvin Of the previously-reported cancer sites, increased risk for breast cancer noted previously in this setting ( 17 ) was confirmed, but increased risk for liver cancer and thyroid cancer were not. However, the small number of cases and wide confidence intervals did not provide reliable evidence against those associations ( Table 3 ). No other sites met our screening criteria.  Griseofulvin Of the previously-reported cancer sites, increased risk for breast cancer noted previously in this setting ( 17 ) was confirmed, but increased risk for liver cancer and thyroid cancer were not. However, the small number of cases and wide confidence intervals did not provide reliable evidence against those associations ( Table 3 ). No other sites met our screening criteria.  Iron-dextran complex No soft-tissue cancers ( 2 ) were observed among the 1,042 recipients and no other sites met our screening criteria.  Iron-dextran complex No soft-tissue cancers ( 2 ) were observed among the 1,042 recipients and no other sites met our screening criteria.  Metronidazole Several sites, both previously suspected ( 8 ) ( Table 3 ) and unsuspected ( Table 4 ) were positively associated. Removing subjects listed in the HIV registry, reduced moderately the associations with anal cancer but had virtually no effect on the odds ratios for other sites. The odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for anal cancer among HIV-free subjects became 1.94 (1.02–3.69) based on 12 cases, compared to 2.39 (1.33–4.30) ( Table 4 ) based on 15 cases but still met our screening criteria  Metronidazole Several sites, both previously suspected ( 8 ) ( Table 3 ) and unsuspected ( Table 4 ) were positively associated. Removing subjects listed in the HIV registry, reduced moderately the associations with anal cancer but had virtually no effect on the odds ratios for other sites. The odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for anal cancer among HIV-free subjects became 1.94 (1.02–3.69) based on 12 cases, compared to 2.39 (1.33–4.30) ( Table 4 ) based on 15 cases but still met our screening criteria  Oxazepam Positive associations were noted for the suspected cancer sites, liver and thyroid, but these were not statistically significant ( Table 3 ) Screening other sites yielded an association with lung cancer ( Table 4 ).  Oxazepam Positive associations were noted for the suspected cancer sites, liver and thyroid, but these were not statistically significant ( Table 3 ) Screening other sites yielded an association with lung cancer ( Table 4 ).  Phenobarbital This drug was studied in its pure form, not in commonly prescribed mixtures such as phenobarbital and belladonna. No statistically significant associations were noted with cancers of the previously suspected sites, gallbladder, lung, ovary, and brain ( 6 , 8 ).. Our previous finding of reduced risk for urinary bladder cancer ( 8 ) was neither well-supported nor contradicted; the odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for three or more prescriptions, two-year lag, was 0.91 (0.62–1.34). An association with cancer of the small intestine was noted on screening ( Table 4 ).  Phenobarbital This drug was studied in its pure form, not in commonly prescribed mixtures such as phenobarbital and belladonna. No statistically significant associations were noted with cancers of the previously suspected sites, gallbladder, lung, ovary, and brain ( 6 , 8 ).. Our previous finding of reduced risk for urinary bladder cancer ( 8 ) was neither well-supported nor contradicted; the odds ratio (95% confidence interval) for three or more prescriptions, two-year lag, was 0.91 (0.62–1.34). An association with cancer of the small intestine was noted on screening ( Table 4 ).  Phenoxybenzamine The previously suspected association with lung cancer ( 1 ) did not receive statistically significant confirmation but risk appeared elevated and there were few cases. There were no cases of the previously suspected peritoneal cancer ( 1 ). No other sites met our screening criteria.  Phenoxybenzamine The previously suspected association with lung cancer ( 1 ) did not receive statistically significant confirmation but risk appeared elevated and there were few cases. There were no cases of the previously suspected peritoneal cancer ( 1 ). No other sites met our screening criteria.  Phenytoin Previously reported associations were confirmed for cancers of the esophagus, liver, lung and lymphocytic leukemia, but not for breast cancer or non-Hodgkin lymphoma ( 4 , 8 ). A positive association was noted with brain cancer ( Table 4 ).  Phenytoin Previously reported associations were confirmed for cancers of the esophagus, liver, lung and lymphocytic leukemia, but not for breast cancer or non-Hodgkin lymphoma ( 4 , 8 ). A positive association was noted with brain cancer ( Table 4 ).  Propylthiouracil A non-significant association with thyroid cancer ( 6 ) was noted ( Table 3 ). Suspicion of a connection with anterior pituitary tumors ( 6 ) was not confirmed, in that no propylthiouracil user developed a cancer diagnosed as “other endocrine”.  Propylthiouracil A non-significant association with thyroid cancer ( 6 ) was noted ( Table 3 ). Suspicion of a connection with anterior pituitary tumors ( 6 ) was not confirmed, in that no propylthiouracil user developed a cancer diagnosed as “other endocrine”.  Discussion Overall perspective on our findings In view of previous evidence for at least possible carcinogenicity for each drug, no adjustment was made for multiple comparisons. However, our screening of 56 possible associations for each drug, implies that some nominally significant associations could readily be due to chance. We have tried to limit this problem by requiring an odds ratio of at least 1.50 and p<0.01 for any associations we present for sites not previously reported to be associated with the drugs studied. In addition, for these sites we added the dose-response criterion that the odds ratio for three or more prescription dispensings had to be greater than for one dispensing. Although this comparison never reached statistical significance in these data, it does add an additional safeguard for purposes of screening. The sensitivity analyses, based on estimated external adjustment for possible confounding by a combination of factors, did not have a substantial effect on most of these findings. However, these were rough estimates and additional confounding must be added to chance as casting doubt on the odds ratios reported here. It is notable, however, that the sensitivity limits generally fell well within the confidence limits, suggesting that chance sampling variation is of greater concern than likely confounding. The exception was the lower sensitivity limits for lung cancer, which were based on an assumed ten-fold association with cigarette smoking. Of course, it is possible that chance and confounding can both bias a finding in the same direction, adding to uncertainty. Confidence limits for the sensitivity limits can be calculated by applying the correction factors used for the odds ratio to its confidence limits (personal communication, S. Schneeweiss, as used in of ( 18 ). Although we have emphasized the possibility of false positive findings in our screening of multiple cancer sites, it should also be acknowledged that our follow-up may not be long enough or doses may be insufficient to detect real positive associations and statistical power is limited for the less common cancer sites and the less frequently prescribed drugs. Although not suspected to be as powerfully carcinogenic as cyclophosphamide, it is somewhat reassuring that griseofulvin, metronidazole, oxazepam, phenobarbital and phenytoin had been received by substantially more patients than cyclophosphamide. Another limitation of pharmacy-based evidence of drug exposure is that patients may not take all, if any, of a dispensed drug. However our focus on dispensing of three or more prescriptions would seem to minimize this problem, since patients are not likely to refill a prescription they decide not to take or continue taking. Chloramphenicol Since this antibiotic was only used topically in our setting, mostly in eye drops, its suspected causal association with leukemia was probably not adequately tested in these analyses. Cyclophosphamide Regarding our study, it is reassuring to note that the known carcinogenicity of cyclophosphamide for bladder cancer and non-lymphocytic leukemia was confirmed in these data and that we found no evidence that these and other associated cancers were the indication for treatment with this drug. Several other sites were also associated. Griseofulvin We confirmed the suspected link to breast cancer but no other associations were noted . There was a transient association with thyroid cancer in previous studies of a different cohort from this department ( 19 ) but it was not confirmed with longer follow-up ( 20 , 21 ) or in this study. Iron-dextran complex High iron stores have been reported in association with several cancer sites, including colon ( 8 ) but the absence of an association with 2-year lag in our data suggests confounding by indication, that is, treatment of colon-cancer-induced bleeding and anemia before the cancer was diagnosed. We found no previously-associated ( 2 ) soft-tissue sarcomas among the recipients of iron-dextran complex. Metronidazole Suspicion that metronidazole might be carcinogenic in humans was raised in studies from the Mayo Clinic ( 22 , 23 ), but not confirmed in our earlier data ( 21 , 24 , 25 ). Evidence after excluding known HIV positive patients did not show that HIV infection was responsible for most cancers but the odds ratio was reduced moderately for anal cancer. At least two of the associations found in screening ( Table 4 ), anus and other skin, are more common in homosexual men, regardless of HIV status, as are amebiasis and giardiasis, two parasitic infections often treated with metronidazole. So some of the associations, but not most, may be readily attributable to confounding by indication. Surprisingly, the odds ratio was not elevated for cancer of the cervix. This cancer has long been suspected of being spuriously associated with metronidazole because metronidazole is often used to treat trichomonal vaginitis, which is correlated with multiple sex partners and therefore with HPV infection, a necessary cause of cervical cancer ( 8 ). There was weak confirmation of the suspected association with breast cancer but sensitivity analyses suggested that confounding could be responsible. Oxazepam The association with lung cancer could be due to confounding by cigarette smoking, as suggested by the sensitivity analysis ( Table 4 ). However, receptors for drugs of this class, benzodiazepines, have been found in lung tissue ( 26 ). This drug caused benign and malignant liver tumors and thyroid adenomas in mice with evidence that it was a promoter of liver cancer development in mice and rats ( 4 ). Our data provided some support, although not statistically significant, for an effect on the thyroid gland. Phenobarbital Previous evidence from studies of humans has focused largely on a positive association with lung cancer and a negative association with bladder cancer ( 8 ). Both of these trends appeared in the present analyses but neither was statistically significant. Previously noted associations with cancer of the gallbladder and ovary ( 6 ) were not confirmed in these data. The association with brain cancer is likely to be due to confounding by indication, since this drug is used to treat seizures, often beginning more than two years before the tumor is evident, as previously noted for phenytoin (listed as diphenylhydantoin) ( 27 ). The association with cancer of the small intestine was unsuspected. Phenobarbital has long been known to be a promoter of liver tumor growth in experimental animals ( 6 ). Phenoxybenzamine There was no clear confirmation of an association with lung cancer because of the small number of cases and wide confidence interval and we found no prior users of phenoxybenzamine among the cases of peritoneal cancer. No other sites met our screening criteria. Phenytoin All of the previously suspected cancer sites except breast and non-Hodgkin lymphoma were confirmed in these data. In addition three other sites showed associations. The associations with brain and liver cancer could well be due to confounding by indication for this anticonvulsant drug. As noted for phenobarbital, the diagnosis of brain tumor could have been made long after starting treatment of seizures, and both seizures and liver cancer can occur with heavy alcohol consumption. It is less easy to explain the other sites but confounding by cigarette smoking could explain the association with lung cancer and therefore may have contributed to that with esophageal cancer. Propylthiouracil Both antithyroid drugs such as propylthiouracil and other non-cancerous thyroid conditions including hyperthyroidism have been suspected, but not proven, to predispose to the development of thyroid cancer ( 8 , 28 ). Thus, it is not possible to determine whether the positive but non-significant association we observed is causal or simply due to confounding by indication or by thyroid cancer present but not yet diagnosed. Suggesting the last possibility is the much stronger association noted for three or more prescriptions—odds ratio 8.03 (3.50–18.39) based on 10 cases—when the analysis included no lag. Further investigation is needed but it will be difficult to separate the benign diseases from their specific treatment in human studies. A possible mechanism for propylthiouracil-induced cancer is increased secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone ( 28 ). Conclusion Although not conclusive, the evidence here adds to the suspicion that griseofulvin, metronidazole, and phenytoin are carcinogenic in humans and confirms the established link of cyclophosphamide to cancer development. There is considerable uncertainty as to whether anything new and important has been learned about chloramphenicol, iron-dextran complex, phenoxybenzamine, or phenobarbital. The evidence regarding propylthiouracil and thyroid cancer is equivocal due to the strong possibility of confounding by indication. Oxazepam was associated with lung cancer but confounding by smoking is a clear possibility. In view of previous evidence concerning oxazepam’s causing thyroid adenomas in mice, the positive association with thyroid cancer is interesting but not confirmatory given its wide confidence intervals.  Overall perspective on our findings In view of previous evidence for at least possible carcinogenicity for each drug, no adjustment was made for multiple comparisons. However, our screening of 56 possible associations for each drug, implies that some nominally significant associations could readily be due to chance. We have tried to limit this problem by requiring an odds ratio of at least 1.50 and p<0.01 for any associations we present for sites not previously reported to be associated with the drugs studied. In addition, for these sites we added the dose-response criterion that the odds ratio for three or more prescription dispensings had to be greater than for one dispensing. Although this comparison never reached statistical significance in these data, it does add an additional safeguard for purposes of screening. The sensitivity analyses, based on estimated external adjustment for possible confounding by a combination of factors, did not have a substantial effect on most of these findings. However, these were rough estimates and additional confounding must be added to chance as casting doubt on the odds ratios reported here. It is notable, however, that the sensitivity limits generally fell well within the confidence limits, suggesting that chance sampling variation is of greater concern than likely confounding. The exception was the lower sensitivity limits for lung cancer, which were based on an assumed ten-fold association with cigarette smoking. Of course, it is possible that chance and confounding can both bias a finding in the same direction, adding to uncertainty. Confidence limits for the sensitivity limits can be calculated by applying the correction factors used for the odds ratio to its confidence limits (personal communication, S. Schneeweiss, as used in of ( 18 ). Although we have emphasized the possibility of false positive findings in our screening of multiple cancer sites, it should also be acknowledged that our follow-up may not be long enough or doses may be insufficient to detect real positive associations and statistical power is limited for the less common cancer sites and the less frequently prescribed drugs. Although not suspected to be as powerfully carcinogenic as cyclophosphamide, it is somewhat reassuring that griseofulvin, metronidazole, oxazepam, phenobarbital and phenytoin had been received by substantially more patients than cyclophosphamide. Another limitation of pharmacy-based evidence of drug exposure is that patients may not take all, if any, of a dispensed drug. However our focus on dispensing of three or more prescriptions would seem to minimize this problem, since patients are not likely to refill a prescription they decide not to take or continue taking.  Chloramphenicol Since this antibiotic was only used topically in our setting, mostly in eye drops, its suspected causal association with leukemia was probably not adequately tested in these analyses.  Cyclophosphamide Regarding our study, it is reassuring to note that the known carcinogenicity of cyclophosphamide for bladder cancer and non-lymphocytic leukemia was confirmed in these data and that we found no evidence that these and other associated cancers were the indication for treatment with this drug. Several other sites were also associated.  Griseofulvin We confirmed the suspected link to breast cancer but no other associations were noted . There was a transient association with thyroid cancer in previous studies of a different cohort from this department ( 19 ) but it was not confirmed with longer follow-up ( 20 , 21 ) or in this study.  Iron-dextran complex High iron stores have been reported in association with several cancer sites, including colon ( 8 ) but the absence of an association with 2-year lag in our data suggests confounding by indication, that is, treatment of colon-cancer-induced bleeding and anemia before the cancer was diagnosed. We found no previously-associated ( 2 ) soft-tissue sarcomas among the recipients of iron-dextran complex.  Metronidazole Suspicion that metronidazole might be carcinogenic in humans was raised in studies from the Mayo Clinic ( 22 , 23 ), but not confirmed in our earlier data ( 21 , 24 , 25 ). Evidence after excluding known HIV positive patients did not show that HIV infection was responsible for most cancers but the odds ratio was reduced moderately for anal cancer. At least two of the associations found in screening ( Table 4 ), anus and other skin, are more common in homosexual men, regardless of HIV status, as are amebiasis and giardiasis, two parasitic infections often treated with metronidazole. So some of the associations, but not most, may be readily attributable to confounding by indication. Surprisingly, the odds ratio was not elevated for cancer of the cervix. This cancer has long been suspected of being spuriously associated with metronidazole because metronidazole is often used to treat trichomonal vaginitis, which is correlated with multiple sex partners and therefore with HPV infection, a necessary cause of cervical cancer ( 8 ). There was weak confirmation of the suspected association with breast cancer but sensitivity analyses suggested that confounding could be responsible.  Oxazepam The association with lung cancer could be due to confounding by cigarette smoking, as suggested by the sensitivity analysis ( Table 4 ). However, receptors for drugs of this class, benzodiazepines, have been found in lung tissue ( 26 ). This drug caused benign and malignant liver tumors and thyroid adenomas in mice with evidence that it was a promoter of liver cancer development in mice and rats ( 4 ). Our data provided some support, although not statistically significant, for an effect on the thyroid gland.  Phenobarbital Previous evidence from studies of humans has focused largely on a positive association with lung cancer and a negative association with bladder cancer ( 8 ). Both of these trends appeared in the present analyses but neither was statistically significant. Previously noted associations with cancer of the gallbladder and ovary ( 6 ) were not confirmed in these data. The association with brain cancer is likely to be due to confounding by indication, since this drug is used to treat seizures, often beginning more than two years before the tumor is evident, as previously noted for phenytoin (listed as diphenylhydantoin) ( 27 ). The association with cancer of the small intestine was unsuspected. Phenobarbital has long been known to be a promoter of liver tumor growth in experimental animals ( 6 ).  Phenoxybenzamine There was no clear confirmation of an association with lung cancer because of the small number of cases and wide confidence interval and we found no prior users of phenoxybenzamine among the cases of peritoneal cancer. No other sites met our screening criteria.  Phenytoin All of the previously suspected cancer sites except breast and non-Hodgkin lymphoma were confirmed in these data. In addition three other sites showed associations. The associations with brain and liver cancer could well be due to confounding by indication for this anticonvulsant drug. As noted for phenobarbital, the diagnosis of brain tumor could have been made long after starting treatment of seizures, and both seizures and liver cancer can occur with heavy alcohol consumption. It is less easy to explain the other sites but confounding by cigarette smoking could explain the association with lung cancer and therefore may have contributed to that with esophageal cancer.  Propylthiouracil Both antithyroid drugs such as propylthiouracil and other non-cancerous thyroid conditions including hyperthyroidism have been suspected, but not proven, to predispose to the development of thyroid cancer ( 8 , 28 ). Thus, it is not possible to determine whether the positive but non-significant association we observed is causal or simply due to confounding by indication or by thyroid cancer present but not yet diagnosed. Suggesting the last possibility is the much stronger association noted for three or more prescriptions—odds ratio 8.03 (3.50–18.39) based on 10 cases—when the analysis included no lag. Further investigation is needed but it will be difficult to separate the benign diseases from their specific treatment in human studies. A possible mechanism for propylthiouracil-induced cancer is increased secretion of thyroid-stimulating hormone ( 28 ).  Conclusion Although not conclusive, the evidence here adds to the suspicion that griseofulvin, metronidazole, and phenytoin are carcinogenic in humans and confirms the established link of cyclophosphamide to cancer development. There is considerable uncertainty as to whether anything new and important has been learned about chloramphenicol, iron-dextran complex, phenoxybenzamine, or phenobarbital. The evidence regarding propylthiouracil and thyroid cancer is equivocal due to the strong possibility of confounding by indication. Oxazepam was associated with lung cancer but confounding by smoking is a clear possibility. In view of previous evidence concerning oxazepam’s causing thyroid adenomas in mice, the positive association with thyroid cancer is interesting but not confirmatory given its wide confidence intervals.  Tables Table 1 Total numbers of recipients of each drug Drug Number Chloramphenicol 1,571 Cyclophosphamide 6,573 Griseofulvin 56,351 Iron-dextran complex 1,042 Metronidazole 530,474 Oxazepam 84,234 Phenobarbital 16,924 Phenoxybenzamine 592 Phenytoin 37,464 Propylthiouracil 4,252 Table 2 Total numbers of persons with cancer at any site and each site included in this report; listed in descending order of frequency. Cancer site No. Cancer site No. ANY CANCER 131,743 Liver, intrahepatic bile ducts 1,568 Breast 24,315 Myeloid leukemia 1,488 Prostate 24,013 Esophagus 1,164 Lung, bronchus 16,975 Cervix uteri 1,133 Colon 10,298 Other skin 960 Melanoma 6,623 Heart, soft tissue 936 Urinary bladder 6,286 Testis 892 Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 6,157 Hodgkin lymphoma 868 Corpus uteri 4,465 Larynx 849 Rectum, rectosigmoid 3,975 Anus, anal canal, anorectum 485 Unspecified cancer 3,802 Small intestine 415 Kidney, renal pelvis 3,267 Salivary glands 413 Pancreas 3,084 Peritoneum, omentum, mesentery 242 Stomach 2,433 Gallbladder 230 Ovary 2,404 Other endocrine 200 Mouth, pharynx 2,254 Other leukemia 167 Thyroid 2,072 Ureter 141 Brain 1,789 Other nervous system 120 Lymphocytic leukemia 1,577 Retroperitoneum 73 Table 3 Findings regarding cancer sites previously associated with the drugs studied. Two-year lag, three or more dispensings. Drug Cancer site No. exposed cases Odds ratio (95% confidence interval) [sensitivity limits] * Chloramphenicol Leukemia, any type 0 -- Cyclophosphamide Urinary bladder 12 2.76 (1.45–5.25) [2.30–3.22] Myeloid leukemia 5 4.17 (1.47–11.83) [3.47–4.87] Other leukemia 1 10.00 (1.63–159.9) [8.32–11.68] Griseofulvin Liver, intrahepatic bile ducts 2 0.91 (0.21–3.87) [0.76–1.06] Breast 35 1.59 (1.11–2.27) [1.32–1.86] Thyroid 1 0.50 (0.07–3.73) [0.42–0.58] Iron-dextran complex Soft tissue, heart 0 -- Metronidazole Colon 120 0.80 (0.66–0.97) [0.67–0.93] Liver, intrahepatic bile ducts 17 0.88 (0.53–1.45) [0.73–1.03] Lung, bronchus 226 0.93 (0.81–1.06) [0.54–1.09] Breast 498 1.13 (1.02–1.24) [0.94–1.32] Cervix uteri 16 0.87 (0.52–0.1.47) [0.72–1.05] Testis 1 0.59 (0.08–4.44) [0.49–0.69] Other endocrine, thymus 3 1.89 (0.54–6.68) [1.57–2.21] Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 84 1.06 (0.84–1.33) [0.88–1.24] Oxazepam Liver, intrahepatic bile ducts 10 1.48 (0.76–2.89) [1.23–1.72] Thyroid 9 1.68 (0.83–3.42) [1.40–1.96] Phenobarbital Gallbladder 1 0.57 (0.07–4.34) [0.47–0.67] Lung, bronchus 92 1.01 (0.82–1.26) [0.59–1.18] Ovary 16 1.08 (0.64–1.82) [0.90–1.26] Brain 9 1.15 (0.58–2.31) [0.96–1.34] Phenoxybenzamine Peritoneum, omentum, mesentery 0 -- Lung, bronchus 5 1.62 (0.63–4.16) [0.95–1.89] Phenytoin Esophagus 15 2.54 (1.44–4.51) [2.11–2.97] Liver, intrahepatic bile ducts 15 1.66 (0.96–2.88) [1.38–1.94] Lung, bronchus 126 1.51 (1.25–1.82) [0.88–1.76] Breast 81 1.02 (0.81–1.28) [0.85–1.19] Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 27 0.96 (0.65–1.43) [0.80–1.12] Lymphocytic leukemia 11 1.91 (1.00–3.64) [1.59–2.23] Propylthiouracil Thyroid 3 2.79 (0.78–10.02) [2.32–3.26] Other endocrine 0 -- * Sensitivity analysis limits: odds ratio decreased and increased by 16.8% except lung cancer decreased by 41.6% (see text for assumptions). Table 4 Findings regarding cancer sites newly associated with the drugs studied based on applying screening criteria to two-year lag, three or more dispensings as follows: odds ratio ?1.50 and > odds ratio for one dispensing, p<0.01. Drug Cancer site No. exposed cases Odds ratio (95% confidence interval) [sensitivity limits] * Chloramphenicol None -- -- Cyclophosphamide Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 11 2.51 (1.29–4.88)) [2.09–2.93] Any cancer 48 2.38 (1.74–3.26) [1.98–2.78] Griseofulvin None -- -- Iron-dextran complex None -- -- Metronidazole Salivary glands 13 2.45 (1.31–4.57) [2.04–2.86] Anus, anal canal, anorectum 15 2.39 (1.33–4.30) [1.99–2.79] Other skin 18 2.21 (1.31–3.72) [1.84–2.58] Myeloid leukemia 33 1.93 (1.32–2.84) [1.58–2.22] Oxazepam Lung, bronchus 114 1.54 (1.26–1.88) [0.90–1.80] Phenobarbital Small intestine 10 5.12 (2.37–11.03) [4.26–5.98] Phenoxybenzamine None -- -- Phenytoin Brain 18 2.95 (1.73–5.05) [2.45–3.45] Propylthiouracil None -- -- * Sensitivity analysis limits: odds ratio decreased and increased by 16.8% except lung cancer decreased by 41.6% (see text for assumptions). 