The Role of XBP-1 in Tumorigenicity Rapid growth of a tumor can overwhelm the vasculature that supplies it with nutrients and oxygen. Inside such tumors, cells undergo endoplasmic reticulum (EnR) stress but can survive such adverse microenvironments by an adaptive mechanism called the unfolded protein response (UPR). X-box binding protein-1 (XBP-1) is a critical transcriptional activator of the UPR and is responsible for regulating the function of genes in cell survival. An unconventional splicing of the XBP-1(U) mRNA results in two proteins: XBP-1(S) that is often increased in a variety of human cancers, and any translated proteins from the unspliced XBP-1(U) mRNA that acts as a dominant negative of endogenous XBP-1(S) action. In cancer cells, over-expression of XBP-1 can confer drug resistance by preventing drug-induced cell cycle arrest and mitochondrial permeability and apoptosis while down-regulation of XBP-1 increases the sensitivity to killing by hypoxia. XBP-1 is also implicated in cellular de-differentiation, oncovirus infection and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Given that XBP-1 mediates a wide range of responses in tumorigenesis, it is logical to focus on XBP-1 as an anti-cancer therapeutic target. Furthermore, combining inhibitors of XBP-1 with other anti-UPR drugs may enhance the activity of some anti-neoplastic therapies.  Conclusions Under normal conditions, the EnR provides a unique location that assists in proper protein folding and assures that only correctly folded proteins advance in the secretory pathway. However, when a cell is deprived of nutrients or oxygen, such as the microenvironments deep inside a tumor, accumulation of proteins can occur in the EnR that can trigger UPR ( 73 ). Although the UPR is a well-conserved adaptive mechanism that ensures proper protein folding or apoptosis, this process can also promote cell survival. UPR activation of ERAD may support the “reusing” of materials recovered from the degradation of misfolded proteins, which could also allow cells to survive when extracellular nutrient sources are limited. XBP-1 is a key gene that is induced by the UPR. XBP-1(S) can activate a variety of genes involved in protein maturation, degradation or EnR expansion that enables the cells to efficiently produce and secrete proteins. XBP-1 has also been linked to tumor cell responses to hypoxia, drug therapy, cellular differentiation and oncovirus infections. Thus, pharmacological inhibitors of the XBP-1-mediated UPR pathway could be important anti-cancer therapeutic tools. 