Application of the revised lung cancer staging system (IASLC Staging Project) to a cancer center population Objective The International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) proposed a revision to the Union Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC-6) staging system for non–small cell lung cancer. The goal of our study was to compare these systems in patients undergoing surgery for non–small cell lung cancer to determine whether one system is superior in staging operable disease. Methods Pathologic stages in 1154 patients undergoing complete resection over a 9-year period were analyzed. Patients were assigned a stage based on both IASLC and UICC-6 systems. We tested for statistically meaningful differences between the two staging systems using the Wilcoxon signed rank test and the permutation test. Results The IASLC system is more effective than the UICC-6 system at ordering and differentiating patients ( P = .009). Application of the IASLC system resulted in 202 (17.5%) patients being reassigned to a different stage ( P = .012), with the most common shifts occurring from IB to IIA and IIIB to IIIA. The 5-year and median survivals of the IASLC IIIA patients including those shifted from the UICC-6 IIIB were 37% and 35 months, respectively. Reclassifying UICC-6 IIIB to IASLC IIIA did not reduce survival for the newly characterized IIIA cohort. Conclusion Our data confirm that the proposed IASLC staging system is more effective at differentiating stage than the UICC-6 system. Reclassifying patients from UICC-6 IIIB to IASLC IIIA will shift some patients from a stage previously considered unresectable to a stage frequently offered surgical resection. Further study and validation of the IASLC system are warranted.  Methods Pathologic stages in 1154 patients undergoing complete resection over a 9-year period were analyzed. Patients were assigned a stage based on both IASLC and UICC-6 systems. We tested for statistically meaningful differences between the two staging systems using the Wilcoxon signed rank test and the permutation test.  Results The IASLC system is more effective than the UICC-6 system at ordering and differentiating patients ( P = .009). Application of the IASLC system resulted in 202 (17.5%) patients being reassigned to a different stage ( P = .012), with the most common shifts occurring from IB to IIA and IIIB to IIIA. The 5-year and median survivals of the IASLC IIIA patients including those shifted from the UICC-6 IIIB were 37% and 35 months, respectively. Reclassifying UICC-6 IIIB to IASLC IIIA did not reduce survival for the newly characterized IIIA cohort.  Conclusion Our data confirm that the proposed IASLC staging system is more effective at differentiating stage than the UICC-6 system. Reclassifying patients from UICC-6 IIIB to IASLC IIIA will shift some patients from a stage previously considered unresectable to a stage frequently offered surgical resection. Further study and validation of the IASLC system are warranted.  PATIENTS AND METHODS Population This study analyzed data from a prospectively collected database of 1154 patients who underwent an R0 surgical resection for NSCLC at UTMDACC between 1998 and 2006. UTMDACC was a contributor of patient data for the IASLC study. Less than 5% of the patients in our study were the same patients as those in the IASLC study, and of those patients who were the same, the length of follow-up was different in the two studies. The two populations can be treated as two distinct data sets. Institutional review board approval was obtained for this study, and informed consent was obtained from each participant. Patients were excluded from analysis if histologic type was small cell carcinoma, neuroendocrine carcinoma, or predominantly bronchoalveolar carcinoma. Chemotherapy or radiation therapy administration did not exclude patients from analysis. A histologic classification of adenocarcinoma with bronchoalveolar features was included in the analysis. Pathologic staging of resected specimens was based on the application of the UICC-6 TNM staging system. Nodal (N) classification for each patient was determined either by systematic lymph node dissection or by lymph node sampling. Each specimen was then reassigned a surgical TNM classification and overall stage on the basis of the IASLC system. Data on pathologic TNM classification, overall stage, and outcome for patients treated at UTMDACC were collected prospectively using Internet-based data collection entered by the health provider at the point of care. The data are subjected to periodic reviews for quality control. Statistical Analyses We tested for statistically meaningful differences between the UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems with respect to stage assignment using a Wilcoxon signed rank test. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS software (SPSS, Inc, Chicago, Ill). Survival probabilities were assessed by the Kaplan–Meier method calculated from the date of surgery until death or most recent follow-up. Operative mortality was excluded from survival analysis to allow for assessment of long-term rather than short-term mortality. Each patient was assigned a T classification and overall stage grouping on the basis of both UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems ( Tables 1 and 2 ). The prognostic significance of overall stage using both the UICC-6 and IASLC systems was determined by univariate analysis. The effectiveness of each staging system was evaluated statistically by a log–rank trend test. In addition, we also assessed whether one staging system is more effective than the other via a permutation test in which we construct differences in log–rank trend test statistics under random rearrangements (ie, permutations) of the original labels assigned to the observed data. By repetition of this process many times (eg, 10,000 times), a null distribution is created and used to assess the difference between the log–rank trend statistic under the original labels and the randomly permuted labels. 12 Please see the included appendix for complete description of the statistical analysis.  Population This study analyzed data from a prospectively collected database of 1154 patients who underwent an R0 surgical resection for NSCLC at UTMDACC between 1998 and 2006. UTMDACC was a contributor of patient data for the IASLC study. Less than 5% of the patients in our study were the same patients as those in the IASLC study, and of those patients who were the same, the length of follow-up was different in the two studies. The two populations can be treated as two distinct data sets. Institutional review board approval was obtained for this study, and informed consent was obtained from each participant. Patients were excluded from analysis if histologic type was small cell carcinoma, neuroendocrine carcinoma, or predominantly bronchoalveolar carcinoma. Chemotherapy or radiation therapy administration did not exclude patients from analysis. A histologic classification of adenocarcinoma with bronchoalveolar features was included in the analysis. Pathologic staging of resected specimens was based on the application of the UICC-6 TNM staging system. Nodal (N) classification for each patient was determined either by systematic lymph node dissection or by lymph node sampling. Each specimen was then reassigned a surgical TNM classification and overall stage on the basis of the IASLC system. Data on pathologic TNM classification, overall stage, and outcome for patients treated at UTMDACC were collected prospectively using Internet-based data collection entered by the health provider at the point of care. The data are subjected to periodic reviews for quality control.  Statistical Analyses We tested for statistically meaningful differences between the UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems with respect to stage assignment using a Wilcoxon signed rank test. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS software (SPSS, Inc, Chicago, Ill). Survival probabilities were assessed by the Kaplan–Meier method calculated from the date of surgery until death or most recent follow-up. Operative mortality was excluded from survival analysis to allow for assessment of long-term rather than short-term mortality. Each patient was assigned a T classification and overall stage grouping on the basis of both UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems ( Tables 1 and 2 ). The prognostic significance of overall stage using both the UICC-6 and IASLC systems was determined by univariate analysis. The effectiveness of each staging system was evaluated statistically by a log–rank trend test. In addition, we also assessed whether one staging system is more effective than the other via a permutation test in which we construct differences in log–rank trend test statistics under random rearrangements (ie, permutations) of the original labels assigned to the observed data. By repetition of this process many times (eg, 10,000 times), a null distribution is created and used to assess the difference between the log–rank trend statistic under the original labels and the randomly permuted labels. 12 Please see the included appendix for complete description of the statistical analysis.  RESULTS The population studied included all patients undergoing curative resection for NSCLC at UTMDACC between 1998 and 2006. The demographics of the study group are shown in Table 3 . Each patient was assigned a pathologic T classification and overall stage on the basis of both the UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems. In 952 patients, application of the IASLC staging system resulted in no change from the UICC-6 assigned stage grouping. However, 202 (17.5%) patients were assigned a different stage grouping when the IASLC staging system was applied to their pathologic stage (Wilcoxon signed rank test; P = .012). Of these 202 patients with a change in stage grouping, 73 (36.2%) patients were upstaged and 129 (63.8%) patients were down-staged by application of the IASLC staging system ( Figure 1 ). Patients assigned a higher stage by the IASLC staging system included patients shifted from UICC-6 IB to IASLC IIA (n = 44, 60.2%) and IASLC IIB (n = 19, 26%) or UICC-6 IIB to IASLC IIIA (n = 10, 13.7%). Of the 73 patients who were assigned a higher stage by IASLC, none was assigned a stage that would preclude surgical resection. Application of the IASLC system resulted in downstaging patients from UICC-6 stages IIB, IIIB, and IV. Sixty-seven (53.2%) patients classified as being in UICC-6 IIB were downstaged to IASLC stage IIA. One hundred four (9%) patients were staged by the UICC-6 as having advanced locoregional disease precluding surgical resection. Of these 104 patients with stage IIIB or IV disease, 59 (56%) were restaged by the IASLC system as having potentially respectable disease. Of these, 59 patients in UICC-6 IIIB were downstaged with 51 (40.4%) patients shifted to IASLC stage IIIA and 8 (6.3%) patients to IASLC stage IIB. Three patients were downstaged from stage IV to IIIA (n = 2) and IIIB (n = 1). The 5-year and median survivals of the IIIA patients in the IASLC system, including those shifted from UICC-6 IIIB, were 37% and 35 months, respectively. Shifting of patients from UICC stage IIIB, usually considered unresectable, to IASLC stage IIIA, in which patients are frequently offered surgical resection, did not result in a decrease in median or overall survival for IASLC stage IIIA patients. The 5-year survival of IASLC stage IIA including those shifted from UICC-6 IB was 64.7% ( Figure 2 ). Statistical Comparison of UICC6 and IASLC Staging Systems We assessed each staging system’s ability to discriminate between lower stage and higher stage patients with respect to overall survival and monotonicity as assessed by strong inverse relationship between stage and overall survival using a permutation test described in the appendix . The IASLC staging system is significantly more effective with respect to discrimination and monotonicity than the UICC-6 system. Application of the permutation test on patients with operable disease showed that the IASLC staging system is more effective that the UICC-6 system at predicting overall survival of patients with operable disease on the basis of stage ( P = .009).  RESULTS The population studied included all patients undergoing curative resection for NSCLC at UTMDACC between 1998 and 2006. The demographics of the study group are shown in Table 3 . Each patient was assigned a pathologic T classification and overall stage on the basis of both the UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems. In 952 patients, application of the IASLC staging system resulted in no change from the UICC-6 assigned stage grouping. However, 202 (17.5%) patients were assigned a different stage grouping when the IASLC staging system was applied to their pathologic stage (Wilcoxon signed rank test; P = .012). Of these 202 patients with a change in stage grouping, 73 (36.2%) patients were upstaged and 129 (63.8%) patients were down-staged by application of the IASLC staging system ( Figure 1 ). Patients assigned a higher stage by the IASLC staging system included patients shifted from UICC-6 IB to IASLC IIA (n = 44, 60.2%) and IASLC IIB (n = 19, 26%) or UICC-6 IIB to IASLC IIIA (n = 10, 13.7%). Of the 73 patients who were assigned a higher stage by IASLC, none was assigned a stage that would preclude surgical resection. Application of the IASLC system resulted in downstaging patients from UICC-6 stages IIB, IIIB, and IV. Sixty-seven (53.2%) patients classified as being in UICC-6 IIB were downstaged to IASLC stage IIA. One hundred four (9%) patients were staged by the UICC-6 as having advanced locoregional disease precluding surgical resection. Of these 104 patients with stage IIIB or IV disease, 59 (56%) were restaged by the IASLC system as having potentially respectable disease. Of these, 59 patients in UICC-6 IIIB were downstaged with 51 (40.4%) patients shifted to IASLC stage IIIA and 8 (6.3%) patients to IASLC stage IIB. Three patients were downstaged from stage IV to IIIA (n = 2) and IIIB (n = 1). The 5-year and median survivals of the IIIA patients in the IASLC system, including those shifted from UICC-6 IIIB, were 37% and 35 months, respectively. Shifting of patients from UICC stage IIIB, usually considered unresectable, to IASLC stage IIIA, in which patients are frequently offered surgical resection, did not result in a decrease in median or overall survival for IASLC stage IIIA patients. The 5-year survival of IASLC stage IIA including those shifted from UICC-6 IB was 64.7% ( Figure 2 ). Statistical Comparison of UICC6 and IASLC Staging Systems We assessed each staging system’s ability to discriminate between lower stage and higher stage patients with respect to overall survival and monotonicity as assessed by strong inverse relationship between stage and overall survival using a permutation test described in the appendix . The IASLC staging system is significantly more effective with respect to discrimination and monotonicity than the UICC-6 system. Application of the permutation test on patients with operable disease showed that the IASLC staging system is more effective that the UICC-6 system at predicting overall survival of patients with operable disease on the basis of stage ( P = .009).  Statistical Comparison of UICC6 and IASLC Staging Systems We assessed each staging system’s ability to discriminate between lower stage and higher stage patients with respect to overall survival and monotonicity as assessed by strong inverse relationship between stage and overall survival using a permutation test described in the appendix . The IASLC staging system is significantly more effective with respect to discrimination and monotonicity than the UICC-6 system. Application of the permutation test on patients with operable disease showed that the IASLC staging system is more effective that the UICC-6 system at predicting overall survival of patients with operable disease on the basis of stage ( P = .009).  Statistical Comparison of UICC6 and IASLC Staging Systems We assessed each staging system’s ability to discriminate between lower stage and higher stage patients with respect to overall survival and monotonicity as assessed by strong inverse relationship between stage and overall survival using a permutation test described in the appendix . The IASLC staging system is significantly more effective with respect to discrimination and monotonicity than the UICC-6 system. Application of the permutation test on patients with operable disease showed that the IASLC staging system is more effective that the UICC-6 system at predicting overall survival of patients with operable disease on the basis of stage ( P = .009).  DISCUSSION Our study aim was to apply the IASLC T classification and overall stage groupings to a population of patients who underwent complete surgical resection for NSCLC at UTMDACC between 1998 and 2006. The proposed changes to the staging system represent a major change that will result in significant shifts of patients into higher or lower stages. We asked the question whether application of the IASLC staging system to a cancer center population replicates the findings of the IASLC International Staging Committee and whether the new IASLC staging system is an improvement over the UICC-6 staging system. Our findings confirmed the ordering of stages reported for the IASLC staging system. Furthermore, direct comparison of the IASLC and UICC-6 staging systems using the permutation test demonstrated that the IASLC system is more effective at differentiating high, mid, and low stage groupings than the current UICC-6 system at a high level of statistical significance. This increased effectiveness of the IASLC staging system may help identify those patients at higher risk for recurrence. The improved stratification of survival and limitation of heterogeneity among patients within a stage may have important implications with regard to clinical research and adjuvant treatment decisions. Our data also demonstrate a significant shifting of patients between stages when the IASLC system was applied to their pathologic stage. Of the 1154 patients in the study, 202 (17.5%) changed stage when the IASLC system was applied. One hundred four (9%) patients were staged by the UICC-6 as having advanced locoregional disease precluding surgical resection. Of these 104 patients with stage IIIB or IV disease, 59 (56%) were restaged by the IASLC system as having potentially resectable disease. Of the 73 patients who were assigned a higher stage by IASLC, none was assigned a stage that would preclude resection. There are several limitations to this analysis. The study was based on a single-institution experience with a relatively small number of patients. The data were entered into a database prospectively but the patients were not entered into this study on a protocol. The type of surgical resection and extent of nodal dissection were left to the discretion of the operating surgeon. Also, there was no centralized pathologic review, and each pathologic specimen was evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The strength of the study lies in the prospective data collection, uniformity of the staging procedures for this patient population, and the independent evaluation by our statistician using a novel application of the permutation test to evaluate the two staging systems at ordering and differentiating patients between stages. Several controversies will undoubtedly arise with the adoption of the IASLC staging system. In the current UICC-6 system, T4 lesions are staged as IIIB regardless of lymph node status and are considered unresectable except in special circumstances. In this study, shifting of stage with application of the IASLC may potentially alter the management of 134 (11.6%) patients. Sixty-three of these patients were upstaged from a stage where surgery alone is the recommended treatment to a stage where adjvant chemotherapy may be considered. 13 – 15 Additionally, 10 patients were upstaged to a stage where neoadjuvant chemotherapy is frequently offered (stage II to IIIA). The role of adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemotherapy in these patient populations may need to be re-evaluated. The IASLC system T4 lesions would be considered as IIIA or IIIB and the designation is based on the presence of absence of mediastinal nodal metastases. Satellite nodules in the ipsilateral primary lobe are considered unresectable T4 (stage IIIB) disease by UICC-6 criteria but T3 (stage IIB or IIIA) and potentially resectable by IASLC. Additionally, a satellite nodule in the ipsilateral lung but outside the primary lobe is unresectable M1 (stage IV) in the UICC-6 system and potentially resectable T4 (stage IIIA or IIIB) by IASLC. The optimal treatment strategy for these stages needs to be re-evaluated. Further study and validation of IASLC staging system and its effects on patient care are warranted.  DISCUSSION Our study aim was to apply the IASLC T classification and overall stage groupings to a population of patients who underwent complete surgical resection for NSCLC at UTMDACC between 1998 and 2006. The proposed changes to the staging system represent a major change that will result in significant shifts of patients into higher or lower stages. We asked the question whether application of the IASLC staging system to a cancer center population replicates the findings of the IASLC International Staging Committee and whether the new IASLC staging system is an improvement over the UICC-6 staging system. Our findings confirmed the ordering of stages reported for the IASLC staging system. Furthermore, direct comparison of the IASLC and UICC-6 staging systems using the permutation test demonstrated that the IASLC system is more effective at differentiating high, mid, and low stage groupings than the current UICC-6 system at a high level of statistical significance. This increased effectiveness of the IASLC staging system may help identify those patients at higher risk for recurrence. The improved stratification of survival and limitation of heterogeneity among patients within a stage may have important implications with regard to clinical research and adjuvant treatment decisions. Our data also demonstrate a significant shifting of patients between stages when the IASLC system was applied to their pathologic stage. Of the 1154 patients in the study, 202 (17.5%) changed stage when the IASLC system was applied. One hundred four (9%) patients were staged by the UICC-6 as having advanced locoregional disease precluding surgical resection. Of these 104 patients with stage IIIB or IV disease, 59 (56%) were restaged by the IASLC system as having potentially resectable disease. Of the 73 patients who were assigned a higher stage by IASLC, none was assigned a stage that would preclude resection. There are several limitations to this analysis. The study was based on a single-institution experience with a relatively small number of patients. The data were entered into a database prospectively but the patients were not entered into this study on a protocol. The type of surgical resection and extent of nodal dissection were left to the discretion of the operating surgeon. Also, there was no centralized pathologic review, and each pathologic specimen was evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The strength of the study lies in the prospective data collection, uniformity of the staging procedures for this patient population, and the independent evaluation by our statistician using a novel application of the permutation test to evaluate the two staging systems at ordering and differentiating patients between stages. Several controversies will undoubtedly arise with the adoption of the IASLC staging system. In the current UICC-6 system, T4 lesions are staged as IIIB regardless of lymph node status and are considered unresectable except in special circumstances. In this study, shifting of stage with application of the IASLC may potentially alter the management of 134 (11.6%) patients. Sixty-three of these patients were upstaged from a stage where surgery alone is the recommended treatment to a stage where adjvant chemotherapy may be considered. 13 – 15 Additionally, 10 patients were upstaged to a stage where neoadjuvant chemotherapy is frequently offered (stage II to IIIA). The role of adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemotherapy in these patient populations may need to be re-evaluated. The IASLC system T4 lesions would be considered as IIIA or IIIB and the designation is based on the presence of absence of mediastinal nodal metastases. Satellite nodules in the ipsilateral primary lobe are considered unresectable T4 (stage IIIB) disease by UICC-6 criteria but T3 (stage IIB or IIIA) and potentially resectable by IASLC. Additionally, a satellite nodule in the ipsilateral lung but outside the primary lobe is unresectable M1 (stage IV) in the UICC-6 system and potentially resectable T4 (stage IIIA or IIIB) by IASLC. The optimal treatment strategy for these stages needs to be re-evaluated. Further study and validation of IASLC staging system and its effects on patient care are warranted.  Figures and Tables FIGURE 1 Kaplan–Meier survival by overall stage for UICC-6 (A) and IASLC (B). HR, Hazard ratio; CI, confidence interval; MS, median survival; NR, not reached. UICC, Union Internationale Contre le Cancer; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. FIGURE 2 Shifting of stage after application of IASLC system. IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. APPENDIX FIGURE 1 Distribution of differences under the null distribution. TABLE 1 Comparison of T and M stage of UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems A. UICC-6 staging system Tx: Primary tumor cannot be assessed, or tumor proven by the presence of malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but not visualized by imaging or bronchoscopy T0: No evidence of primary tumor Tis: Carcinoma in situ T1: Tumor 3 cm or less in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, without evidence of invasion more proximal than the lobar bronchus T2: Tumor more than 3 cm in diameter; or tumor with any of the following features: Involves main bronchus, 2 cm or more distal to the carina Invades visceral pleura Associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis that extends to the hilar region but does not involve the entire lung T3: Tumor more than 7 cm or Direct invasion any of the following: chest wall (including superior sulcus tumours), diaphragm, phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium Tumor in the main bronchus less than 2 cm distal to the carina without carinal invasion Associated atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis of the entire lung T4: Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: Mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body or carina Separate tumor nodule(s) in the ipsilateral primary lobe Malignant pleural effusion M1: Distant metastases B. IASLC staging system Tx: Primary tumor cannot be assessed, or tumor proven by the presence of malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but not visualized by imaging or bronchoscopy T0: No evidence of primary tumor Tis: Carcinoma in situ T1: Tumor 3 cm or less in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, without evidence of invasion more proximal than the lobar bronchus T1a: Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension T1b: Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 3 cm in greatest dimension T2: Tumor more than 3 cm but not more than 7 cm or tumor with any of the following features: Involves main bronchus, 2 cm or more distal to the carina Invades visceral pleura Associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis that extends to the hilar region but does not involve the entire lung T2a: Tumor more than 3 cm but not more than 5 cm in greatest dimension T2b: Tumor more than 5 cm but not more than 7 cm in greatest dimension T3: Tumor more than 7 cm or Direct invasion any of the following: chest wall (including superior sulcus tumours), diaphragm, phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium Tumor in the main bronchus less than 2 cm distal to the carina Associated atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis of the entire lung Separate tumor nodule(s) in the same lobe T4: Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body or carina Separate tumor nodule(s) in a different ipsilateral lobe M1a: Tumor nodule in contralateral lung, tumor with pleural nodules, malignant effusion M1b: Distant metastases UICC, Union Internationale Contre le Cancer; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. TABLE 2 Comparison of TNM stage groupings of IASLC versus UICC-6 staging systems Stage UICC-6 IASLC Stage IA T1 N0 M0 T1a N0 M0 T1b N0 M0 Stage IB T2 N0 M0 T2a N0 M0 Stage IIA T1 N1 M0 T1a N1 M0 T1b N1 M0 T2a N1 M0 T2b N0 M0 Stage IIB T2 N1 M0 T2b N1 M0 T3 N0 M0 T3 N0 M0 Stage IIIA T3 N1 M0 T1a N2 M0 T1–3 N2 M0 T1b N2 M0 T2a N2 M0 T2b N2 M0 T3 N1 M0 T3 N2 M0 T4 N0 M0 T4 N1 M0 Stage IIIB T4, Any N, M0 T4 N2 M0 Any T, N3 M0 Any T, N3, M0 Stage IV Any T, Any N, M1 Any T, Any N, M1 a/b UICC, Union Internationale Contre le Cancer; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. TABLE 3 Patient characteristics Age, y (median, range) 66 (32–90) Sex (N, %) ?Male 607 (52.6) ?Female 547 (47.4) Histology ?Adenocarcinoma 658 (57%) ?Squamous cell 388 (33.6%) ?NSCLC (NOS) 62 (5.4%) ?Large cell 24 (2.1%) ?Adenosquamous 22 (1.9%) Procedure ?Lobectomy/bilobectomy 947 (82.1%) ?Pneumonectomy 94 (8.1%) ?Wedge resection 65 (5.6%) ?Segmentectomy 48 (4.2%) NSCLC, Non–small cell lung cancer; NOS, not otherwise specified.  Figures and Tables FIGURE 1 Kaplan–Meier survival by overall stage for UICC-6 (A) and IASLC (B). HR, Hazard ratio; CI, confidence interval; MS, median survival; NR, not reached. UICC, Union Internationale Contre le Cancer; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. FIGURE 2 Shifting of stage after application of IASLC system. IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. APPENDIX FIGURE 1 Distribution of differences under the null distribution. TABLE 1 Comparison of T and M stage of UICC-6 and IASLC staging systems A. UICC-6 staging system Tx: Primary tumor cannot be assessed, or tumor proven by the presence of malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but not visualized by imaging or bronchoscopy T0: No evidence of primary tumor Tis: Carcinoma in situ T1: Tumor 3 cm or less in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, without evidence of invasion more proximal than the lobar bronchus T2: Tumor more than 3 cm in diameter; or tumor with any of the following features: Involves main bronchus, 2 cm or more distal to the carina Invades visceral pleura Associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis that extends to the hilar region but does not involve the entire lung T3: Tumor more than 7 cm or Direct invasion any of the following: chest wall (including superior sulcus tumours), diaphragm, phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium Tumor in the main bronchus less than 2 cm distal to the carina without carinal invasion Associated atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis of the entire lung T4: Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: Mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body or carina Separate tumor nodule(s) in the ipsilateral primary lobe Malignant pleural effusion M1: Distant metastases B. IASLC staging system Tx: Primary tumor cannot be assessed, or tumor proven by the presence of malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but not visualized by imaging or bronchoscopy T0: No evidence of primary tumor Tis: Carcinoma in situ T1: Tumor 3 cm or less in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, without evidence of invasion more proximal than the lobar bronchus T1a: Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension T1b: Tumor more than 2 cm but not more than 3 cm in greatest dimension T2: Tumor more than 3 cm but not more than 7 cm or tumor with any of the following features: Involves main bronchus, 2 cm or more distal to the carina Invades visceral pleura Associated with atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis that extends to the hilar region but does not involve the entire lung T2a: Tumor more than 3 cm but not more than 5 cm in greatest dimension T2b: Tumor more than 5 cm but not more than 7 cm in greatest dimension T3: Tumor more than 7 cm or Direct invasion any of the following: chest wall (including superior sulcus tumours), diaphragm, phrenic nerve, mediastinal pleura, parietal pericardium Tumor in the main bronchus less than 2 cm distal to the carina Associated atelectasis or obstructive pneumonitis of the entire lung Separate tumor nodule(s) in the same lobe T4: Tumor of any size that invades any of the following: mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body or carina Separate tumor nodule(s) in a different ipsilateral lobe M1a: Tumor nodule in contralateral lung, tumor with pleural nodules, malignant effusion M1b: Distant metastases UICC, Union Internationale Contre le Cancer; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. TABLE 2 Comparison of TNM stage groupings of IASLC versus UICC-6 staging systems Stage UICC-6 IASLC Stage IA T1 N0 M0 T1a N0 M0 T1b N0 M0 Stage IB T2 N0 M0 T2a N0 M0 Stage IIA T1 N1 M0 T1a N1 M0 T1b N1 M0 T2a N1 M0 T2b N0 M0 Stage IIB T2 N1 M0 T2b N1 M0 T3 N0 M0 T3 N0 M0 Stage IIIA T3 N1 M0 T1a N2 M0 T1–3 N2 M0 T1b N2 M0 T2a N2 M0 T2b N2 M0 T3 N1 M0 T3 N2 M0 T4 N0 M0 T4 N1 M0 Stage IIIB T4, Any N, M0 T4 N2 M0 Any T, N3 M0 Any T, N3, M0 Stage IV Any T, Any N, M1 Any T, Any N, M1 a/b UICC, Union Internationale Contre le Cancer; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer. TABLE 3 Patient characteristics Age, y (median, range) 66 (32–90) Sex (N, %) ?Male 607 (52.6) ?Female 547 (47.4) Histology ?Adenocarcinoma 658 (57%) ?Squamous cell 388 (33.6%) ?NSCLC (NOS) 62 (5.4%) ?Large cell 24 (2.1%) ?Adenosquamous 22 (1.9%) Procedure ?Lobectomy/bilobectomy 947 (82.1%) ?Pneumonectomy 94 (8.1%) ?Wedge resection 65 (5.6%) ?Segmentectomy 48 (4.2%) NSCLC, Non–small cell lung cancer; NOS, not otherwise specified. 