Modulating T cell Homeostasis with IL-7: Preclinical and Clinical Studies Interleukin-7 (IL-7) is required for the development and survival of T cells and plays a critical role in modulating T cell homeostasis. This review will address current understanding of IL-7 biology, review recent clinical experiences and discuss potential future clinical applications of IL-7, or IL-7 blockade, in the setting of disease.  Conclusion Modulating the IL-7 axis holds promise for a variety of clinical scenarios spanning aging-related declines in T cell immunity, to repairing damaged immune systems from HIV disease or cancer chemotherapy. As this field moves forward, combinations of multiple therapies may be needed to optimize immune reconstitution or anti-cancer effects in the context of specific immunotherapy, but IL-7 holds promise as a central component of such regimens. In addition, autoimmune disease and lymphoid malignancies that depend upon IL-7 signaling present an opportunity to explore blockade of IL-7 and/or its receptor in modulating these diseases.  Figures and Table Figure 1 Expression levels of IL-7 receptor subunits across T cell development CD132 (?c-receptor) is expressed throughout T cell differentiation, whereas CD127 (IL-7R?) expression is seen early in thymopoiesis, then on recent thymic emigrants and naïve T cells. Effector T cells have low levels of CD127 expression, but increase levels once they acquire a memory phenotype during early antigen exposure. Because CD132 expression is relatively constant, regulation of CD127 expression largely dictates availability of the IL-7 receptor. Subsets with high levels of CD127 expression are potential targets for expansion with IL-7 therapy. Figure 2 Naïve T cell production is hampered through a normal aging-associated involution of the thymus While children have the capacity to generate large numbers of naïve T cells by thymopoiesis, thymic-dependent T cell production in adults is limited, rendering lymphopenic adults dependent upon homeostatic peripheral expansion for T cell regeneration. A similar dependence of peripheral expansion to maintain T cell numbers occurs with advancing age, and leads to limited T cell receptor repertoire diversity. IL-7 therapy may selectively expand small numbers of recent thymic emigrants and naïve T cells, which would lead to increased diversity of the peripheral T cell repertoire. IL-7 therapy may also enhance thymic throughput in some settings, also potentially increasing TCR repertoire diversity. Figure adapted from the 2007 NIH Annual Report. Table 1 Comparison of the first two Phase I trials with rhIL-7 at the National Cancer Institute Sportes et al. [ 19 ] Rosenberg et al. [ 60 ] Number of patients 16 12 Age range 20–71 20–67 rhIL-7 doses tested (mcg/kg/dose) 3, 10, 30, 60 1 3, 10, 30, 60 2 Total CD4 and CD8 expansion ? ? Regulatory T cells ? ? Naïve T cells ? CD4 and CD8 ? trend only Memory T cells ? Central > effector ? trend only Peripheral B cells No change No change Non-neutralizing antibodies 31% 100% Neutralizing antibodies 0% 0% 1 every other day × 14 days 2 every 3 days × 8 doses 