Caspase Inhibitors for the Treatment of Hepatitis C  Summary Several preclinical and early clinical studies suggest a potential benefit for caspase inhibitors in liver injury. However, significant methodologic issues including small sample size, short follow-up, and use of surrogate markers, is present in all the current studies. In particular, none of these agents has been shown to consistently decrease the critical outcomes of mortality or time to transplant. Although the results are intriguing, additional carefully designed studies with adequate methodology, patient sample size, and follow-up need to be performed before any of these medications may be recommended for the treatment of hepatitis C. Nonetheless, caspase inhibitors are extremely promising hepatoprotective agents and their further study is strongly encouraged.  Figures Fig. 1 The extrinsic pathway is initiated by the engagement of a death receptor by its cognate ligand, which results in initiator caspases 8 and 10. Activated initiator caspases cleave the BH3-only member of the Bcl-2 family Bid, which, in turn, causes mitochondrial dysfunction. The intrinsic pathway can be triggered by different intracellular stresses converging on the mitochondria. Both pathways lead to mitochondrial permeabilization with release of pro-apoptotic mitochondrial proteins, resulting in caspase 9 activation, and, subsequently, through a proteolytic cascade, activation of the effector caspases 3, 6 and 7, responsible for the degradation of numerous cellular components. Inhibition of caspases is an effective tool to block the extrinsic or death receptor pathway of cell death. Blocking caspase 9/3/6/7 will not prevent cell death as mitochondrial dysfunction, a lethal event, has already occurred. Fig. 2 Patients received IDN-6556 orally once a day at the dose indicated. Changes in serum ALT values are expressed as percent change from baseline. QD dosing indicates once a day drug administration. Data are expressed as the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM). (Reprinted from Pockros PJ, Schiff ER, Shiffman ML, et al. Oral IDN-6556, an antiapoptotic caspase inhibitor, may lower aminotransferase activity in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology 2007;46(2):326; with permission.) Fig. 3 Four patients with NASH were treated with IDN-6556 at a dose of 100 mg orally twice a day. Changes in the serum ALT values are expressed as a percent change from baseline. Results are the mean ± SEM in 4 patients. (Reprinted from Pockros PJ, Schiff ER, Shiffman ML, et al. Oral IDN-6556, an antiapoptotic caspase inhibitor, may lower aminotransferase activity in patients with chronic hepatitis C. Hepatology 2007;46(2):327; with permission.) 