Approaches to Measure Sleep-Wake Disturbances in Adolescents with Cancer Sleep-wake disturbances commonly occur in healthy adolescents. While diminished sleep and sleepiness seem normal for healthy adolescents, adolescents with chronic illnesses face additional disruption in the quantity and quality of their sleep as a result of the disease process, ongoing treatment, and associated symptoms. Little is known about how sleep in adolescents is affected by cancer, cancer treatment, and concurrent symptoms or about the consequences of sleep disruption for these patients. Although there is limited evidence to guide sleep measurement in adolescents with cancer, researchers may learn effective strategies from sleep studies completed with adolescents with other conditions. This systematic review examines how researchers have measured sleep using actigraphy, diary, and/or self-report questionnaires in diverse samples of healthy and ill adolescents. Psychometric properties are reported for nine self-report sleep questionnaires that were used in studies with mostly healthy adolescent samples. Nineteen studies provide evidence that actigraphy can be successfully and reliably used as an effective objective method to measure sleep in adolescents, including those with chronic illness. Daily sleep diaries were used less frequently to collect data from adolescents. The suitability of these techniques for the study of cancer-related sleep-wake disturbances in adolescents as well as strategies to enhance the reliability, validity, and feasibility of these measures will be discussed. Future sleep research in adolescents affected by cancer can be strengthened by the consistent use of sleep terminology, measurement of key sleep parameters, and efforts to develop and use psychometrically sound instruments. Oncology clinicians should be ready to add emerging evidence from sleep research to their care of adolescents with cancer.  Results This systematic review identified a number of studies that examined adolescent sleep using actigraphy, self-report questionnaires, and diaries using the inclusion criteria outlined above. These measurement approaches will be discussed along with considerations for their use with adolescent oncology patients. Actigraphy The search identified nineteen studies that used actigraphy to measure sleep in healthy adolescents as well as adolescents diagnosed with a variety of chronic illnesses. The aims of the studies were descriptive as well as intervention-testing. Two studies focused specifically on sleep in children and adolescents with cancer. Hinds et al. (2007b) measured sleep in 29 hospitalized patients receiving chemotherapy for a solid tumor or acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and Gedaly-Duff et al. (2006) measured sleep at home in nine patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). The adolescents in these studies wore actigraphs for periods ranging from 2 to 14 days. In an accompanying sleep log or diary, adolescents typically recorded other data to assist with data analysis, such as daily bedtime, time out of bed, and times when the device was removed ( Sadeh, Sharkey, & Carskadon, 1994 ). The studies reported a variety of sleep variables objectively measured by actigraphy, including total sleep time, sleep latency, number of awakenings, and wake time after sleep onset. Several different actigraph models were used in the studies, and scoring was completed with different software programs and mathematical algorithms. Table 2 includes information about the actigraphy studies with adolescents, along with comments about technical difficulties. Acebo and colleagues (1999) concluded that at least five nights of actigraphy recordings (either weekday-night or weekend-night) were required for adequate reliability estimates (greater than 0.70) of aggregated values. They also found that measures of sleep minutes and sleep period were the least reliable aggregated actigraphy variable. Sadeh and colleagues (2000) reported reliability estimates ranging from 0.66 to 0.91 for aggregated values calculated for a 5-day recording period. Actigraph data have been shown to correlate with polysomnography recordings in infants, children, and adults, except in patients with highly disturbed sleep or movement disorders ( Littner et al, 2003 ), confirming it as an accurate measurement approach. Johnson, Kirchner, Rosen, Storfer-Isser, Cartar et al. (2007) explored the reliability of actigraphy in a sample of 181 adolescents, comparing actigraphy data from three different modes of analysis to overnight polysomnography (PSG). They found that actigraphy underestimated sleep duration compared to PSG in these adolescent participants, with more accurate estimates of sleep duration in females. Except for the subjects with autism, investigators reported over 90 % compliance with adolescents' use of actigraphs, confirming feasibility in healthy adolescents as well as those with acute and chronic illnesses. Technical problems resulted in loss of up to 20% of actigraph data, and other problems with actigraphs included broken straps, allergic reactions, and adolescents who forgot to replace the devices after swimming or bathing – problems similar to actigraphy use with adults. Benefits of actigraphy relate to its ability to objectively measure the subject's sleep by continuous recording over several days in a natural setting during normal activities. Drawbacks include the need for training in use of the actigraph and the accompanying computer software for data analysis. Use of actigraphy may also be limited to smaller samples because of practical issues related to expenses and availability of equipment. Self-report sleep questionnaires Self-report sleep questionnaires commonly ask participants to retrospectively report about their sleep for a specified period of time. In Table 3 , nine self-report questionnaires are described that have been used in sleep studies with adolescents. These questionnaires include a variety of the sleep parameters and most commonly measure daytime sleepiness, quality of sleep, circadian rhythm tendencies, total sleep time, and sleep latency. Some instruments and subscales also ask about behaviors that facilitate or inhibit sleep, including the use of alcohol, tobacco, and sleep medications, as well as other sleep habits and sleep settings. The instruments have periods of recall that range from one week to ‘past months’ and use a variety of responses and scoring approaches. Table 4 provides psychometric information about each sleep questionnaire that was reported in a sleep study or studies with adolescents. There is support for two scales to measure sleepiness in adolescents: the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS). The ESS has also been used in several other large studies with healthy adolescents in Korea ( Joo, Shin, Kim, Yi, Ahn Park, et al., 2005 ), Mexico ( Moo-Estrella, Perez-Benitez, Solis-Rodriguez, & Arankowsky-Sandoval, 2005 ), Poland ( Oginska & Pokorski, 2006 ), and the United States (US) ( Pilcher, Schoeling, & Prosansky, 2000 ), although no psychometric data is reported. The PDSS has also been used to study sleepiness in overweight adolescents (Beebe, Lewin, Zeller, McCabe, MacLeod et al., 2007). Several scales are available to measure sleep behaviors and sleep quality. In addition to the studies listed in the table, Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) has been used in a number of large scale surveys with healthy adolescents in the US ( Amschler & MacKenzie, 2005 ; Mercer, Merritt, & Cowell, 1998 ; O'Brien & Mindell, 2005 ; Owens, Stahl, Patton, Reddy, & Crouch, 2006 ; Stallones, Beseler, & Chen, 2006 ), Croatia ( Radovic-Vadacek & Koscec, 2004 ), Korea ( Yang, Kim, Patel, & Lee, 2005 ), and Italy ( Russo, Bruni, Lucidi, Ferri, & Violani, 2007 ). The Survey has also been used to study adolescents with pain ( Meltzer, Logan, Mindell, 2005 ; Palermo & Kiska, 2005 ). Sadeh's Sleep Questionnaire has been used to study sleep in Israeli adolescents with headache (Bursztein, Bernstein, & Sadeh, 2006). Gaina and colleagues have measured sleep in several large studies with healthy Japanese adolescents using their Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ; Gaina, Sekine, Kanayama, Takashi, Hu, et al., 2006; Gaina, Sekine, Shimako, Ziaoli, Hitomi, et al., 2006). In summary, none of the self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents addresses all nine parameters recommended by oncology sleep experts. Many of the self-report sleep questionnaires need more reliability and validity testing, and none have been used to study sleep in adolescents who have cancer. Although there is moderate support for the reliability and validity of Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) and Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina et al., 2004b ), these measures have limitations for use with adolescent subjects who do not regularly attend school because items on both questionnaires ask specifically about sleep-wake patterns on school days. The School Sleep Habits Survey, for example, asks questions about the subject's sleep during the past two school weeks and about ‘usual’ sleep and wake times on school days. Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire includes categories for ‘school days’ and ‘weekends.’ Adolescents who have irregular school attendance, who are not currently in school, or who follow a flexible home-schooling routine would find these questions inapplicable or difficult to answer. Since psychometric data from the studies show these self-report measures are less valid when adolescents report sleep from less-structured non-school days, these instruments may be better suited for testing with adolescent cancer-survivors who are regularly attending school or work. Finally, other limitations of self-report sleep surveys include issues related to subject recall and bias. This is especially problematic in adolescents, who may provide the most socially desirable responses rather than the most accurate ( Wolfson et al, 2003 ). Sleep diary Daily sleep diaries or logs are recommended for use with actigraphy to identify artifacts, bedtimes, and wake-times and support data analysis ( Littner et al., 2003 ). Daily sleep diaries, however, can also be used as the main subjective sleep measurement approach. Five studies provide evidence about the use of sleep diaries alone to measure sleep in adolescents. ( Table 5 .) Gaina and colleagues ( Gaina et al., 2004b ; Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ) compared one week of subjective diary data to actigraph data in over 130 healthy Japanese subjects age 13 to 14 years. Subjective reports of sleep latency, sleep start, sleep end, and assumed sleep were significantly associated with objective actigraph data for both genders, with correlations ranging from 0.49 to 0.99, p < 0.001 ( Gaina et al., 2004b ). Correlations were lower for nighttime awakenings (r = 0.55 to 0.68) and sleep latency (r = 0.66 – 0.77), where adolescents tended to underestimate how many times they awoke during the night and overestimate how long it took them to fall asleep. The associations were consistently stronger for school-days than for weekend days, and the strength of the associations showed a decreasing pattern over the one-week period ( Gaina et al., 2005b ). Bertocci and colleagues (2005) collected sleep diary information for one week from a group of 51 children and adolescents with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 42 matched controls, age 8 to 16 years old. While depressed subjects rated their sleep as more disturbed than the control subjects, follow-up polysomnography showed no objective evidence to support the diary complaints of poor sleep reported by adolescents with MDD. In fact, the subgroup of MDD youth with the worst sleep complaints appeared to sleep better in the polysomnography laboratory. The authors' findings raise questions about how adolescents with behavioral and emotional problems perceive their sleep and sleep problems. Tsai and Li (2004) collected sleep diary data from 237 Taiwanese college students for one week, assessing sleep time variables as well asking about sleep quality and any significant events. Hansen and colleagues (2005) reported on diary data collected for one month at four separate times from 55 American high school students taking a biology class. Problems with attrition were noted in the Hansen study, but no validity or reliability estimates for the diary data were given in either of these studies. In summary, there is a need for studies to evaluate the use of a sleep diary alone as a valid and reliable sleep measurement approach with adolescents. There is some evidence to support the short-term use of diaries for healthy adolescents on regular schedules, but diaries may be problematic when used to collect sleep data on non-school days, from adolescents who keep irregular schedules, and from adolescents with significant emotional issues. The burden of daily diary recording may result in decreased reliability over time, and this approach may have limited feasibility and problems with missing data when used with adolescents who are symptomatic on active cancer treatment.  Results This systematic review identified a number of studies that examined adolescent sleep using actigraphy, self-report questionnaires, and diaries using the inclusion criteria outlined above. These measurement approaches will be discussed along with considerations for their use with adolescent oncology patients. Actigraphy The search identified nineteen studies that used actigraphy to measure sleep in healthy adolescents as well as adolescents diagnosed with a variety of chronic illnesses. The aims of the studies were descriptive as well as intervention-testing. Two studies focused specifically on sleep in children and adolescents with cancer. Hinds et al. (2007b) measured sleep in 29 hospitalized patients receiving chemotherapy for a solid tumor or acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and Gedaly-Duff et al. (2006) measured sleep at home in nine patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). The adolescents in these studies wore actigraphs for periods ranging from 2 to 14 days. In an accompanying sleep log or diary, adolescents typically recorded other data to assist with data analysis, such as daily bedtime, time out of bed, and times when the device was removed ( Sadeh, Sharkey, & Carskadon, 1994 ). The studies reported a variety of sleep variables objectively measured by actigraphy, including total sleep time, sleep latency, number of awakenings, and wake time after sleep onset. Several different actigraph models were used in the studies, and scoring was completed with different software programs and mathematical algorithms. Table 2 includes information about the actigraphy studies with adolescents, along with comments about technical difficulties. Acebo and colleagues (1999) concluded that at least five nights of actigraphy recordings (either weekday-night or weekend-night) were required for adequate reliability estimates (greater than 0.70) of aggregated values. They also found that measures of sleep minutes and sleep period were the least reliable aggregated actigraphy variable. Sadeh and colleagues (2000) reported reliability estimates ranging from 0.66 to 0.91 for aggregated values calculated for a 5-day recording period. Actigraph data have been shown to correlate with polysomnography recordings in infants, children, and adults, except in patients with highly disturbed sleep or movement disorders ( Littner et al, 2003 ), confirming it as an accurate measurement approach. Johnson, Kirchner, Rosen, Storfer-Isser, Cartar et al. (2007) explored the reliability of actigraphy in a sample of 181 adolescents, comparing actigraphy data from three different modes of analysis to overnight polysomnography (PSG). They found that actigraphy underestimated sleep duration compared to PSG in these adolescent participants, with more accurate estimates of sleep duration in females. Except for the subjects with autism, investigators reported over 90 % compliance with adolescents' use of actigraphs, confirming feasibility in healthy adolescents as well as those with acute and chronic illnesses. Technical problems resulted in loss of up to 20% of actigraph data, and other problems with actigraphs included broken straps, allergic reactions, and adolescents who forgot to replace the devices after swimming or bathing – problems similar to actigraphy use with adults. Benefits of actigraphy relate to its ability to objectively measure the subject's sleep by continuous recording over several days in a natural setting during normal activities. Drawbacks include the need for training in use of the actigraph and the accompanying computer software for data analysis. Use of actigraphy may also be limited to smaller samples because of practical issues related to expenses and availability of equipment. Self-report sleep questionnaires Self-report sleep questionnaires commonly ask participants to retrospectively report about their sleep for a specified period of time. In Table 3 , nine self-report questionnaires are described that have been used in sleep studies with adolescents. These questionnaires include a variety of the sleep parameters and most commonly measure daytime sleepiness, quality of sleep, circadian rhythm tendencies, total sleep time, and sleep latency. Some instruments and subscales also ask about behaviors that facilitate or inhibit sleep, including the use of alcohol, tobacco, and sleep medications, as well as other sleep habits and sleep settings. The instruments have periods of recall that range from one week to ‘past months’ and use a variety of responses and scoring approaches. Table 4 provides psychometric information about each sleep questionnaire that was reported in a sleep study or studies with adolescents. There is support for two scales to measure sleepiness in adolescents: the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS). The ESS has also been used in several other large studies with healthy adolescents in Korea ( Joo, Shin, Kim, Yi, Ahn Park, et al., 2005 ), Mexico ( Moo-Estrella, Perez-Benitez, Solis-Rodriguez, & Arankowsky-Sandoval, 2005 ), Poland ( Oginska & Pokorski, 2006 ), and the United States (US) ( Pilcher, Schoeling, & Prosansky, 2000 ), although no psychometric data is reported. The PDSS has also been used to study sleepiness in overweight adolescents (Beebe, Lewin, Zeller, McCabe, MacLeod et al., 2007). Several scales are available to measure sleep behaviors and sleep quality. In addition to the studies listed in the table, Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) has been used in a number of large scale surveys with healthy adolescents in the US ( Amschler & MacKenzie, 2005 ; Mercer, Merritt, & Cowell, 1998 ; O'Brien & Mindell, 2005 ; Owens, Stahl, Patton, Reddy, & Crouch, 2006 ; Stallones, Beseler, & Chen, 2006 ), Croatia ( Radovic-Vadacek & Koscec, 2004 ), Korea ( Yang, Kim, Patel, & Lee, 2005 ), and Italy ( Russo, Bruni, Lucidi, Ferri, & Violani, 2007 ). The Survey has also been used to study adolescents with pain ( Meltzer, Logan, Mindell, 2005 ; Palermo & Kiska, 2005 ). Sadeh's Sleep Questionnaire has been used to study sleep in Israeli adolescents with headache (Bursztein, Bernstein, & Sadeh, 2006). Gaina and colleagues have measured sleep in several large studies with healthy Japanese adolescents using their Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ; Gaina, Sekine, Kanayama, Takashi, Hu, et al., 2006; Gaina, Sekine, Shimako, Ziaoli, Hitomi, et al., 2006). In summary, none of the self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents addresses all nine parameters recommended by oncology sleep experts. Many of the self-report sleep questionnaires need more reliability and validity testing, and none have been used to study sleep in adolescents who have cancer. Although there is moderate support for the reliability and validity of Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) and Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina et al., 2004b ), these measures have limitations for use with adolescent subjects who do not regularly attend school because items on both questionnaires ask specifically about sleep-wake patterns on school days. The School Sleep Habits Survey, for example, asks questions about the subject's sleep during the past two school weeks and about ‘usual’ sleep and wake times on school days. Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire includes categories for ‘school days’ and ‘weekends.’ Adolescents who have irregular school attendance, who are not currently in school, or who follow a flexible home-schooling routine would find these questions inapplicable or difficult to answer. Since psychometric data from the studies show these self-report measures are less valid when adolescents report sleep from less-structured non-school days, these instruments may be better suited for testing with adolescent cancer-survivors who are regularly attending school or work. Finally, other limitations of self-report sleep surveys include issues related to subject recall and bias. This is especially problematic in adolescents, who may provide the most socially desirable responses rather than the most accurate ( Wolfson et al, 2003 ). Sleep diary Daily sleep diaries or logs are recommended for use with actigraphy to identify artifacts, bedtimes, and wake-times and support data analysis ( Littner et al., 2003 ). Daily sleep diaries, however, can also be used as the main subjective sleep measurement approach. Five studies provide evidence about the use of sleep diaries alone to measure sleep in adolescents. ( Table 5 .) Gaina and colleagues ( Gaina et al., 2004b ; Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ) compared one week of subjective diary data to actigraph data in over 130 healthy Japanese subjects age 13 to 14 years. Subjective reports of sleep latency, sleep start, sleep end, and assumed sleep were significantly associated with objective actigraph data for both genders, with correlations ranging from 0.49 to 0.99, p < 0.001 ( Gaina et al., 2004b ). Correlations were lower for nighttime awakenings (r = 0.55 to 0.68) and sleep latency (r = 0.66 – 0.77), where adolescents tended to underestimate how many times they awoke during the night and overestimate how long it took them to fall asleep. The associations were consistently stronger for school-days than for weekend days, and the strength of the associations showed a decreasing pattern over the one-week period ( Gaina et al., 2005b ). Bertocci and colleagues (2005) collected sleep diary information for one week from a group of 51 children and adolescents with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 42 matched controls, age 8 to 16 years old. While depressed subjects rated their sleep as more disturbed than the control subjects, follow-up polysomnography showed no objective evidence to support the diary complaints of poor sleep reported by adolescents with MDD. In fact, the subgroup of MDD youth with the worst sleep complaints appeared to sleep better in the polysomnography laboratory. The authors' findings raise questions about how adolescents with behavioral and emotional problems perceive their sleep and sleep problems. Tsai and Li (2004) collected sleep diary data from 237 Taiwanese college students for one week, assessing sleep time variables as well asking about sleep quality and any significant events. Hansen and colleagues (2005) reported on diary data collected for one month at four separate times from 55 American high school students taking a biology class. Problems with attrition were noted in the Hansen study, but no validity or reliability estimates for the diary data were given in either of these studies. In summary, there is a need for studies to evaluate the use of a sleep diary alone as a valid and reliable sleep measurement approach with adolescents. There is some evidence to support the short-term use of diaries for healthy adolescents on regular schedules, but diaries may be problematic when used to collect sleep data on non-school days, from adolescents who keep irregular schedules, and from adolescents with significant emotional issues. The burden of daily diary recording may result in decreased reliability over time, and this approach may have limited feasibility and problems with missing data when used with adolescents who are symptomatic on active cancer treatment.  Actigraphy The search identified nineteen studies that used actigraphy to measure sleep in healthy adolescents as well as adolescents diagnosed with a variety of chronic illnesses. The aims of the studies were descriptive as well as intervention-testing. Two studies focused specifically on sleep in children and adolescents with cancer. Hinds et al. (2007b) measured sleep in 29 hospitalized patients receiving chemotherapy for a solid tumor or acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and Gedaly-Duff et al. (2006) measured sleep at home in nine patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). The adolescents in these studies wore actigraphs for periods ranging from 2 to 14 days. In an accompanying sleep log or diary, adolescents typically recorded other data to assist with data analysis, such as daily bedtime, time out of bed, and times when the device was removed ( Sadeh, Sharkey, & Carskadon, 1994 ). The studies reported a variety of sleep variables objectively measured by actigraphy, including total sleep time, sleep latency, number of awakenings, and wake time after sleep onset. Several different actigraph models were used in the studies, and scoring was completed with different software programs and mathematical algorithms. Table 2 includes information about the actigraphy studies with adolescents, along with comments about technical difficulties. Acebo and colleagues (1999) concluded that at least five nights of actigraphy recordings (either weekday-night or weekend-night) were required for adequate reliability estimates (greater than 0.70) of aggregated values. They also found that measures of sleep minutes and sleep period were the least reliable aggregated actigraphy variable. Sadeh and colleagues (2000) reported reliability estimates ranging from 0.66 to 0.91 for aggregated values calculated for a 5-day recording period. Actigraph data have been shown to correlate with polysomnography recordings in infants, children, and adults, except in patients with highly disturbed sleep or movement disorders ( Littner et al, 2003 ), confirming it as an accurate measurement approach. Johnson, Kirchner, Rosen, Storfer-Isser, Cartar et al. (2007) explored the reliability of actigraphy in a sample of 181 adolescents, comparing actigraphy data from three different modes of analysis to overnight polysomnography (PSG). They found that actigraphy underestimated sleep duration compared to PSG in these adolescent participants, with more accurate estimates of sleep duration in females. Except for the subjects with autism, investigators reported over 90 % compliance with adolescents' use of actigraphs, confirming feasibility in healthy adolescents as well as those with acute and chronic illnesses. Technical problems resulted in loss of up to 20% of actigraph data, and other problems with actigraphs included broken straps, allergic reactions, and adolescents who forgot to replace the devices after swimming or bathing – problems similar to actigraphy use with adults. Benefits of actigraphy relate to its ability to objectively measure the subject's sleep by continuous recording over several days in a natural setting during normal activities. Drawbacks include the need for training in use of the actigraph and the accompanying computer software for data analysis. Use of actigraphy may also be limited to smaller samples because of practical issues related to expenses and availability of equipment.  Actigraphy The search identified nineteen studies that used actigraphy to measure sleep in healthy adolescents as well as adolescents diagnosed with a variety of chronic illnesses. The aims of the studies were descriptive as well as intervention-testing. Two studies focused specifically on sleep in children and adolescents with cancer. Hinds et al. (2007b) measured sleep in 29 hospitalized patients receiving chemotherapy for a solid tumor or acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and Gedaly-Duff et al. (2006) measured sleep at home in nine patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). The adolescents in these studies wore actigraphs for periods ranging from 2 to 14 days. In an accompanying sleep log or diary, adolescents typically recorded other data to assist with data analysis, such as daily bedtime, time out of bed, and times when the device was removed ( Sadeh, Sharkey, & Carskadon, 1994 ). The studies reported a variety of sleep variables objectively measured by actigraphy, including total sleep time, sleep latency, number of awakenings, and wake time after sleep onset. Several different actigraph models were used in the studies, and scoring was completed with different software programs and mathematical algorithms. Table 2 includes information about the actigraphy studies with adolescents, along with comments about technical difficulties. Acebo and colleagues (1999) concluded that at least five nights of actigraphy recordings (either weekday-night or weekend-night) were required for adequate reliability estimates (greater than 0.70) of aggregated values. They also found that measures of sleep minutes and sleep period were the least reliable aggregated actigraphy variable. Sadeh and colleagues (2000) reported reliability estimates ranging from 0.66 to 0.91 for aggregated values calculated for a 5-day recording period. Actigraph data have been shown to correlate with polysomnography recordings in infants, children, and adults, except in patients with highly disturbed sleep or movement disorders ( Littner et al, 2003 ), confirming it as an accurate measurement approach. Johnson, Kirchner, Rosen, Storfer-Isser, Cartar et al. (2007) explored the reliability of actigraphy in a sample of 181 adolescents, comparing actigraphy data from three different modes of analysis to overnight polysomnography (PSG). They found that actigraphy underestimated sleep duration compared to PSG in these adolescent participants, with more accurate estimates of sleep duration in females. Except for the subjects with autism, investigators reported over 90 % compliance with adolescents' use of actigraphs, confirming feasibility in healthy adolescents as well as those with acute and chronic illnesses. Technical problems resulted in loss of up to 20% of actigraph data, and other problems with actigraphs included broken straps, allergic reactions, and adolescents who forgot to replace the devices after swimming or bathing – problems similar to actigraphy use with adults. Benefits of actigraphy relate to its ability to objectively measure the subject's sleep by continuous recording over several days in a natural setting during normal activities. Drawbacks include the need for training in use of the actigraph and the accompanying computer software for data analysis. Use of actigraphy may also be limited to smaller samples because of practical issues related to expenses and availability of equipment.  Self-report sleep questionnaires Self-report sleep questionnaires commonly ask participants to retrospectively report about their sleep for a specified period of time. In Table 3 , nine self-report questionnaires are described that have been used in sleep studies with adolescents. These questionnaires include a variety of the sleep parameters and most commonly measure daytime sleepiness, quality of sleep, circadian rhythm tendencies, total sleep time, and sleep latency. Some instruments and subscales also ask about behaviors that facilitate or inhibit sleep, including the use of alcohol, tobacco, and sleep medications, as well as other sleep habits and sleep settings. The instruments have periods of recall that range from one week to ‘past months’ and use a variety of responses and scoring approaches. Table 4 provides psychometric information about each sleep questionnaire that was reported in a sleep study or studies with adolescents. There is support for two scales to measure sleepiness in adolescents: the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS). The ESS has also been used in several other large studies with healthy adolescents in Korea ( Joo, Shin, Kim, Yi, Ahn Park, et al., 2005 ), Mexico ( Moo-Estrella, Perez-Benitez, Solis-Rodriguez, & Arankowsky-Sandoval, 2005 ), Poland ( Oginska & Pokorski, 2006 ), and the United States (US) ( Pilcher, Schoeling, & Prosansky, 2000 ), although no psychometric data is reported. The PDSS has also been used to study sleepiness in overweight adolescents (Beebe, Lewin, Zeller, McCabe, MacLeod et al., 2007). Several scales are available to measure sleep behaviors and sleep quality. In addition to the studies listed in the table, Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) has been used in a number of large scale surveys with healthy adolescents in the US ( Amschler & MacKenzie, 2005 ; Mercer, Merritt, & Cowell, 1998 ; O'Brien & Mindell, 2005 ; Owens, Stahl, Patton, Reddy, & Crouch, 2006 ; Stallones, Beseler, & Chen, 2006 ), Croatia ( Radovic-Vadacek & Koscec, 2004 ), Korea ( Yang, Kim, Patel, & Lee, 2005 ), and Italy ( Russo, Bruni, Lucidi, Ferri, & Violani, 2007 ). The Survey has also been used to study adolescents with pain ( Meltzer, Logan, Mindell, 2005 ; Palermo & Kiska, 2005 ). Sadeh's Sleep Questionnaire has been used to study sleep in Israeli adolescents with headache (Bursztein, Bernstein, & Sadeh, 2006). Gaina and colleagues have measured sleep in several large studies with healthy Japanese adolescents using their Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ; Gaina, Sekine, Kanayama, Takashi, Hu, et al., 2006; Gaina, Sekine, Shimako, Ziaoli, Hitomi, et al., 2006). In summary, none of the self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents addresses all nine parameters recommended by oncology sleep experts. Many of the self-report sleep questionnaires need more reliability and validity testing, and none have been used to study sleep in adolescents who have cancer. Although there is moderate support for the reliability and validity of Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) and Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina et al., 2004b ), these measures have limitations for use with adolescent subjects who do not regularly attend school because items on both questionnaires ask specifically about sleep-wake patterns on school days. The School Sleep Habits Survey, for example, asks questions about the subject's sleep during the past two school weeks and about ‘usual’ sleep and wake times on school days. Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire includes categories for ‘school days’ and ‘weekends.’ Adolescents who have irregular school attendance, who are not currently in school, or who follow a flexible home-schooling routine would find these questions inapplicable or difficult to answer. Since psychometric data from the studies show these self-report measures are less valid when adolescents report sleep from less-structured non-school days, these instruments may be better suited for testing with adolescent cancer-survivors who are regularly attending school or work. Finally, other limitations of self-report sleep surveys include issues related to subject recall and bias. This is especially problematic in adolescents, who may provide the most socially desirable responses rather than the most accurate ( Wolfson et al, 2003 ).  Self-report sleep questionnaires Self-report sleep questionnaires commonly ask participants to retrospectively report about their sleep for a specified period of time. In Table 3 , nine self-report questionnaires are described that have been used in sleep studies with adolescents. These questionnaires include a variety of the sleep parameters and most commonly measure daytime sleepiness, quality of sleep, circadian rhythm tendencies, total sleep time, and sleep latency. Some instruments and subscales also ask about behaviors that facilitate or inhibit sleep, including the use of alcohol, tobacco, and sleep medications, as well as other sleep habits and sleep settings. The instruments have periods of recall that range from one week to ‘past months’ and use a variety of responses and scoring approaches. Table 4 provides psychometric information about each sleep questionnaire that was reported in a sleep study or studies with adolescents. There is support for two scales to measure sleepiness in adolescents: the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) and the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS). The ESS has also been used in several other large studies with healthy adolescents in Korea ( Joo, Shin, Kim, Yi, Ahn Park, et al., 2005 ), Mexico ( Moo-Estrella, Perez-Benitez, Solis-Rodriguez, & Arankowsky-Sandoval, 2005 ), Poland ( Oginska & Pokorski, 2006 ), and the United States (US) ( Pilcher, Schoeling, & Prosansky, 2000 ), although no psychometric data is reported. The PDSS has also been used to study sleepiness in overweight adolescents (Beebe, Lewin, Zeller, McCabe, MacLeod et al., 2007). Several scales are available to measure sleep behaviors and sleep quality. In addition to the studies listed in the table, Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) has been used in a number of large scale surveys with healthy adolescents in the US ( Amschler & MacKenzie, 2005 ; Mercer, Merritt, & Cowell, 1998 ; O'Brien & Mindell, 2005 ; Owens, Stahl, Patton, Reddy, & Crouch, 2006 ; Stallones, Beseler, & Chen, 2006 ), Croatia ( Radovic-Vadacek & Koscec, 2004 ), Korea ( Yang, Kim, Patel, & Lee, 2005 ), and Italy ( Russo, Bruni, Lucidi, Ferri, & Violani, 2007 ). The Survey has also been used to study adolescents with pain ( Meltzer, Logan, Mindell, 2005 ; Palermo & Kiska, 2005 ). Sadeh's Sleep Questionnaire has been used to study sleep in Israeli adolescents with headache (Bursztein, Bernstein, & Sadeh, 2006). Gaina and colleagues have measured sleep in several large studies with healthy Japanese adolescents using their Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ; Gaina, Sekine, Kanayama, Takashi, Hu, et al., 2006; Gaina, Sekine, Shimako, Ziaoli, Hitomi, et al., 2006). In summary, none of the self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents addresses all nine parameters recommended by oncology sleep experts. Many of the self-report sleep questionnaires need more reliability and validity testing, and none have been used to study sleep in adolescents who have cancer. Although there is moderate support for the reliability and validity of Carskadon's School Habits Survey ( Carskadon et al., 1991 ) and Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire ( Gaina et al., 2004b ), these measures have limitations for use with adolescent subjects who do not regularly attend school because items on both questionnaires ask specifically about sleep-wake patterns on school days. The School Sleep Habits Survey, for example, asks questions about the subject's sleep during the past two school weeks and about ‘usual’ sleep and wake times on school days. Gaina's Sleep Questionnaire includes categories for ‘school days’ and ‘weekends.’ Adolescents who have irregular school attendance, who are not currently in school, or who follow a flexible home-schooling routine would find these questions inapplicable or difficult to answer. Since psychometric data from the studies show these self-report measures are less valid when adolescents report sleep from less-structured non-school days, these instruments may be better suited for testing with adolescent cancer-survivors who are regularly attending school or work. Finally, other limitations of self-report sleep surveys include issues related to subject recall and bias. This is especially problematic in adolescents, who may provide the most socially desirable responses rather than the most accurate ( Wolfson et al, 2003 ).  Sleep diary Daily sleep diaries or logs are recommended for use with actigraphy to identify artifacts, bedtimes, and wake-times and support data analysis ( Littner et al., 2003 ). Daily sleep diaries, however, can also be used as the main subjective sleep measurement approach. Five studies provide evidence about the use of sleep diaries alone to measure sleep in adolescents. ( Table 5 .) Gaina and colleagues ( Gaina et al., 2004b ; Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ) compared one week of subjective diary data to actigraph data in over 130 healthy Japanese subjects age 13 to 14 years. Subjective reports of sleep latency, sleep start, sleep end, and assumed sleep were significantly associated with objective actigraph data for both genders, with correlations ranging from 0.49 to 0.99, p < 0.001 ( Gaina et al., 2004b ). Correlations were lower for nighttime awakenings (r = 0.55 to 0.68) and sleep latency (r = 0.66 – 0.77), where adolescents tended to underestimate how many times they awoke during the night and overestimate how long it took them to fall asleep. The associations were consistently stronger for school-days than for weekend days, and the strength of the associations showed a decreasing pattern over the one-week period ( Gaina et al., 2005b ). Bertocci and colleagues (2005) collected sleep diary information for one week from a group of 51 children and adolescents with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 42 matched controls, age 8 to 16 years old. While depressed subjects rated their sleep as more disturbed than the control subjects, follow-up polysomnography showed no objective evidence to support the diary complaints of poor sleep reported by adolescents with MDD. In fact, the subgroup of MDD youth with the worst sleep complaints appeared to sleep better in the polysomnography laboratory. The authors' findings raise questions about how adolescents with behavioral and emotional problems perceive their sleep and sleep problems. Tsai and Li (2004) collected sleep diary data from 237 Taiwanese college students for one week, assessing sleep time variables as well asking about sleep quality and any significant events. Hansen and colleagues (2005) reported on diary data collected for one month at four separate times from 55 American high school students taking a biology class. Problems with attrition were noted in the Hansen study, but no validity or reliability estimates for the diary data were given in either of these studies. In summary, there is a need for studies to evaluate the use of a sleep diary alone as a valid and reliable sleep measurement approach with adolescents. There is some evidence to support the short-term use of diaries for healthy adolescents on regular schedules, but diaries may be problematic when used to collect sleep data on non-school days, from adolescents who keep irregular schedules, and from adolescents with significant emotional issues. The burden of daily diary recording may result in decreased reliability over time, and this approach may have limited feasibility and problems with missing data when used with adolescents who are symptomatic on active cancer treatment.  Sleep diary Daily sleep diaries or logs are recommended for use with actigraphy to identify artifacts, bedtimes, and wake-times and support data analysis ( Littner et al., 2003 ). Daily sleep diaries, however, can also be used as the main subjective sleep measurement approach. Five studies provide evidence about the use of sleep diaries alone to measure sleep in adolescents. ( Table 5 .) Gaina and colleagues ( Gaina et al., 2004b ; Gaina, Sekine, Hamanishi, Chen, & Kagamimori, 2005 ) compared one week of subjective diary data to actigraph data in over 130 healthy Japanese subjects age 13 to 14 years. Subjective reports of sleep latency, sleep start, sleep end, and assumed sleep were significantly associated with objective actigraph data for both genders, with correlations ranging from 0.49 to 0.99, p < 0.001 ( Gaina et al., 2004b ). Correlations were lower for nighttime awakenings (r = 0.55 to 0.68) and sleep latency (r = 0.66 – 0.77), where adolescents tended to underestimate how many times they awoke during the night and overestimate how long it took them to fall asleep. The associations were consistently stronger for school-days than for weekend days, and the strength of the associations showed a decreasing pattern over the one-week period ( Gaina et al., 2005b ). Bertocci and colleagues (2005) collected sleep diary information for one week from a group of 51 children and adolescents with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 42 matched controls, age 8 to 16 years old. While depressed subjects rated their sleep as more disturbed than the control subjects, follow-up polysomnography showed no objective evidence to support the diary complaints of poor sleep reported by adolescents with MDD. In fact, the subgroup of MDD youth with the worst sleep complaints appeared to sleep better in the polysomnography laboratory. The authors' findings raise questions about how adolescents with behavioral and emotional problems perceive their sleep and sleep problems. Tsai and Li (2004) collected sleep diary data from 237 Taiwanese college students for one week, assessing sleep time variables as well asking about sleep quality and any significant events. Hansen and colleagues (2005) reported on diary data collected for one month at four separate times from 55 American high school students taking a biology class. Problems with attrition were noted in the Hansen study, but no validity or reliability estimates for the diary data were given in either of these studies. In summary, there is a need for studies to evaluate the use of a sleep diary alone as a valid and reliable sleep measurement approach with adolescents. There is some evidence to support the short-term use of diaries for healthy adolescents on regular schedules, but diaries may be problematic when used to collect sleep data on non-school days, from adolescents who keep irregular schedules, and from adolescents with significant emotional issues. The burden of daily diary recording may result in decreased reliability over time, and this approach may have limited feasibility and problems with missing data when used with adolescents who are symptomatic on active cancer treatment.  Implications for Practice and Research Although much has been learned about the importance of sleep for adolescents' well-being, more research is needed to understand sleep-wake disturbances in adolescents with cancer as they receive acute treatment and when they become long-term survivors. Because a limited number of sleep studies have been conducted with adolescents with cancer, knowledge about their sleep problems often emerges from studies with younger children or older adults. To facilitate adolescent oncology sleep research, investigators need to work toward a sound measurement approach using a standard set of sleep parameters. Sleep researchers need to report information about the feasibility, reliability, and validity of sleep measures when they are used with adolescents, and studies with larger samples of adolescents with cancer are needed. This review described the use of actigraphy, self-report questionnaires, and diaries used to measure sleep in healthy and chronically ill adolescents. Actigraphy is an objective approach that has been used successfully with chronically ill adolescents, including adolescents with cancer. When combined with diary questions to elicit subjective data, actigraphy offers a valid and reliable measurement approach for adolescent oncology sleep research, especially when at least five nights of usable data are recorded. When using this approach, however, adolescent oncology sleep researchers need to follow recommended standards for the use and analysis of data as well as account for the necessary technological and financial requirements. Although there are several adolescent-appropriate sleep questionnaires currently used in sleep research, none address the full set of sleep parameters recommended for oncology patients, and none have been tested with adolescents on cancer treatment or adolescent cancer survivors. Researchers need to explore whether some of the existing instruments can be tailored for use with adolescent oncology patients. Other questionnaires that have been validated with adults with cancer, such as the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) ( Beck, Schwartz, Towlsey, Dudley, & Barsevick, 2004 ), the General Sleep Disturbance Scale (GSDS) ( Miaskowski et al., 2006 ), or the Clinical Sleep Assessment ( Lee & Ward, 2005 ) may also be acceptable for trials with adolescents. Although the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index has been used in several studies with healthy older adolescents and young adults ( Brown, Buboltz, & Soper, 2002 ; Carney, Edinger, Meyer, Lindman, & Istre, 2006 ; Pilcher, Schoeling, & Prosansky, 2000 ), no psychometric data was available about its use with these samples. Sleep diaries also need to be evaluated as a potential short-term measurement approach with adolescent oncology patients. Once accurately described, the sleep-wake disturbances of adolescents with cancer should be compared with those of healthy cohorts of adolescents for clinical interpretation. Information about normal sleep variables is available for healthy adolescents, and these parameters can be applied to the oncology population to identify and study the most serious sleep-wake disturbances ( National Sleep Foundation, 2000 ). The impact of sleep-wake disturbances on adolescents' well-being is an especially important consideration for oncology health care providers. Just as with healthy adolescents, insufficient sleep may contribute to a variety of risks and negative consequences for adolescents who are also dealing with the effects of cancer. Insufficient sleep may further compromise adolescents' abilities to continue with their normal activities at school and with their friends as well as to overcome the emotional and mood disturbances that accompany a cancer diagnosis. Sound approaches to the measurement of sleep are critical to advance symptom prevention and management research that will improve the quality of life for adolescents with cancer, both during and after their treatment has ended.  Implications for Practice and Research Although much has been learned about the importance of sleep for adolescents' well-being, more research is needed to understand sleep-wake disturbances in adolescents with cancer as they receive acute treatment and when they become long-term survivors. Because a limited number of sleep studies have been conducted with adolescents with cancer, knowledge about their sleep problems often emerges from studies with younger children or older adults. To facilitate adolescent oncology sleep research, investigators need to work toward a sound measurement approach using a standard set of sleep parameters. Sleep researchers need to report information about the feasibility, reliability, and validity of sleep measures when they are used with adolescents, and studies with larger samples of adolescents with cancer are needed. This review described the use of actigraphy, self-report questionnaires, and diaries used to measure sleep in healthy and chronically ill adolescents. Actigraphy is an objective approach that has been used successfully with chronically ill adolescents, including adolescents with cancer. When combined with diary questions to elicit subjective data, actigraphy offers a valid and reliable measurement approach for adolescent oncology sleep research, especially when at least five nights of usable data are recorded. When using this approach, however, adolescent oncology sleep researchers need to follow recommended standards for the use and analysis of data as well as account for the necessary technological and financial requirements. Although there are several adolescent-appropriate sleep questionnaires currently used in sleep research, none address the full set of sleep parameters recommended for oncology patients, and none have been tested with adolescents on cancer treatment or adolescent cancer survivors. Researchers need to explore whether some of the existing instruments can be tailored for use with adolescent oncology patients. Other questionnaires that have been validated with adults with cancer, such as the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) ( Beck, Schwartz, Towlsey, Dudley, & Barsevick, 2004 ), the General Sleep Disturbance Scale (GSDS) ( Miaskowski et al., 2006 ), or the Clinical Sleep Assessment ( Lee & Ward, 2005 ) may also be acceptable for trials with adolescents. Although the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index has been used in several studies with healthy older adolescents and young adults ( Brown, Buboltz, & Soper, 2002 ; Carney, Edinger, Meyer, Lindman, & Istre, 2006 ; Pilcher, Schoeling, & Prosansky, 2000 ), no psychometric data was available about its use with these samples. Sleep diaries also need to be evaluated as a potential short-term measurement approach with adolescent oncology patients. Once accurately described, the sleep-wake disturbances of adolescents with cancer should be compared with those of healthy cohorts of adolescents for clinical interpretation. Information about normal sleep variables is available for healthy adolescents, and these parameters can be applied to the oncology population to identify and study the most serious sleep-wake disturbances ( National Sleep Foundation, 2000 ). The impact of sleep-wake disturbances on adolescents' well-being is an especially important consideration for oncology health care providers. Just as with healthy adolescents, insufficient sleep may contribute to a variety of risks and negative consequences for adolescents who are also dealing with the effects of cancer. Insufficient sleep may further compromise adolescents' abilities to continue with their normal activities at school and with their friends as well as to overcome the emotional and mood disturbances that accompany a cancer diagnosis. Sound approaches to the measurement of sleep are critical to advance symptom prevention and management research that will improve the quality of life for adolescents with cancer, both during and after their treatment has ended.  Tables Table 1 Nine sleep parameters recommended for evaluation of sleep-wake disturbances Sleep parameter Definition Total sleep time Number of minutes of sleep in bed Sleep latency Number of minutes between getting into bed and falling asleep Awakenings Number of awakenings during the sleep period Wake after sleep onset (WASO) Number of minutes awake after initial sleep onset Daytime napping Number of minutes of sleep during daytime naps Daytime sleepiness Number of episodes of falling asleep without intention Quality of perceived sleep Subjective assessment of quality Circadian rhythm Bio-behavioral phenomenon that repeats approximately every 24 hours Sleep efficiency Number of minutes of sleep divided by the number of minutes in bed From Berger, A. et al. (2005) . Sleep-wake disturbances in people with cancer and their caregivers: State of the science. Oncology Nursing Forum, 32 , E98-126. Table 2 Studies that used actigraphy with adolescent samples Author/year/country Health status of sample Sample size Age of sample Gender and ethnicity of sample Number of nights recorded Comments 1 Acebo et al., 1999 US Healthy 36 Range = 11-16y 58% female; 87% Caucasian 7 Loss of 10% of nights due to technical problems and 8% due to irreconcilable differences between diary and actigraph. 2 Armitage et al., 2004 US Major depressive disorder (MDD) and healthy controls 59 with MDD and 41 healthy controls Range = 8-17y 51% female 5 95% compliance for 5 nights of data 3 Beebe et al., 2007 US Overweight and healthy controls 60 overweight and 20 healthy controls Mean age = 13.1y (overweight) 12.6y (controls) 67% female, 40% Caucasian (overweight); 64% female, 46% Caucasian (controls) 7 84% wore actigraph at least 5 nights, 62% at least three school nights, 78% at least two non-school nights 4 Bursztein et al., 2006 Israel Headache and healthy controls 28 with headache and 108 healthy controls Range = 7-14y Headache: 50% male; Healthy controls: 39% male 5 No problems reported with actigraphs. 5 Carskadon et al., 1998 US Healthy 32 9th graders and 26 10th graders Mean age = 15.0 y 62% female 14 Loss of less than 1 night of data per student due to lack of concordance between self-report and actigraph record 6 Cousins et al., 2007 US History of substance abuse 34 Mean age = 15.9y 50% female; 47% Caucasian 7 An average of 5.08 nights of data per subject. 7 Franck et al., 1999 US HIV infection and healthy controls 18 with HIV-infection and 15 healthy controls Mean age = 11.0 y 61% male; 39% Caucasian, 28% African American 3 (first night data discarded) Reported problems with broken actigraph straps and removal of actigraphs 8 Gaina et al., 2004b Japan Healthy 42 Mean age = 14.2y; range = 13-14y 100% male 7 7% of data lost due to subject ‘forgot to wear actigraph’ and artifact during recording. 5% of subject removed actigraph due to allergic reaction. 9 Gaina et al., 2005b Japan Healthy 91 Range = 13-14 y 52% female 7 3% of data was not usable due to “problems with actigraphy recording.” 10 Gedaly-Duff et al., 2006 US Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 9 Mean age = 11.0 y; Range = 8-16y 56% female; 78% Caucasian 3 Reported 100% compliance 11 Hinds et al., 2007b US Hospitalized for chemotherapy for solid tumor or acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 29 Mean age = 12.5; Range = 7-18y 59% female; 72% Caucasian, 14% African American, 14% Hispanic 2-3 1 patient (3%) withdrew and 1 actigraph (3%) malfunctioned. 12 Johnson et al., 2007 US Healthy 164 Mean age = 13.7y 53% African American 5-7 No problems reported 13 Oyane & Bjorvatn, 2005 Norway Autism and Asperger syndrome 15 Mean age = 19.6y Not reported. 14 5 subjects (33%) refused to wear the Actiwatch. 14 Sadeh et al., 2000 Israel Healthy 53 Mean age = 11.8y; Range = 9.9-12.7y 51% male 4-5 school nights No report of problems. 15 Sadeh et al., 2002 Israel Healthy 51 Mean age = 11.8y 51% male 5 school nights Actigraphy repeated on 6 subjects (12%) due to technical failure or illness. 16 Sadeh et al., 2003 Israel Healthy 35 Mean age = 11.6y 51% male 5 school nights No report of problems. 17 Sangal et al., 2006 USA Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 85 Mean age = 10.1y; Range = 6-14y 75% male; 62%Caucasian 7 (3 intervals) 3% of subjects had unreliable actigraphy data. 18 Teixeira et al., 2007 Brazil Healthy 92 Range = 14-21 years 52% female 7 22% data lost due to actigraph malfunction 19 Wolfson et al., 2003 US Healthy 302 Mean age = 16y; grades 9-12 65% female; 75% Caucasian 8 Loss of less than one scorable night per subject. Table 3 Self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents Author/Year Domains (# of items) Period of recall Scoring Adolescent Sleep-Wake Scale LeBourgeois, Giannotti, Cortesi, Wolfson, & Harsh, 2005 Sleep behaviors and sleep quality in 12-18 year olds (28) Going to bed (5) Falling asleep (6) Maintaining sleep (6) Reinitiating sleep (6) Returning to wakefulness (5) 1 month Scale ranges from 1-6, and higher scores indicate better sleep quality. Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale LeBourgeois, Giannotti, Cortesi, Wolfson, & Harsh, 2005 Sleep facilitating and sleep-inhibiting practices in 12-18 year olds (28) Physiological (5) Cognitive (6) Emotional (3) Sleep environment (4) Daytime sleep (1) Substances (2) Bedtime routine (1) Sleep stability (4) Bed/bedroom sharing (2) ‘past months’ Scale ranges from 1-6, and higher scores indicate better sleep hygiene. Epworth Sleepiness Scale Johns, 1991 Sleepiness (8) ‘recent time’ 4-point Likert scale (0 = would never doze, 3 = high chance of dozing) Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale Drake et al., 2003 Sleepiness (8) Not specified 5 point Likert scale (0 = never, 4 = always) School Sleep Habits Survey Carskadon, Seifer, & Acebo, 1991 Daytime sleepiness scale (10) Sleep/wake problems behavior scale (15) Depressive mood scale (6) Morningness/eveningness (M/E) scale (10) 2 weeks Higher scores mean greater sleepiness, sleep/wake problems, depression, and Sleep Habits Questionnaire Gruber, Sadeh, & Raviv, 1997 Sleep habits, sleepiness, fatigue (20) Not reported 4 point Likert scale Sleep Hygiene Awareness and Practices Scale (SHAPS) Lacks & Rotert, 1986 Sleep hygiene awareness (13) Caffeine awareness (18) Hygiene practice (19) 1 week 7-point Likert scale Sleep Quality Index (SQI) Urponen, et al., 1991 Sleep Quality (8) 1 week 3-point Likert scale Sleep Questionnaire Gaina et al., 2005a Sleep-wake patterns (13) Bedtimes, wake times, sleep times, desired sleep time, sleepiness, sleep-latency, ease of falling asleep, number of night awakenings, sleep deepness, feelings in the morning, sleep is enough, sleep quality, drowsiness 1 week Discontinuous variables on a nominal scale Table 4 Psychometric properties of self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents Author/Year Country Health status of sample Sample size Age of sample Gender and ethnicity of sample Reliability and Validity Adolescent Sleep-Wake Scale LeBourgeois et al., 2005 Italy and US Healthy 1348 (776 Italian and 572 American) Mean age = 14.6y Range = 12-17 y 49% male; Italian sample: 99% Caucasian; American sample: 78% African American Reliability Internal consistency: (Chronbach's alpha): Subscales = .60 -.82. Full scale = .80 - .86 Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale LeBourgeois et al., 2005 Italy and US Healthy 1348 (776 Italian and 572 American) Mean age = 14.6y Range = 12-17 y 49% male; Italian sample: 99% Caucasian; American sample: 78% African American Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Subscales = .37 - .74 Full scale = .80 Epworth Sleepiness Scale Gibson et al., 2006 Canada Healthy 3235 Mean age = 16.2y Range = 14-18y 53% male Reliability Stability: ICC (Intraclass correlation) = 0.88. Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale Drake et al., 2003 US Healthy 442 Mean age = 11.8 y Range = 11-15y 52% male; 90% Caucasian Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Total scale = .81 Split-half samples = .80. Validity ?Construct validity: Factor analysis confirms 1 factor. Maganti et al., 2006 US Epilepsy 26 patients and 26 controls Mean age = 14 y Range = 8 – 18y 65% female Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Full scale = .78 School Sleep Habits Survey Gau & Soong, 2003 Taiwan Healthy 1547 9-16 y; Mean age = 12 y 52% male Reliability Morningness/Eveningness scale Stability: ICC for sum score = .75 Internal consistency: Chronbach's alpha = .68 Sleepiness Scale Stability: Kappa statistic = .27-.51. Stability: ICC for sum score = .57-.73. Internal consistency: Chronbach's alpha = .64. Sleep Disturbance Scale Stability: Kappa statistic = .23-.70. Stability: ICC for sum score = .48-.86 Internal consistency: Chronbach's alpha = .45 Validity M/E scale Discriminant validity confirmed between highest and lowest quartiles. Giannotti et al., 2002 Italy Healthy 6631 Mean age = 17y Range = 14-18 y 60% female Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Sleepiness Scale = .63 Sleep/Wake Problems Scale = .71. Substance Use Scale = .51. M/E scale = .73. Wolfson et al., 2003 US Healthy 302 Mean age = 16 y Range = 14-19 y 65% female; “Mostly Caucasian” Concurrent validity Pearson correlation with actigraph data: Survey responses correlated with actigraph data for total sleep time, sleep onset time, and wake time. Correlations were lower for weekend nights (r = .31 - .48) than for weekday nights (r = .53 - .77). By matched-pair t tests with actigraph data: Schoolnight survey responses for total sleep time and wake time did not differ from actigraph estimates. Survey schoolnight bedtimes were 8-13 minutes earlier than actigraph (p<.001). Survey weekend night sleep time was 30 minutes longer than actigraph data (p< .001). Survey weekend wake times were 55 minutes later than actigraph data (p < .001). Wolfson & Carskadon, 1998 US Healthy 3120 13-19 y 52% female; 85% Caucasian Reliability: Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Sleepiness scale = .70 Sleep/wake problems scale = .75. Sleep Habits Questionnaire Sadeh et al., 2000 Israel Healthy 53 Mean age = 11.8y Range = 9-12 y Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Between .72 and .82 Validity Construct: Factor analysis confirms 2 factors: sleepiness and sporadic daytime sleep. Sleep Hygiene Awareness and Practices Scale (SHAPS) Brown et al., 2002 US Healthy 124 Mean age = 19.5 y 59% female Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Sleep hygiene awareness = 0.78 Caffeine knowledge = 0.47 Sleep hygiene practices = 0.55 Test-retest: Sleep hygiene awareness = 0.76, p<.001 Caffeine knowledge = 0.50, p<0.001 Sleep hygiene practices = 0.74, p<0.001 Sleep Quality Index Bulboltz, et al., 2001 US Healthy 191 Mean age = 19 y 50% female, 82% Caucasian Reliability Internal Consistency (Chronbach's alpha) = 0.74 Sleep Questionnaire Gaina et al., 2005b Japan Healthy 91 Mean age = 14.2y Range = 13-14y 52% female Reliability Test-retest (Kappa statistic): Bedtime, sleep latency = .46 - .59 Wakeup, sleep efficiency = .62 - .63 Sleep perception, sleepiness = .41-.48 Validity Concurrent: Pearson correlation with actigraph (p < 0.01): r = .65 - .68 for schoolnight bedtime, waketime r = .50 - .60 for weekend bedtime, waketime r = .39 for schoolnight sleep period r = .36-.42 for weekend sleep period Table 5 Studies using sleep diary measurement approach Author/year/country Health status Sample size Age of sample Gender and ethnicity Length of diary report Bertocci et al., 2005 US Major depressive disorder (MDD) and healthy controls 51 subjects with MDD and 42 healthy controls MDD group: Mean age = 12.3y Control group: Mean age = 11.9y MDD group: 55% female, 84% Caucasian Control group: 667% male, 86% Caucasian 1 week Gaina et al., 2004b Japan Healthy 42 Range = 13-14 y 100% male 1 week Gaina et al., 2005b Japan Healthy 91 Range = 13-14 y 52% male 1 week Hansen et al., 2005 US Healthy 60 High school seniors Not reported 4 1-month intervals Tsai & Lee, 2004 Taiwan Healthy 237 Range = 18-24 y 54% male 1 week  Tables Table 1 Nine sleep parameters recommended for evaluation of sleep-wake disturbances Sleep parameter Definition Total sleep time Number of minutes of sleep in bed Sleep latency Number of minutes between getting into bed and falling asleep Awakenings Number of awakenings during the sleep period Wake after sleep onset (WASO) Number of minutes awake after initial sleep onset Daytime napping Number of minutes of sleep during daytime naps Daytime sleepiness Number of episodes of falling asleep without intention Quality of perceived sleep Subjective assessment of quality Circadian rhythm Bio-behavioral phenomenon that repeats approximately every 24 hours Sleep efficiency Number of minutes of sleep divided by the number of minutes in bed From Berger, A. et al. (2005) . Sleep-wake disturbances in people with cancer and their caregivers: State of the science. Oncology Nursing Forum, 32 , E98-126. Table 2 Studies that used actigraphy with adolescent samples Author/year/country Health status of sample Sample size Age of sample Gender and ethnicity of sample Number of nights recorded Comments 1 Acebo et al., 1999 US Healthy 36 Range = 11-16y 58% female; 87% Caucasian 7 Loss of 10% of nights due to technical problems and 8% due to irreconcilable differences between diary and actigraph. 2 Armitage et al., 2004 US Major depressive disorder (MDD) and healthy controls 59 with MDD and 41 healthy controls Range = 8-17y 51% female 5 95% compliance for 5 nights of data 3 Beebe et al., 2007 US Overweight and healthy controls 60 overweight and 20 healthy controls Mean age = 13.1y (overweight) 12.6y (controls) 67% female, 40% Caucasian (overweight); 64% female, 46% Caucasian (controls) 7 84% wore actigraph at least 5 nights, 62% at least three school nights, 78% at least two non-school nights 4 Bursztein et al., 2006 Israel Headache and healthy controls 28 with headache and 108 healthy controls Range = 7-14y Headache: 50% male; Healthy controls: 39% male 5 No problems reported with actigraphs. 5 Carskadon et al., 1998 US Healthy 32 9th graders and 26 10th graders Mean age = 15.0 y 62% female 14 Loss of less than 1 night of data per student due to lack of concordance between self-report and actigraph record 6 Cousins et al., 2007 US History of substance abuse 34 Mean age = 15.9y 50% female; 47% Caucasian 7 An average of 5.08 nights of data per subject. 7 Franck et al., 1999 US HIV infection and healthy controls 18 with HIV-infection and 15 healthy controls Mean age = 11.0 y 61% male; 39% Caucasian, 28% African American 3 (first night data discarded) Reported problems with broken actigraph straps and removal of actigraphs 8 Gaina et al., 2004b Japan Healthy 42 Mean age = 14.2y; range = 13-14y 100% male 7 7% of data lost due to subject ‘forgot to wear actigraph’ and artifact during recording. 5% of subject removed actigraph due to allergic reaction. 9 Gaina et al., 2005b Japan Healthy 91 Range = 13-14 y 52% female 7 3% of data was not usable due to “problems with actigraphy recording.” 10 Gedaly-Duff et al., 2006 US Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) 9 Mean age = 11.0 y; Range = 8-16y 56% female; 78% Caucasian 3 Reported 100% compliance 11 Hinds et al., 2007b US Hospitalized for chemotherapy for solid tumor or acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 29 Mean age = 12.5; Range = 7-18y 59% female; 72% Caucasian, 14% African American, 14% Hispanic 2-3 1 patient (3%) withdrew and 1 actigraph (3%) malfunctioned. 12 Johnson et al., 2007 US Healthy 164 Mean age = 13.7y 53% African American 5-7 No problems reported 13 Oyane & Bjorvatn, 2005 Norway Autism and Asperger syndrome 15 Mean age = 19.6y Not reported. 14 5 subjects (33%) refused to wear the Actiwatch. 14 Sadeh et al., 2000 Israel Healthy 53 Mean age = 11.8y; Range = 9.9-12.7y 51% male 4-5 school nights No report of problems. 15 Sadeh et al., 2002 Israel Healthy 51 Mean age = 11.8y 51% male 5 school nights Actigraphy repeated on 6 subjects (12%) due to technical failure or illness. 16 Sadeh et al., 2003 Israel Healthy 35 Mean age = 11.6y 51% male 5 school nights No report of problems. 17 Sangal et al., 2006 USA Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 85 Mean age = 10.1y; Range = 6-14y 75% male; 62%Caucasian 7 (3 intervals) 3% of subjects had unreliable actigraphy data. 18 Teixeira et al., 2007 Brazil Healthy 92 Range = 14-21 years 52% female 7 22% data lost due to actigraph malfunction 19 Wolfson et al., 2003 US Healthy 302 Mean age = 16y; grades 9-12 65% female; 75% Caucasian 8 Loss of less than one scorable night per subject. Table 3 Self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents Author/Year Domains (# of items) Period of recall Scoring Adolescent Sleep-Wake Scale LeBourgeois, Giannotti, Cortesi, Wolfson, & Harsh, 2005 Sleep behaviors and sleep quality in 12-18 year olds (28) Going to bed (5) Falling asleep (6) Maintaining sleep (6) Reinitiating sleep (6) Returning to wakefulness (5) 1 month Scale ranges from 1-6, and higher scores indicate better sleep quality. Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale LeBourgeois, Giannotti, Cortesi, Wolfson, & Harsh, 2005 Sleep facilitating and sleep-inhibiting practices in 12-18 year olds (28) Physiological (5) Cognitive (6) Emotional (3) Sleep environment (4) Daytime sleep (1) Substances (2) Bedtime routine (1) Sleep stability (4) Bed/bedroom sharing (2) ‘past months’ Scale ranges from 1-6, and higher scores indicate better sleep hygiene. Epworth Sleepiness Scale Johns, 1991 Sleepiness (8) ‘recent time’ 4-point Likert scale (0 = would never doze, 3 = high chance of dozing) Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale Drake et al., 2003 Sleepiness (8) Not specified 5 point Likert scale (0 = never, 4 = always) School Sleep Habits Survey Carskadon, Seifer, & Acebo, 1991 Daytime sleepiness scale (10) Sleep/wake problems behavior scale (15) Depressive mood scale (6) Morningness/eveningness (M/E) scale (10) 2 weeks Higher scores mean greater sleepiness, sleep/wake problems, depression, and Sleep Habits Questionnaire Gruber, Sadeh, & Raviv, 1997 Sleep habits, sleepiness, fatigue (20) Not reported 4 point Likert scale Sleep Hygiene Awareness and Practices Scale (SHAPS) Lacks & Rotert, 1986 Sleep hygiene awareness (13) Caffeine awareness (18) Hygiene practice (19) 1 week 7-point Likert scale Sleep Quality Index (SQI) Urponen, et al., 1991 Sleep Quality (8) 1 week 3-point Likert scale Sleep Questionnaire Gaina et al., 2005a Sleep-wake patterns (13) Bedtimes, wake times, sleep times, desired sleep time, sleepiness, sleep-latency, ease of falling asleep, number of night awakenings, sleep deepness, feelings in the morning, sleep is enough, sleep quality, drowsiness 1 week Discontinuous variables on a nominal scale Table 4 Psychometric properties of self-report sleep questionnaires used with adolescents Author/Year Country Health status of sample Sample size Age of sample Gender and ethnicity of sample Reliability and Validity Adolescent Sleep-Wake Scale LeBourgeois et al., 2005 Italy and US Healthy 1348 (776 Italian and 572 American) Mean age = 14.6y Range = 12-17 y 49% male; Italian sample: 99% Caucasian; American sample: 78% African American Reliability Internal consistency: (Chronbach's alpha): Subscales = .60 -.82. Full scale = .80 - .86 Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale LeBourgeois et al., 2005 Italy and US Healthy 1348 (776 Italian and 572 American) Mean age = 14.6y Range = 12-17 y 49% male; Italian sample: 99% Caucasian; American sample: 78% African American Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Subscales = .37 - .74 Full scale = .80 Epworth Sleepiness Scale Gibson et al., 2006 Canada Healthy 3235 Mean age = 16.2y Range = 14-18y 53% male Reliability Stability: ICC (Intraclass correlation) = 0.88. Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale Drake et al., 2003 US Healthy 442 Mean age = 11.8 y Range = 11-15y 52% male; 90% Caucasian Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Total scale = .81 Split-half samples = .80. Validity ?Construct validity: Factor analysis confirms 1 factor. Maganti et al., 2006 US Epilepsy 26 patients and 26 controls Mean age = 14 y Range = 8 – 18y 65% female Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Full scale = .78 School Sleep Habits Survey Gau & Soong, 2003 Taiwan Healthy 1547 9-16 y; Mean age = 12 y 52% male Reliability Morningness/Eveningness scale Stability: ICC for sum score = .75 Internal consistency: Chronbach's alpha = .68 Sleepiness Scale Stability: Kappa statistic = .27-.51. Stability: ICC for sum score = .57-.73. Internal consistency: Chronbach's alpha = .64. Sleep Disturbance Scale Stability: Kappa statistic = .23-.70. Stability: ICC for sum score = .48-.86 Internal consistency: Chronbach's alpha = .45 Validity M/E scale Discriminant validity confirmed between highest and lowest quartiles. Giannotti et al., 2002 Italy Healthy 6631 Mean age = 17y Range = 14-18 y 60% female Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Sleepiness Scale = .63 Sleep/Wake Problems Scale = .71. Substance Use Scale = .51. M/E scale = .73. Wolfson et al., 2003 US Healthy 302 Mean age = 16 y Range = 14-19 y 65% female; “Mostly Caucasian” Concurrent validity Pearson correlation with actigraph data: Survey responses correlated with actigraph data for total sleep time, sleep onset time, and wake time. Correlations were lower for weekend nights (r = .31 - .48) than for weekday nights (r = .53 - .77). By matched-pair t tests with actigraph data: Schoolnight survey responses for total sleep time and wake time did not differ from actigraph estimates. Survey schoolnight bedtimes were 8-13 minutes earlier than actigraph (p<.001). Survey weekend night sleep time was 30 minutes longer than actigraph data (p< .001). Survey weekend wake times were 55 minutes later than actigraph data (p < .001). Wolfson & Carskadon, 1998 US Healthy 3120 13-19 y 52% female; 85% Caucasian Reliability: Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Sleepiness scale = .70 Sleep/wake problems scale = .75. Sleep Habits Questionnaire Sadeh et al., 2000 Israel Healthy 53 Mean age = 11.8y Range = 9-12 y Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Between .72 and .82 Validity Construct: Factor analysis confirms 2 factors: sleepiness and sporadic daytime sleep. Sleep Hygiene Awareness and Practices Scale (SHAPS) Brown et al., 2002 US Healthy 124 Mean age = 19.5 y 59% female Reliability Internal consistency (Chronbach's alpha): Sleep hygiene awareness = 0.78 Caffeine knowledge = 0.47 Sleep hygiene practices = 0.55 Test-retest: Sleep hygiene awareness = 0.76, p<.001 Caffeine knowledge = 0.50, p<0.001 Sleep hygiene practices = 0.74, p<0.001 Sleep Quality Index Bulboltz, et al., 2001 US Healthy 191 Mean age = 19 y 50% female, 82% Caucasian Reliability Internal Consistency (Chronbach's alpha) = 0.74 Sleep Questionnaire Gaina et al., 2005b Japan Healthy 91 Mean age = 14.2y Range = 13-14y 52% female Reliability Test-retest (Kappa statistic): Bedtime, sleep latency = .46 - .59 Wakeup, sleep efficiency = .62 - .63 Sleep perception, sleepiness = .41-.48 Validity Concurrent: Pearson correlation with actigraph (p < 0.01): r = .65 - .68 for schoolnight bedtime, waketime r = .50 - .60 for weekend bedtime, waketime r = .39 for schoolnight sleep period r = .36-.42 for weekend sleep period Table 5 Studies using sleep diary measurement approach Author/year/country Health status Sample size Age of sample Gender and ethnicity Length of diary report Bertocci et al., 2005 US Major depressive disorder (MDD) and healthy controls 51 subjects with MDD and 42 healthy controls MDD group: Mean age = 12.3y Control group: Mean age = 11.9y MDD group: 55% female, 84% Caucasian Control group: 667% male, 86% Caucasian 1 week Gaina et al., 2004b Japan Healthy 42 Range = 13-14 y 100% male 1 week Gaina et al., 2005b Japan Healthy 91 Range = 13-14 y 52% male 1 week Hansen et al., 2005 US Healthy 60 High school seniors Not reported 4 1-month intervals Tsai & Lee, 2004 Taiwan Healthy 237 Range = 18-24 y 54% male 1 week 