Patient-derived tumor reactive antibodies as diagnostic markers for ovarian cancer Objective Most ovarian cancers are diagnosed at advanced stage (67%) and prospects for significant improvement in survival reside in early diagnosis. Our objective was to validate our array assay for the identification of ovarian cancer based on quantitation of tumor-reactive IgG. Methods The diagnostic array utilizes specific exosome-derived antigens to detect reactive IgG in patients’ sera. Specific protein targets were isolated by immunoaffinity from exosomes derived from ovarian tumor cell lines. Sera were obtained from age-matched female volunteers, women with benign ovarian disease and with ovarian cancer. Immunoreactivity was also compared between exosomal proteins and their recombinant counterparts. Results Sera from ovarian cancer patients exhibited significantly greater immunoreactivities than either normal controls or women with benign disease (both considered negative to all antigens tested). Reactivities with nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, p53, and SSX common antigen for patients with all stages of ovarian cancer were significantly higher than for controls and women with benign ovarian disease. Reactivity with placental-type alkaline phosphatase, TAG 72, survivin, NY-ESO-1, GRP78, and Muc16 (CA125) allowed the differentiation between Stage III/IV and early stage ovarian cancer. Conclusions The quantitation of circulating tumor-reactive IgG can be used to identify the presence of ovarian cancer. The analyses of IgG recognition of specific exosomal antigens allows for the differentiation of women with benign ovarian masses from ovarian cancer, as well as distinguishing early and late stage ovarian cancers. Thus, the quantitative assessment of IgG reactive with specific tumor-derived exosomal proteins can be used as diagnostic markers for ovarian cancer.  INTRODUCTION Ovarian cancer accounts for only a third of gynecologic cancers; however, it results in 55% of deaths from gynecologic malignancies and 6% of all cancer deaths in women [ 1 , 2 ]. Long-term survival has not changed significantly in the last two decades, largely due to inadequate diagnostic approaches, which only detect well-established cancers. Compared with other cancers associated with women, 77% of endometrial cancers, 55% of breast cancers and 83% of cervical cancers are diagnosed as Stage I, while only 23% of ovarian cancers are diagnosed at Stage I [ 2 ]. This late diagnosis may reflect inaccessibility of the ovaries and lack of symptoms until regional and distant metastases have occurred [ 3 ]. Thus, prospects for significant improvement in ovarian cancer survival reside in early diagnosis of disease. While intended as a disease monitor (therapeutic responses, disease recurrence and progression) [ 4 ], the CA125 ELISA is routinely used to diagnose ovarian cancer [ 5 ]. Due to CA125’s limited expression in early stage ovarian cancers and its association with nonmalignant pathologies, CA125, at best, exhibits a positive predictive value of 57% [ 4 ]. The CA125 ELISA is an example of antigen-based diagnostic assays (detection of circulating tumor-associated antigens) [ 6 ], which relies on over- or aberrant expression of specific proteins and their release from tumor cells, by active secretion or shedding. These antigenic proteins must saturate the immunologic antigen-processing capacity and reach a detectable steady-state concentration in the circulation, which occur well after the initial transformation event [ 7 ]. Aberrant expression of cancer-associated proteins can result in autoantibody induction [ 8 – 12 ]. Tumor-reactive antibodies can be demonstrated in the circulation soon after initial tumor development and prior to detection of circulating antigens [ 7 , 13 , 14 ]. While stabilities of all biomarkers have not been investigated, studies on circulating p53 indicate a half-life of several hours [ 15 , 16 ] and the half-life of circulating S100B protein (in melanoma) has been estimated to be only 30 minutes [ 17 ]. Some serum biomarkers for ovarian cancer have been demonstrated to be highly sensitive to confounding factors, including psychological stress, time of blood draw, and uncontrolled differences in sample manipulation [ 18 ]. Serum antibodies are stable and less sensitive to confounding factors relative to other serum biomarkers [ 13 , 14 , 19 ]. Tumor-reactive IgG has been demonstrated in multiple tumor types, including melanoma [ 20 ], lung [ 21 ], breast [ 22 ], head and neck [ 23 ] and ovarian cancers [ 24 – 26 ]. Tumor-reactive IgG can be detected early in tumor development and are linked with tumor progression. In experimental animal models, circulating tumor-reactive IgG can be demonstrated well in advance of palpable tumor or circulating tumor antigens [ 27 ]. Imai et al. [ 28 , 29 ] demonstrated that circulating tumor-reactive autoantibodies significantly increased in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) compared to precancerous conditions and that progression to HCC coincided with seroconversion from autoantibody negative to positive status [ 29 ]. In colorectal cancer, when comparing patients with colorectal polyps and varying stages and grades of colorectal cancer, autoantibodies against p53 appear to occur with tumor progression in the multistep colorectal carcinogenesis [ 30 ]. Based on mathematical models correlating biomarker detection limits with actual tumor burden, the calculated minimum tumor size leading to a positive test result was 116.7mm3 using CA125 and ovarian cancer [ 31 ]. Since this model assumed uniform antigen production by all tumor cells and that 10% of the secreted biomarker (based on in vitro studies) reached the circulation, this calculated minimum size may be significantly underestimated. To identify early lesions, assays must detect markers arising between the initial transformation event and tumor foci formation [ 15 ]. While circulating tumor antigens are not detectable at this point, host immunologic recognitions of these alterations have been observed [ 7 , 13 , 14 ]. We now demonstrate the ability of patients’ autoantibody responses to detect the presence of ovarian cancer and to differentiate benign and malignant lesions. We address the recognition patterns of early and late stage ovarian cancers for specific proteins, as well as demonstrate the superiority of “naturally modified” tumor exosomal proteins over recombinant proteins in detecting this response.  Methods The diagnostic array utilizes specific exosome-derived antigens to detect reactive IgG in patients’ sera. Specific protein targets were isolated by immunoaffinity from exosomes derived from ovarian tumor cell lines. Sera were obtained from age-matched female volunteers, women with benign ovarian disease and with ovarian cancer. Immunoreactivity was also compared between exosomal proteins and their recombinant counterparts.  Results Sera from ovarian cancer patients exhibited significantly greater immunoreactivities than either normal controls or women with benign disease (both considered negative to all antigens tested). Reactivities with nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, p53, and SSX common antigen for patients with all stages of ovarian cancer were significantly higher than for controls and women with benign ovarian disease. Reactivity with placental-type alkaline phosphatase, TAG 72, survivin, NY-ESO-1, GRP78, and Muc16 (CA125) allowed the differentiation between Stage III/IV and early stage ovarian cancer.  Conclusions The quantitation of circulating tumor-reactive IgG can be used to identify the presence of ovarian cancer. The analyses of IgG recognition of specific exosomal antigens allows for the differentiation of women with benign ovarian masses from ovarian cancer, as well as distinguishing early and late stage ovarian cancers. Thus, the quantitative assessment of IgG reactive with specific tumor-derived exosomal proteins can be used as diagnostic markers for ovarian cancer.  MATERIALS & METHODS Patients Banked sera have been obtained from the NCI-Prostate, Lung, Colon, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial, Gynecologic Oncology Group Serum Bank (Columbus, OH) and Asterand Co. (Detroit, MI). Sera included specimens from ovarian cancer patients with Stage I disease (n=35), stage II (n=25), stage III (n=40), stage IV (n=25), benign ovarian disease (n=40), and from age-matched female volunteers (n=40). The control group consisted of age-matched healthy females (no diagnosis of any cancer, not genetically predisposed for ovarian or breast cancer, and disease- free at least 6 months after sample collection), undergoing routine gynecologic examinations. For patients with malignant ovarian disease, this study was limited to serous papillary adenocarcinomas and women with benign ovarian disease were limited to serous adenoma. Sera from female cancer patients with pancreatic, lung, breast, and colon cancers were obtained from ProMedDx (Norton, MA). All sera are stored at ?70°C. Age, pathologic diagnosis, and histological analyses at the time of sample acquisition were obtained for all groups. The age differences were not significant (p=0.31), with the mean age of the non-tumor-bearing controls being 57.0 ± 4.1 years, compared to 58.1 ± 5.2 for patients with ovarian cancer and 56.9 ± 5.3 years for patients with benign disease. “Natural” tumor derived cellular proteins for western blot analysis “Naturally” post-translationally modified proteins were isolated from human ovarian tumor cell lines established in our laboratory from women with Stage IIIc cyst adenocarcinoma of the ovary (designated UL-1 and UL-3). UL-3 cells, previously designated UL-3A, were derived from a 40-year old Caucasian woman with a family history of breast/ovarian cancers [ 32 ], while UL-1 was derived from 63 year old Caucasian woman, with no family history of cancer [ 33 ]. These ovarian tumor cells are grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 0.1mM nonessential amino acids, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 200mM L-glutamine, 100mg/mL streptomycin and 100IU/mL penicillin in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. Cell viability was evaluated by trypan blue exclusion and all cultures utilized for this study were >95% viable. For solubilized cellular proteins, cells were removed from culture dishes by scraping and centrifuging at 400× g for 10 minutes. The cell pellet was lysed in 1%NP-40, 500mM NaCl, 50mM Tris (pH7.5), 1mM DTT, and cocktails of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and this suspension centrifuged at 10,000× g for 15 minutes. Supernatants were clarified by incubation with anti-human IgG,A,M-agarose for 1 hour. After centrifugation at 3000rpm, clarified cell lysates were use to identify specific immunoreactivity. Normal ovary, obtained from women undergoing elective oophorectomies (unrelated to cancer), was used to identify “normal” autoreactivity. Ovarian epithelium was carefully dissected from the fresh ovary prior to homogenization in a Dounce homogenizer. The resulting cell homogenate was centrifuged at 1,000× g for 15 minutes to remove unbroken cells. The cell homogenate was diluted 1:2 with 1%NP-40, 500mM NaCl, 50mM Tris (pH7.5), 1mM DTT, and cocktails of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO). Immunoreactivity patterns defined by western immunoblotting To visualize autoantibody reactivity patterns, proteins (40 µg) from each cell lysate were applied per lane to a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel, electrophoretically separated [ 34 ] and analyzed by western immunoblotting [ 35 ]. Membranes were probed overnight at 4°C with patient sera, diluted 1:100, followed by peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgG (Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO). We determined the 1:100 dilutions for this test, using serial dilutions of patient and control sera to identify the optimal dilution to distinguish seropositive patients and seronegative controls (25). Bound immune complexes were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, Amersham Life Sciences, Arlington Heights, IL). The resulting x-ray film was scanned as a 16-bit grayscale JPEG image. This grayscale image was digitized and converted into pixel density using Un-scan-it software (Silk Scientific Corp., Orem, UT). On each gel image, the number of pixels for all visualized bands was quantitated using Un-Scan-It and the total number of pixels for all bands within each lane was calculated. Since each western blot gel was run in duplicate, this total number of pixels for all bands in a specific lane was determined for both gels and the mean (average) total pixels for the specific lane from both gels was calculated. Source of “natural” tumor derived exosomal proteins for immunoreactive pattern analysis Exosomes were isolated from conditioned culture media by a two-step procedure developed in our laboratory [ 25 ]. Media (100mL) were concentrated by freeze-drying and applied to a Bio-Gel A50m column (1.5 × 45cm) equilibrated with PBS. Fractions (1mL) were collected, monitoring the elution by absorbance at 280nm. The fractions containing material greater than 50 million Daltons was centrifuged at 100,000× g for 1 hour at 4°C and the quantity of protein determined by the Bradford microassay method (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Previously, we investigated cellular components recognized by tumor-reactive autologous humoral responses, using mass spectrometry to identify tumor-derived antigenic proteins. These proteins were selected based on their reactivity with circulating IgG from at least 40% of the Stage III/IV patients screened [ 11 , 12 , 24 , 25 ]. To isolate specific immunoreactive proteins, these proteins were isolated from exosomes derived from cultured cells by immunosorbent chromatography. Commercial antibodies for each protein were obtained: anti-proCathepsin D (rabbit polyclonal, Calbiochem), ant-GRP78 (goat polyclonal, Santa Cruz Biotechnology [SCBT]), ant-p53 (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), anti-nucleophosmin (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), anti-placental alkaline phosphatase (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), anti-SSX common epitope (rabbit polyclonal, SCBT), anti-survivin (rabbit polyclonal, Abcam), anti-NY-ESO-1 (mouse monoclonal, SCBT), anti-Muc16 (mouse monoclonal, SCBT), anti-HSP90 (rat monoclonal, Abcam), anti-TAG72 (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), and anti-HoxA7 (mouse monoclonal, SCBT). Exosomal proteins from the ovarian tumor cell lines were solubilized in 50mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5), containing 0.3% SDS, 2mM sodium orthovanadate, 200mM DTT, 1mM sodium fluoride, 1mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 µg/mL leupeptin, 1 µg/mL aprotinin, 1µg/mL pepstatin, and 1mM PMSF on ice. The solubilized exosomal proteins were applied to the immunosorbent column and incubated overnight at 4°C. The specific bound proteins released by 0.1M glycine-HCl, pH2.8, neutralized with 1M Tris. Aliquots were evaluated by western immunoblot to confirm the molecular identity. The immunoreactivity of patient-derived antibodies to posttranslationally modified exosomal proteins and their recombinant counterparts was assessed by western immunoblotting described above. Recombinant proteins were obtained commercially. Recombinant nucleophosmin, p53 and GRP78 were obtained from Abnova (Walnut, CA) and recombinant cathepsin D and survivin were obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Each recombinant protein and its immunoaffinity purified exosome-derived counterpart (10ng) were applied to 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels, electrophoretically separated and analyzed by western immunoblotting with patient sera, diluted 1:100 as the primary antibody, followed by peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgG as the secondary antibody (Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO). Array assay for tumor antigen-reactive immunoglobulins Purified exosomal proteins (250µL containing 20ng/mL protein) were applied to nitrocellulose membranes using a bio-dot microfiltration apparatus (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). As controls, serially diluted human IgG was spotted onto each membrane as an internal positive control for standardizing blots, diluted mouse and rabbit Ig as a negative control, and peroxidase-conjugated Ig samples as a reagent control and for orientation. Membranes were blocked with 5% BSA and then washed 3 times with TBS plus 0.1% Tween-20 and twice with TBS. Sera (diluted 1:100) from known cancer patients and non-cancer bearing controls were incubated with the membranes overnight at 4°C, incubated with peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgG, and visualized by ECL. The resulting x-ray film was imaged using the Kodak DC290 gel documentation system and analyzed using the Kodak 1D image analysis software (Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, NY). The array image was captured as a 16-bit grayscale JPEG image. From this image, regions of interest (ROI) were manually defined and the ROIs were digitized and converted into pixel density by the 1D image analysis software. The number of pixels for each spot on the array was obtained and comparisons between membranes were performed after normalization with the internal positive control (peroxidase-labeled mouse Ig). To define the cutoff threshold for positive values, the maximum pixel value was determined for reactivity with any protein spot for the initial 20 normal control (non-cancer, no benign ovarian disease) samples. Any reactivity (pixel density), greater than this maximum value (for this study, 2971 pixels), was considered positive. Statistical analysis The recognition of specific protein spots by each patient was stratified by the presence or absence of antibodies reactive with each specific antigen. Comparisons between the presence of specific antigens from non-cancer bearing controls and patients at each stage of ovarian cancer were performed by the Kruskal-Wallis test. Tests with p < 0.05 are considered statistically significant.  Patients Banked sera have been obtained from the NCI-Prostate, Lung, Colon, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial, Gynecologic Oncology Group Serum Bank (Columbus, OH) and Asterand Co. (Detroit, MI). Sera included specimens from ovarian cancer patients with Stage I disease (n=35), stage II (n=25), stage III (n=40), stage IV (n=25), benign ovarian disease (n=40), and from age-matched female volunteers (n=40). The control group consisted of age-matched healthy females (no diagnosis of any cancer, not genetically predisposed for ovarian or breast cancer, and disease- free at least 6 months after sample collection), undergoing routine gynecologic examinations. For patients with malignant ovarian disease, this study was limited to serous papillary adenocarcinomas and women with benign ovarian disease were limited to serous adenoma. Sera from female cancer patients with pancreatic, lung, breast, and colon cancers were obtained from ProMedDx (Norton, MA). All sera are stored at ?70°C. Age, pathologic diagnosis, and histological analyses at the time of sample acquisition were obtained for all groups. The age differences were not significant (p=0.31), with the mean age of the non-tumor-bearing controls being 57.0 ± 4.1 years, compared to 58.1 ± 5.2 for patients with ovarian cancer and 56.9 ± 5.3 years for patients with benign disease.  “Natural” tumor derived cellular proteins for western blot analysis “Naturally” post-translationally modified proteins were isolated from human ovarian tumor cell lines established in our laboratory from women with Stage IIIc cyst adenocarcinoma of the ovary (designated UL-1 and UL-3). UL-3 cells, previously designated UL-3A, were derived from a 40-year old Caucasian woman with a family history of breast/ovarian cancers [ 32 ], while UL-1 was derived from 63 year old Caucasian woman, with no family history of cancer [ 33 ]. These ovarian tumor cells are grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 0.1mM nonessential amino acids, 1mM sodium pyruvate, 200mM L-glutamine, 100mg/mL streptomycin and 100IU/mL penicillin in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. Cell viability was evaluated by trypan blue exclusion and all cultures utilized for this study were >95% viable. For solubilized cellular proteins, cells were removed from culture dishes by scraping and centrifuging at 400× g for 10 minutes. The cell pellet was lysed in 1%NP-40, 500mM NaCl, 50mM Tris (pH7.5), 1mM DTT, and cocktails of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and this suspension centrifuged at 10,000× g for 15 minutes. Supernatants were clarified by incubation with anti-human IgG,A,M-agarose for 1 hour. After centrifugation at 3000rpm, clarified cell lysates were use to identify specific immunoreactivity. Normal ovary, obtained from women undergoing elective oophorectomies (unrelated to cancer), was used to identify “normal” autoreactivity. Ovarian epithelium was carefully dissected from the fresh ovary prior to homogenization in a Dounce homogenizer. The resulting cell homogenate was centrifuged at 1,000× g for 15 minutes to remove unbroken cells. The cell homogenate was diluted 1:2 with 1%NP-40, 500mM NaCl, 50mM Tris (pH7.5), 1mM DTT, and cocktails of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO).  Immunoreactivity patterns defined by western immunoblotting To visualize autoantibody reactivity patterns, proteins (40 µg) from each cell lysate were applied per lane to a 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel, electrophoretically separated [ 34 ] and analyzed by western immunoblotting [ 35 ]. Membranes were probed overnight at 4°C with patient sera, diluted 1:100, followed by peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgG (Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO). We determined the 1:100 dilutions for this test, using serial dilutions of patient and control sera to identify the optimal dilution to distinguish seropositive patients and seronegative controls (25). Bound immune complexes were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, Amersham Life Sciences, Arlington Heights, IL). The resulting x-ray film was scanned as a 16-bit grayscale JPEG image. This grayscale image was digitized and converted into pixel density using Un-scan-it software (Silk Scientific Corp., Orem, UT). On each gel image, the number of pixels for all visualized bands was quantitated using Un-Scan-It and the total number of pixels for all bands within each lane was calculated. Since each western blot gel was run in duplicate, this total number of pixels for all bands in a specific lane was determined for both gels and the mean (average) total pixels for the specific lane from both gels was calculated.  Source of “natural” tumor derived exosomal proteins for immunoreactive pattern analysis Exosomes were isolated from conditioned culture media by a two-step procedure developed in our laboratory [ 25 ]. Media (100mL) were concentrated by freeze-drying and applied to a Bio-Gel A50m column (1.5 × 45cm) equilibrated with PBS. Fractions (1mL) were collected, monitoring the elution by absorbance at 280nm. The fractions containing material greater than 50 million Daltons was centrifuged at 100,000× g for 1 hour at 4°C and the quantity of protein determined by the Bradford microassay method (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Previously, we investigated cellular components recognized by tumor-reactive autologous humoral responses, using mass spectrometry to identify tumor-derived antigenic proteins. These proteins were selected based on their reactivity with circulating IgG from at least 40% of the Stage III/IV patients screened [ 11 , 12 , 24 , 25 ]. To isolate specific immunoreactive proteins, these proteins were isolated from exosomes derived from cultured cells by immunosorbent chromatography. Commercial antibodies for each protein were obtained: anti-proCathepsin D (rabbit polyclonal, Calbiochem), ant-GRP78 (goat polyclonal, Santa Cruz Biotechnology [SCBT]), ant-p53 (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), anti-nucleophosmin (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), anti-placental alkaline phosphatase (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), anti-SSX common epitope (rabbit polyclonal, SCBT), anti-survivin (rabbit polyclonal, Abcam), anti-NY-ESO-1 (mouse monoclonal, SCBT), anti-Muc16 (mouse monoclonal, SCBT), anti-HSP90 (rat monoclonal, Abcam), anti-TAG72 (mouse monoclonal, Abcam), and anti-HoxA7 (mouse monoclonal, SCBT). Exosomal proteins from the ovarian tumor cell lines were solubilized in 50mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5), containing 0.3% SDS, 2mM sodium orthovanadate, 200mM DTT, 1mM sodium fluoride, 1mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 µg/mL leupeptin, 1 µg/mL aprotinin, 1µg/mL pepstatin, and 1mM PMSF on ice. The solubilized exosomal proteins were applied to the immunosorbent column and incubated overnight at 4°C. The specific bound proteins released by 0.1M glycine-HCl, pH2.8, neutralized with 1M Tris. Aliquots were evaluated by western immunoblot to confirm the molecular identity. The immunoreactivity of patient-derived antibodies to posttranslationally modified exosomal proteins and their recombinant counterparts was assessed by western immunoblotting described above. Recombinant proteins were obtained commercially. Recombinant nucleophosmin, p53 and GRP78 were obtained from Abnova (Walnut, CA) and recombinant cathepsin D and survivin were obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). Each recombinant protein and its immunoaffinity purified exosome-derived counterpart (10ng) were applied to 12.5% SDS-PAGE gels, electrophoretically separated and analyzed by western immunoblotting with patient sera, diluted 1:100 as the primary antibody, followed by peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgG as the secondary antibody (Sigma-Alrich, St. Louis, MO).  Array assay for tumor antigen-reactive immunoglobulins Purified exosomal proteins (250µL containing 20ng/mL protein) were applied to nitrocellulose membranes using a bio-dot microfiltration apparatus (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). As controls, serially diluted human IgG was spotted onto each membrane as an internal positive control for standardizing blots, diluted mouse and rabbit Ig as a negative control, and peroxidase-conjugated Ig samples as a reagent control and for orientation. Membranes were blocked with 5% BSA and then washed 3 times with TBS plus 0.1% Tween-20 and twice with TBS. Sera (diluted 1:100) from known cancer patients and non-cancer bearing controls were incubated with the membranes overnight at 4°C, incubated with peroxidase-conjugated anti-human IgG, and visualized by ECL. The resulting x-ray film was imaged using the Kodak DC290 gel documentation system and analyzed using the Kodak 1D image analysis software (Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, NY). The array image was captured as a 16-bit grayscale JPEG image. From this image, regions of interest (ROI) were manually defined and the ROIs were digitized and converted into pixel density by the 1D image analysis software. The number of pixels for each spot on the array was obtained and comparisons between membranes were performed after normalization with the internal positive control (peroxidase-labeled mouse Ig). To define the cutoff threshold for positive values, the maximum pixel value was determined for reactivity with any protein spot for the initial 20 normal control (non-cancer, no benign ovarian disease) samples. Any reactivity (pixel density), greater than this maximum value (for this study, 2971 pixels), was considered positive.  Statistical analysis The recognition of specific protein spots by each patient was stratified by the presence or absence of antibodies reactive with each specific antigen. Comparisons between the presence of specific antigens from non-cancer bearing controls and patients at each stage of ovarian cancer were performed by the Kruskal-Wallis test. Tests with p < 0.05 are considered statistically significant.  RESULTS Recognition of specific antigenic targets by tumor reactive IgG The presence of humoral immune responses was assessed in ovarian cancer patients by western immunoblot ( Figure 1 , representative blots). Differences in the antigens recognized and the intensity of that recognition were observed. For all 125 ovarian cancer patients tested, western immunoblots identified multiple bands ranging in molecular weight from 10 to 140kD, although the number and intensity of the immune interaction was variable among patients. Variable intensities on the immunoblot appeared to correlate with stage of disease (total pixels/lane, r=0.906). While late stage cancer patients recognized more bands at greater intensity, stage-specific differential recognition patterns were observed in IgG from ovarian cancer patients. Early stage patients exhibited unique, intense recognition of several antigens with molecular weights greater than 100kD, while late stage patients exhibited unique recognition of antigens with molecular weights less than 40kD. Reactivity of normal sera was also tested against these proteins and they failed to recognize proteins (data not shown). Cancer patient sera exhibit reactivity with only a few bands in normal ovarian epithelium. While CA125 performs poorly as a diagnostic marker, we compared the CA125 levels in our groups. Of the 40 control subjects with no evidence of cancer, 5exhibited CA125 levels >35 units/mL, while 8 of the 40 women with benign ovarian masses exhibited elevated CA125 (>35units/mL). Of the 35 patients with Stage I disease, 21 exhibited CA125 levels <35 units/mL with a mean of 28.38±16.64. Of the 40 patients with Stage III disease, 37 expressed elevated levels of CA125 with a mean level of 139.52±47.74 units/mL (ranging from 42–937). The mean levels of circulating CA125 between Stage I and III CA125 levels was not statistically significant. Differential recognition of exosomal proteins versus recombinant proteins For each antigen pair tested (specific exosome-derived protein (10ng) and its recombinant counterpart), patient-derived antibodies exhibited greater immunoreactivity with exosomal proteins ( Figure 2 ). For nucleophosmin, all ovarian cancer patients exhibited a more intense reactivity with the exosome-derived protein versus the recombinant protein (16.52±5.58 fold). For Cathepsin D, ovarian cancer patients recognized the exosome-derived protein 7.02±2.68 fold more than the recombinant protein. For Survivin, ovarian cancer patients exhibited a 1.53±0.76 fold elevated reactivity with the exosome-derived antigen compared with the recombinant protein. For p53, an 18.19±1.97 fold greater reactivity was observed with ovarian cancer patients’ sera against exosomal p53 than with recombinant p53. Exosomal p53 also exhibits recognition of 2 additional lower molecular weight bands. For GRP78, a 5.42±1.04 fold increase in immunoreactivity was observed using the exosomal GRP78, compared to the recombinant GRP78. Array defined autoantibody reactivity Using a dot-blot array to define reactivity, sera from normal female controls, women with benign ovarian disease and ovarian cancer, diluted 1:100, were incubated with the 12 array-associated antigens ( Figure 3 ). For each array, the resulting chemiluminescent individual spots were scanned and, using the values from multiple arrays, the mean pixels of each antigen were determined and plotted ( Figure 4 ). The immunoreactivities for both normal controls and women with benign disease were considered negative to all antigens tested. The means for all cancer groups were statistically different from control and benign cases. For most antigens tested, while the mean reactivity (pixel values) was greater in Stages III and IV disease than in early stage disease (Stages I and II), the differences were not significant. However, for Muc16, p53, PLAP and survivin, the reactivities were significantly greater in advanced than early stage disease. Repeating the study with sera from women with advanced pancreatic, lung, breast, and colon cancers indicated that all cancer patients tested generated autoantibodies recognizing nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, p53, and SSX antigens, compare with female controls and ovarian cancer patients ( Figure 5 ). Only ovarian cancer patients appear to recognize placental type alkaline phosphatase (PLAP). Patients with lung and colon cancer appear to more strongly recognize survivin.  RESULTS Recognition of specific antigenic targets by tumor reactive IgG The presence of humoral immune responses was assessed in ovarian cancer patients by western immunoblot ( Figure 1 , representative blots). Differences in the antigens recognized and the intensity of that recognition were observed. For all 125 ovarian cancer patients tested, western immunoblots identified multiple bands ranging in molecular weight from 10 to 140kD, although the number and intensity of the immune interaction was variable among patients. Variable intensities on the immunoblot appeared to correlate with stage of disease (total pixels/lane, r=0.906). While late stage cancer patients recognized more bands at greater intensity, stage-specific differential recognition patterns were observed in IgG from ovarian cancer patients. Early stage patients exhibited unique, intense recognition of several antigens with molecular weights greater than 100kD, while late stage patients exhibited unique recognition of antigens with molecular weights less than 40kD. Reactivity of normal sera was also tested against these proteins and they failed to recognize proteins (data not shown). Cancer patient sera exhibit reactivity with only a few bands in normal ovarian epithelium. While CA125 performs poorly as a diagnostic marker, we compared the CA125 levels in our groups. Of the 40 control subjects with no evidence of cancer, 5exhibited CA125 levels >35 units/mL, while 8 of the 40 women with benign ovarian masses exhibited elevated CA125 (>35units/mL). Of the 35 patients with Stage I disease, 21 exhibited CA125 levels <35 units/mL with a mean of 28.38±16.64. Of the 40 patients with Stage III disease, 37 expressed elevated levels of CA125 with a mean level of 139.52±47.74 units/mL (ranging from 42–937). The mean levels of circulating CA125 between Stage I and III CA125 levels was not statistically significant. Differential recognition of exosomal proteins versus recombinant proteins For each antigen pair tested (specific exosome-derived protein (10ng) and its recombinant counterpart), patient-derived antibodies exhibited greater immunoreactivity with exosomal proteins ( Figure 2 ). For nucleophosmin, all ovarian cancer patients exhibited a more intense reactivity with the exosome-derived protein versus the recombinant protein (16.52±5.58 fold). For Cathepsin D, ovarian cancer patients recognized the exosome-derived protein 7.02±2.68 fold more than the recombinant protein. For Survivin, ovarian cancer patients exhibited a 1.53±0.76 fold elevated reactivity with the exosome-derived antigen compared with the recombinant protein. For p53, an 18.19±1.97 fold greater reactivity was observed with ovarian cancer patients’ sera against exosomal p53 than with recombinant p53. Exosomal p53 also exhibits recognition of 2 additional lower molecular weight bands. For GRP78, a 5.42±1.04 fold increase in immunoreactivity was observed using the exosomal GRP78, compared to the recombinant GRP78. Array defined autoantibody reactivity Using a dot-blot array to define reactivity, sera from normal female controls, women with benign ovarian disease and ovarian cancer, diluted 1:100, were incubated with the 12 array-associated antigens ( Figure 3 ). For each array, the resulting chemiluminescent individual spots were scanned and, using the values from multiple arrays, the mean pixels of each antigen were determined and plotted ( Figure 4 ). The immunoreactivities for both normal controls and women with benign disease were considered negative to all antigens tested. The means for all cancer groups were statistically different from control and benign cases. For most antigens tested, while the mean reactivity (pixel values) was greater in Stages III and IV disease than in early stage disease (Stages I and II), the differences were not significant. However, for Muc16, p53, PLAP and survivin, the reactivities were significantly greater in advanced than early stage disease. Repeating the study with sera from women with advanced pancreatic, lung, breast, and colon cancers indicated that all cancer patients tested generated autoantibodies recognizing nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, p53, and SSX antigens, compare with female controls and ovarian cancer patients ( Figure 5 ). Only ovarian cancer patients appear to recognize placental type alkaline phosphatase (PLAP). Patients with lung and colon cancer appear to more strongly recognize survivin.  Recognition of specific antigenic targets by tumor reactive IgG The presence of humoral immune responses was assessed in ovarian cancer patients by western immunoblot ( Figure 1 , representative blots). Differences in the antigens recognized and the intensity of that recognition were observed. For all 125 ovarian cancer patients tested, western immunoblots identified multiple bands ranging in molecular weight from 10 to 140kD, although the number and intensity of the immune interaction was variable among patients. Variable intensities on the immunoblot appeared to correlate with stage of disease (total pixels/lane, r=0.906). While late stage cancer patients recognized more bands at greater intensity, stage-specific differential recognition patterns were observed in IgG from ovarian cancer patients. Early stage patients exhibited unique, intense recognition of several antigens with molecular weights greater than 100kD, while late stage patients exhibited unique recognition of antigens with molecular weights less than 40kD. Reactivity of normal sera was also tested against these proteins and they failed to recognize proteins (data not shown). Cancer patient sera exhibit reactivity with only a few bands in normal ovarian epithelium. While CA125 performs poorly as a diagnostic marker, we compared the CA125 levels in our groups. Of the 40 control subjects with no evidence of cancer, 5exhibited CA125 levels >35 units/mL, while 8 of the 40 women with benign ovarian masses exhibited elevated CA125 (>35units/mL). Of the 35 patients with Stage I disease, 21 exhibited CA125 levels <35 units/mL with a mean of 28.38±16.64. Of the 40 patients with Stage III disease, 37 expressed elevated levels of CA125 with a mean level of 139.52±47.74 units/mL (ranging from 42–937). The mean levels of circulating CA125 between Stage I and III CA125 levels was not statistically significant.  Recognition of specific antigenic targets by tumor reactive IgG The presence of humoral immune responses was assessed in ovarian cancer patients by western immunoblot ( Figure 1 , representative blots). Differences in the antigens recognized and the intensity of that recognition were observed. For all 125 ovarian cancer patients tested, western immunoblots identified multiple bands ranging in molecular weight from 10 to 140kD, although the number and intensity of the immune interaction was variable among patients. Variable intensities on the immunoblot appeared to correlate with stage of disease (total pixels/lane, r=0.906). While late stage cancer patients recognized more bands at greater intensity, stage-specific differential recognition patterns were observed in IgG from ovarian cancer patients. Early stage patients exhibited unique, intense recognition of several antigens with molecular weights greater than 100kD, while late stage patients exhibited unique recognition of antigens with molecular weights less than 40kD. Reactivity of normal sera was also tested against these proteins and they failed to recognize proteins (data not shown). Cancer patient sera exhibit reactivity with only a few bands in normal ovarian epithelium. While CA125 performs poorly as a diagnostic marker, we compared the CA125 levels in our groups. Of the 40 control subjects with no evidence of cancer, 5exhibited CA125 levels >35 units/mL, while 8 of the 40 women with benign ovarian masses exhibited elevated CA125 (>35units/mL). Of the 35 patients with Stage I disease, 21 exhibited CA125 levels <35 units/mL with a mean of 28.38±16.64. Of the 40 patients with Stage III disease, 37 expressed elevated levels of CA125 with a mean level of 139.52±47.74 units/mL (ranging from 42–937). The mean levels of circulating CA125 between Stage I and III CA125 levels was not statistically significant.  Differential recognition of exosomal proteins versus recombinant proteins For each antigen pair tested (specific exosome-derived protein (10ng) and its recombinant counterpart), patient-derived antibodies exhibited greater immunoreactivity with exosomal proteins ( Figure 2 ). For nucleophosmin, all ovarian cancer patients exhibited a more intense reactivity with the exosome-derived protein versus the recombinant protein (16.52±5.58 fold). For Cathepsin D, ovarian cancer patients recognized the exosome-derived protein 7.02±2.68 fold more than the recombinant protein. For Survivin, ovarian cancer patients exhibited a 1.53±0.76 fold elevated reactivity with the exosome-derived antigen compared with the recombinant protein. For p53, an 18.19±1.97 fold greater reactivity was observed with ovarian cancer patients’ sera against exosomal p53 than with recombinant p53. Exosomal p53 also exhibits recognition of 2 additional lower molecular weight bands. For GRP78, a 5.42±1.04 fold increase in immunoreactivity was observed using the exosomal GRP78, compared to the recombinant GRP78.  Differential recognition of exosomal proteins versus recombinant proteins For each antigen pair tested (specific exosome-derived protein (10ng) and its recombinant counterpart), patient-derived antibodies exhibited greater immunoreactivity with exosomal proteins ( Figure 2 ). For nucleophosmin, all ovarian cancer patients exhibited a more intense reactivity with the exosome-derived protein versus the recombinant protein (16.52±5.58 fold). For Cathepsin D, ovarian cancer patients recognized the exosome-derived protein 7.02±2.68 fold more than the recombinant protein. For Survivin, ovarian cancer patients exhibited a 1.53±0.76 fold elevated reactivity with the exosome-derived antigen compared with the recombinant protein. For p53, an 18.19±1.97 fold greater reactivity was observed with ovarian cancer patients’ sera against exosomal p53 than with recombinant p53. Exosomal p53 also exhibits recognition of 2 additional lower molecular weight bands. For GRP78, a 5.42±1.04 fold increase in immunoreactivity was observed using the exosomal GRP78, compared to the recombinant GRP78.  Array defined autoantibody reactivity Using a dot-blot array to define reactivity, sera from normal female controls, women with benign ovarian disease and ovarian cancer, diluted 1:100, were incubated with the 12 array-associated antigens ( Figure 3 ). For each array, the resulting chemiluminescent individual spots were scanned and, using the values from multiple arrays, the mean pixels of each antigen were determined and plotted ( Figure 4 ). The immunoreactivities for both normal controls and women with benign disease were considered negative to all antigens tested. The means for all cancer groups were statistically different from control and benign cases. For most antigens tested, while the mean reactivity (pixel values) was greater in Stages III and IV disease than in early stage disease (Stages I and II), the differences were not significant. However, for Muc16, p53, PLAP and survivin, the reactivities were significantly greater in advanced than early stage disease. Repeating the study with sera from women with advanced pancreatic, lung, breast, and colon cancers indicated that all cancer patients tested generated autoantibodies recognizing nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, p53, and SSX antigens, compare with female controls and ovarian cancer patients ( Figure 5 ). Only ovarian cancer patients appear to recognize placental type alkaline phosphatase (PLAP). Patients with lung and colon cancer appear to more strongly recognize survivin.  Array defined autoantibody reactivity Using a dot-blot array to define reactivity, sera from normal female controls, women with benign ovarian disease and ovarian cancer, diluted 1:100, were incubated with the 12 array-associated antigens ( Figure 3 ). For each array, the resulting chemiluminescent individual spots were scanned and, using the values from multiple arrays, the mean pixels of each antigen were determined and plotted ( Figure 4 ). The immunoreactivities for both normal controls and women with benign disease were considered negative to all antigens tested. The means for all cancer groups were statistically different from control and benign cases. For most antigens tested, while the mean reactivity (pixel values) was greater in Stages III and IV disease than in early stage disease (Stages I and II), the differences were not significant. However, for Muc16, p53, PLAP and survivin, the reactivities were significantly greater in advanced than early stage disease. Repeating the study with sera from women with advanced pancreatic, lung, breast, and colon cancers indicated that all cancer patients tested generated autoantibodies recognizing nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, p53, and SSX antigens, compare with female controls and ovarian cancer patients ( Figure 5 ). Only ovarian cancer patients appear to recognize placental type alkaline phosphatase (PLAP). Patients with lung and colon cancer appear to more strongly recognize survivin.  DISCUSSION While the appearance of specific proteins in the circulation can be indicative of cancer, as well as other non-cancerous conditions, the induction of humoral responses against tumor-derived proteins appears to enhance cancer specificity. Since these circulating tumor-reactive immunoglobulins are detectable prior to detection of circulating tumor antigen or palpable tumors, assessment of this autoantibody response against specific proteins can provide a cancer screening tool superior to those currently available. Using a broad array of tumor-derived antigens, specific immunoreactivity has been detected in all cancer patients evaluated [ 24 , 25 , 36 ]; however, recognition of these proteins by antibodies from non-cancer-bearing volunteers is a rare (<1%) event [ 37 ]. In our assay system, significant levels of tumor-reactive antibodies were not detected in non-cancer bearing controls or women with benign ovarian disease ( Figure 1 and Figure 4 ), which is consistent with other groups [ 38 ]. A modification of "autologous typing," termed SEREX, is being used to identify targets of immune recognition using recombinant cDNA expression libraries of human tumors [ 39 ]. While >1,500 tumor antigens have been identified, these antigens represent either structural abnormalities (mutations) or aberrant levels of mRNA expression in normal versus tumor tissue. The primary use of the SEREX approach has been the identification of tumor-derived protein targets for antigen-based assays. Recently, global epitope/antigen profiling using serum antibodies as analytes, termed epitomics, has been extensively investigated as diagnostic markers, particularly in high risk populations [ 40 – 42 ]. This combination of high-throughput selection and array-based serologic detection of antigens (using the phage display system), can define large panels of epitopes or tumor antigens in an unbiased fashion without regard to function [ 40 , 41 ]. Chatterjee et al [ 42 ] identified 65 different antigens and demonstrated reactivity in sera from 32 ovarian cancer patients and no reactivity in sera from healthy female controls and 14 patients with either benign disease or other malignant gynecologic diseases. Despite the high-throughput capacity of this technique, it possesses several limitations, including high cross-reactivity with bacterial or phage components, co-expression of cDNA derived from normal tissue (including lymphoid cells) present within the original tumor and an absence of cancer-linked post-translational modifications and processing, which can result in loss of immunoreactivity of these “engineered” protein targets [ 39 ]. As a result, using their 65 antigen array, Chatterjee et al [ 42 ] found only an average sensitivity and specificity of 55% and 98%, respectively. We further demonstrate the importance of the posttranslational modification that are missing from the high-throughput phage display approaches by comparing naturally modified proteins with recombinant counterparts. This study demonstrates superior recognition of exosomal proteins compared to their recombinant counterparts ( Figure 2 ). Recognition of exosome-derived nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, survivin, p53 and GRP78 was significantly greater than recombinant proteins. These findings also support our original findings that proteins associated with exosomes are more antigenic than their recombinant or even cell-associated counterparts, with additional antigenic epitopes present in the exosomal form [ 43 ]. With p53 antigens, most studies suggest autoantibodies bind to the amino- or carboxy-termini. Failure of recombinant wild-type p53 to be reactive with autoantibodies directed against mutated sites may explain the lower frequency of p53 autoantibodies versus the frequency of p53 mutations in ovarian cancer. Our work using tumor-derived exosomal p53, as the antigenic target, indicates more than 80% of ovarian cancer patients express p53 autoantibodies ( Figure 2 and Figure 4 ). Our results demonstrated that 60% of individuals with pancreatic, breast and colon cancers were also seropositive for antibodies against p53 protein, while 80% of lung cancer patients were also seropositive for p53 autoantibodies ( Figure 5 ). While other detection formats, such as multiplexing, may provide a superior platform for autoantibody screening against multiple antigens, previous studies, using an analogous dot-blot method for defining seropositive status, demonstrated a 100% sensitivity and specificity in distinguishing seropositive from seronegative individuals [ 44 ]. These results focused on a key issue of Gynecologic Oncology of differentiating ultrasound-identified benign versus malignant ovarian masses. As shown in Figure 4 , the presence of autoantibodies against nuclophosmin, cathepsin D, GRP78, and SSX antigens can differentiate between benign ovarian masses and even Stage I ovarian cancer. These findings also highlight our envisioned diagnostic approach, which would consist of a two-tiered assay. Many of the autoantigenic proteins utilized in this pilot assay appear to define cancer, in general, which would constitute the first-tier of a screening assay or an assay to differentiate the nature of pelvic masses. Of the tested panel of antigens, PLAP was the only tumor-associated antigen to exhibit a statistically significant specificity for ovarian cancer and would represent a model second-tier antigen. However, the recognition of PLAP is only significantly associated with Stage II and later disease. Based on our Western blot data ( Figure 1 ), there appear to be other antigenic proteins unique or preferentially present in Stage I disease. Our current research focuses on the identification and isolation of antigens specifically associated with ovarian cancer and linked with Stage I disease. Aberrant proteins associated with cancer may only represent minute alterations that are not discerned in antigen-based diagnostic tests, but the induction of IgG against these proteins can be indicators of the alteration. Specific alterations in these proteins may both target specific intracellular proteins for release as exosomes and lead to their recognition as non-self. The ability of the immune system to identify minor alterations in otherwise normal proteins creates a tool for the analysis of cancer-linked modifications and provides cancer specificity. Recognition specific protein aberrations that are shared by patients with the same tumor type can be utilized for the diagnosis of tumor type and stage.  DISCUSSION While the appearance of specific proteins in the circulation can be indicative of cancer, as well as other non-cancerous conditions, the induction of humoral responses against tumor-derived proteins appears to enhance cancer specificity. Since these circulating tumor-reactive immunoglobulins are detectable prior to detection of circulating tumor antigen or palpable tumors, assessment of this autoantibody response against specific proteins can provide a cancer screening tool superior to those currently available. Using a broad array of tumor-derived antigens, specific immunoreactivity has been detected in all cancer patients evaluated [ 24 , 25 , 36 ]; however, recognition of these proteins by antibodies from non-cancer-bearing volunteers is a rare (<1%) event [ 37 ]. In our assay system, significant levels of tumor-reactive antibodies were not detected in non-cancer bearing controls or women with benign ovarian disease ( Figure 1 and Figure 4 ), which is consistent with other groups [ 38 ]. A modification of "autologous typing," termed SEREX, is being used to identify targets of immune recognition using recombinant cDNA expression libraries of human tumors [ 39 ]. While >1,500 tumor antigens have been identified, these antigens represent either structural abnormalities (mutations) or aberrant levels of mRNA expression in normal versus tumor tissue. The primary use of the SEREX approach has been the identification of tumor-derived protein targets for antigen-based assays. Recently, global epitope/antigen profiling using serum antibodies as analytes, termed epitomics, has been extensively investigated as diagnostic markers, particularly in high risk populations [ 40 – 42 ]. This combination of high-throughput selection and array-based serologic detection of antigens (using the phage display system), can define large panels of epitopes or tumor antigens in an unbiased fashion without regard to function [ 40 , 41 ]. Chatterjee et al [ 42 ] identified 65 different antigens and demonstrated reactivity in sera from 32 ovarian cancer patients and no reactivity in sera from healthy female controls and 14 patients with either benign disease or other malignant gynecologic diseases. Despite the high-throughput capacity of this technique, it possesses several limitations, including high cross-reactivity with bacterial or phage components, co-expression of cDNA derived from normal tissue (including lymphoid cells) present within the original tumor and an absence of cancer-linked post-translational modifications and processing, which can result in loss of immunoreactivity of these “engineered” protein targets [ 39 ]. As a result, using their 65 antigen array, Chatterjee et al [ 42 ] found only an average sensitivity and specificity of 55% and 98%, respectively. We further demonstrate the importance of the posttranslational modification that are missing from the high-throughput phage display approaches by comparing naturally modified proteins with recombinant counterparts. This study demonstrates superior recognition of exosomal proteins compared to their recombinant counterparts ( Figure 2 ). Recognition of exosome-derived nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, survivin, p53 and GRP78 was significantly greater than recombinant proteins. These findings also support our original findings that proteins associated with exosomes are more antigenic than their recombinant or even cell-associated counterparts, with additional antigenic epitopes present in the exosomal form [ 43 ]. With p53 antigens, most studies suggest autoantibodies bind to the amino- or carboxy-termini. Failure of recombinant wild-type p53 to be reactive with autoantibodies directed against mutated sites may explain the lower frequency of p53 autoantibodies versus the frequency of p53 mutations in ovarian cancer. Our work using tumor-derived exosomal p53, as the antigenic target, indicates more than 80% of ovarian cancer patients express p53 autoantibodies ( Figure 2 and Figure 4 ). Our results demonstrated that 60% of individuals with pancreatic, breast and colon cancers were also seropositive for antibodies against p53 protein, while 80% of lung cancer patients were also seropositive for p53 autoantibodies ( Figure 5 ). While other detection formats, such as multiplexing, may provide a superior platform for autoantibody screening against multiple antigens, previous studies, using an analogous dot-blot method for defining seropositive status, demonstrated a 100% sensitivity and specificity in distinguishing seropositive from seronegative individuals [ 44 ]. These results focused on a key issue of Gynecologic Oncology of differentiating ultrasound-identified benign versus malignant ovarian masses. As shown in Figure 4 , the presence of autoantibodies against nuclophosmin, cathepsin D, GRP78, and SSX antigens can differentiate between benign ovarian masses and even Stage I ovarian cancer. These findings also highlight our envisioned diagnostic approach, which would consist of a two-tiered assay. Many of the autoantigenic proteins utilized in this pilot assay appear to define cancer, in general, which would constitute the first-tier of a screening assay or an assay to differentiate the nature of pelvic masses. Of the tested panel of antigens, PLAP was the only tumor-associated antigen to exhibit a statistically significant specificity for ovarian cancer and would represent a model second-tier antigen. However, the recognition of PLAP is only significantly associated with Stage II and later disease. Based on our Western blot data ( Figure 1 ), there appear to be other antigenic proteins unique or preferentially present in Stage I disease. Our current research focuses on the identification and isolation of antigens specifically associated with ovarian cancer and linked with Stage I disease. Aberrant proteins associated with cancer may only represent minute alterations that are not discerned in antigen-based diagnostic tests, but the induction of IgG against these proteins can be indicators of the alteration. Specific alterations in these proteins may both target specific intracellular proteins for release as exosomes and lead to their recognition as non-self. The ability of the immune system to identify minor alterations in otherwise normal proteins creates a tool for the analysis of cancer-linked modifications and provides cancer specificity. Recognition specific protein aberrations that are shared by patients with the same tumor type can be utilized for the diagnosis of tumor type and stage.  Figures Figure 1 Representative western immunoblots of patient immunoreactivity with cellular proteins from ovarian tumors and normal ovarian epithelium. Recognition of cellular proteins used patient serum diluted 1:100. Representation sera were obtained from patients (Panel A) with a benign ovarian mass (serous adenoma), (Panel B) early stage (Stage I) and (Panel C) late stage (Stage IIIc) ovarian cancers. Figure 2 Representative comparison of immune recognition of specific antigenic proteins by patient serum. Immunoaffinity purified exosomal proteins (10ng) were compared to recombinant counterparts (10ng) in western immunoblot analyses using sera from patients with Stage IIIc ovarian cancer. Figure 3 Protein array from the assessment of immunoreactivity of patient sera. Panel A presents the array layout. Panel B shows 3 representative dot blots using sera from normal female controls. Panel C presents 3 representative dot blots using sera from patients with benign ovarian disease, while Panel D shows 3 representative dot blots using sera from ovarian cancer patients. Figure 4 Quantitation of dot immunoblots presenting the immunoreactivity of sera from normal controls (n=40), women with benign disease (n=40) and patients with various stages of ovarian cancer (Stage I, n=35; Stage II, n=25; Stage III, n=40; Stage IV, n=25) patients against nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, GRP78, HoxA7, HSP90, Muc16, NY-ESO-1, p53, PLAP, SSX common antigen, survivin, and TAG72. * denotes significantly different (p<0.05) than either control or benign. Figure 5 Quantitation of dot immunoblots presenting the immunoreactivity of sera from normal controls and women with pancreatic (n=15), lung (n=15), breast (n=15), colon (n=15), and ovarian cancers (n=40). * denotes significantly different (p<0.05) than control.  Figures Figure 1 Representative western immunoblots of patient immunoreactivity with cellular proteins from ovarian tumors and normal ovarian epithelium. Recognition of cellular proteins used patient serum diluted 1:100. Representation sera were obtained from patients (Panel A) with a benign ovarian mass (serous adenoma), (Panel B) early stage (Stage I) and (Panel C) late stage (Stage IIIc) ovarian cancers. Figure 2 Representative comparison of immune recognition of specific antigenic proteins by patient serum. Immunoaffinity purified exosomal proteins (10ng) were compared to recombinant counterparts (10ng) in western immunoblot analyses using sera from patients with Stage IIIc ovarian cancer. Figure 3 Protein array from the assessment of immunoreactivity of patient sera. Panel A presents the array layout. Panel B shows 3 representative dot blots using sera from normal female controls. Panel C presents 3 representative dot blots using sera from patients with benign ovarian disease, while Panel D shows 3 representative dot blots using sera from ovarian cancer patients. Figure 4 Quantitation of dot immunoblots presenting the immunoreactivity of sera from normal controls (n=40), women with benign disease (n=40) and patients with various stages of ovarian cancer (Stage I, n=35; Stage II, n=25; Stage III, n=40; Stage IV, n=25) patients against nucleophosmin, cathepsin D, GRP78, HoxA7, HSP90, Muc16, NY-ESO-1, p53, PLAP, SSX common antigen, survivin, and TAG72. * denotes significantly different (p<0.05) than either control or benign. Figure 5 Quantitation of dot immunoblots presenting the immunoreactivity of sera from normal controls and women with pancreatic (n=15), lung (n=15), breast (n=15), colon (n=15), and ovarian cancers (n=40). * denotes significantly different (p<0.05) than control. 