Inhibition of Proteasome Activity by Bortezomib in Renal Cancer Cells Is p53 Dependent and VHL Independent Background Antiproliferative effects of proteasome inhibitors are suggested to be primarily due to effects on nuclear factor-?B (NF-?B)-dependent pathways and the induction of apoptosis. The objective of this study was to elucidate the mechanistic basis for the antiproliferative effects of the proteasome inhibitor, bortezomib, in human clear cell renal cell cancer cells (CCRCC). Materials and Methods von Hippel Lindau (VHL) mutation/methylation status and cytotoxic response to bortezomib was determined in a panel of CCRCC cell lines. Effects on target protein/gene expression and the role of p53 in bortezomib-mediated cytotoxicity, inhibition of proteasome activity, survivin transcript and protein expression as well as induction of p21 expression was determined in CCRCC that differed in their intrinsic sensitivity to bortezomib. Results VHL status was not associated with cytotoxic response to bortezomib treatment. Cytotoxicity in cell lines that differed in intrinsic sensitivity to bortezomib correlated with sustained inhibition of proteasome activity, survivin expression and induction of p21 expression. Stable down-regulation of p53 expression by siRNA led to attenuation of bortezomib effects, survivin down-regulation and p21 induction, suggesting that cellular effects are p53-dependent. Conclusion These results demonstrate that the antiproliferative effects of bortezomib in CCRCC cells are VHL independent and dependent on pathways regulated by p53.  Materials and Methods Cell lines and transfection The RCC cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, non-essential amino acids and sodium pyruvate. Transient transfection with siRNA-scrambled or siRNA-p53 was carried out with 10 ?l of Lipofectamine 2000®/3×105 cells in 1 ml of medium for 4 h. Stable expression of si-RNAs were carried out by cloning into a modified pBabe-puromycin retroviral vector. This vector contains the RNA polymerase III-dependent H1 RNA promoter cloned into the NheI site of the U3 region of the 3?LTR, which is used to drive expression of the si-RNAs. si-RNA oligonucleotides were cloned into Bg lII and Hind III sites immediately downstream of the H1 RNA promoter. The sequences of the si-p53 oligonucleotides cloned into the vector and protocol for transduction have been described previously ( 35 ). Following transduction, the target cells were selected for viral integration with 1 ?g/ml of puromycin for 1 week. Transfection of 786-0 cells with wild-type VHL cDNA-containing vector, pCR3 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK), or empty vector was carried out using 4 ?g DNA/5×105 cells and Lipofectamine 2000®. Stable transfectants were selected by culturing in 1 mg/ml G418. General treatment protocol The RCC cells in log phase of growth were treated with 50-1,000 nM bortezomib for 30 min, washed and re-incubated in drug-free medium for various time intervals prior to analysis for cytotoxicity and levels of target transcript or protein. Cytotoxicity was determined by cell counts after 4 to 6 doublings ( 36 ). DNA isolation DNA was isolated from approximately 2×106 cells using a Qiagen DNeasy DNA Isolation Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. VHL mutation analysis PCR-based amplification of each of the 3 exons was performed as described in Janezic et al. ( 37 ) using the following VHL primer sets: exon 1 forward, 5?-TGGAGGATCCTT CTGCGCAC-3?; exon 1 reverse, 5?-GGCTTCAGACCGTGC TATCG-3?; exon 2 forward, 5-GGCTCTTTAACAACCTT TGC-3?; exon 2 reverse, 5?-TTGGATACCGTGCCTGACATC-3?; exon 3 forward, 5?-ACAGGT-AGTTGTTGGCAAAGCC-3?; exon 3 reverse, 5?-GAAGGAACCAGTCCTGTATC-3?. The amplicons were sequenced using an ABI377 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation's Genomics Core Facility. Sequences derived from the amplifed samples were compared to the wild-type VHL sequence (GenBank Accession No. AF010238) using LaserGene software (DNAStar, Perkin Elmer, Foster City, CA, USA) to identify and characterize the presence of mutations. VHL methylation analysis Methylation status was determined using VHL methylation-specific PCR primers after DNA bisulfite modification. Genomic DNA was modified using a CpGenome™ DNA modification kit according to the manufacturer's protocol (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA, USA). The product then underwent PCR-based amplification using methylation-specific primers described in Herman et al. ( 38 ). Methylation status was determined by gel electrophoresis of the PCR products as described in Herman et al. ( 38 ). Cell lysis and Western blotting For immunoblot analysis, cell lysates were prepared in radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA), containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.425 M NaCl, 0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA and ?-mercaptoethanol plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors ( 36 ). An aliquot of the cell lysate was electrophoresed on a 10% Bis-Tris or 12 % Tris-HCl gels. The separated proteins were electroblotted onto PVDF membranes and blocked in 5% non fat dry milk (NFDM) in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 0.05% Tween-20 (TBST) at room temperature for 1 h. The membrane was incubated with the primary antibody in 3% NFDM/TBST at 4°C (usually overnight), followed by a peroxidase labeled secondary antibody, diluted 40,000-fold, for 1 h at room temperature. The primary antibodies were survivin (polyclonal; Santa Cruz Biotech., Santa Cruz, CA, USA), actin (polyclonal), p21 (monoclonal), p53 (D01, monoclonal), VHL (11E12, mouse monoclonal, RB), and HIF1? (mouse monoclonal; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). The relative intensity of the signal was determined for the protein band of interest and normalized with the relative intensity of actin. Proteasome activity assay Cell extracts were prepared in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, 1 mg/ml CHAPS and 1 mM PMSF) from control and treated cells retrieved at 6-12 h intervals, over a 48-h period, following treatment with different concentrations of bortezomib. Proteasome activity was determined using the substrate succinyl-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-7 amino methyl coumarin in a 20S Proteasome Assay Kit (Boston Biochem, Cambridge, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Fluorescence was determined in a Wallac Victor 2 multilabel counter (Perkin Elmer, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and activity was expressed as a percentage that of the control normalized for protein content. Survivin transcript expression RNA was isolated from approximately 2×106 cells using the Qiagen RNeasy RNA isolation kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Single-stranded cDNA was synthesized from 1 ?g of RNA using the SuperScript first-strand synthesis system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Following cDNA synthesis, relative levels of expression of survivin transcript in the renal cancer cell lines were determined in triplicate PCR reactions. The primers for survivin were forward: 5?-GGACCACCGCATC TCTACATTCAA-3? and reverse: 5?-CGTTCTCAGTGGGGCAGT GGAT-3?. The primers for ?2-microglobulin were forward: 5?-CTTGTCTTTCAGCAAGGACTGG-3? and reverse: 5?-CATGA TGCTGCTTACA-TGTCTC-3?. The PCR reaction was performed on a ABI7700 sequence detection system (ABI, Foster City, CA, USA). Relative survivin expression was determined by comparison of the critical amplification threshold values in the treatment group against those of the untreated control group after normalization with ?2-microglobulin expression (Sequence Detection System Software, ABI). Microarray analyses Expression profiles were determined using a custom cancer cDNA array containing probes to 9240 cDNA clones corresponding to 4900 Unigenes or unclustered expressed sequence tags (ESTs) relevant to cancer or kidney development ( 39 ). The expression profiles of si-GFP and si-p53 transfected RC26B cells 24 hours after bortezomib treatment were simultaneously compared on the same slide and processed as described by Frevel et al. ( 39 ).  Cell lines and transfection The RCC cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, non-essential amino acids and sodium pyruvate. Transient transfection with siRNA-scrambled or siRNA-p53 was carried out with 10 ?l of Lipofectamine 2000®/3×105 cells in 1 ml of medium for 4 h. Stable expression of si-RNAs were carried out by cloning into a modified pBabe-puromycin retroviral vector. This vector contains the RNA polymerase III-dependent H1 RNA promoter cloned into the NheI site of the U3 region of the 3?LTR, which is used to drive expression of the si-RNAs. si-RNA oligonucleotides were cloned into Bg lII and Hind III sites immediately downstream of the H1 RNA promoter. The sequences of the si-p53 oligonucleotides cloned into the vector and protocol for transduction have been described previously ( 35 ). Following transduction, the target cells were selected for viral integration with 1 ?g/ml of puromycin for 1 week. Transfection of 786-0 cells with wild-type VHL cDNA-containing vector, pCR3 (Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK), or empty vector was carried out using 4 ?g DNA/5×105 cells and Lipofectamine 2000®. Stable transfectants were selected by culturing in 1 mg/ml G418.  General treatment protocol The RCC cells in log phase of growth were treated with 50-1,000 nM bortezomib for 30 min, washed and re-incubated in drug-free medium for various time intervals prior to analysis for cytotoxicity and levels of target transcript or protein. Cytotoxicity was determined by cell counts after 4 to 6 doublings ( 36 ).  DNA isolation DNA was isolated from approximately 2×106 cells using a Qiagen DNeasy DNA Isolation Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol.  VHL mutation analysis PCR-based amplification of each of the 3 exons was performed as described in Janezic et al. ( 37 ) using the following VHL primer sets: exon 1 forward, 5?-TGGAGGATCCTT CTGCGCAC-3?; exon 1 reverse, 5?-GGCTTCAGACCGTGC TATCG-3?; exon 2 forward, 5-GGCTCTTTAACAACCTT TGC-3?; exon 2 reverse, 5?-TTGGATACCGTGCCTGACATC-3?; exon 3 forward, 5?-ACAGGT-AGTTGTTGGCAAAGCC-3?; exon 3 reverse, 5?-GAAGGAACCAGTCCTGTATC-3?. The amplicons were sequenced using an ABI377 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation's Genomics Core Facility. Sequences derived from the amplifed samples were compared to the wild-type VHL sequence (GenBank Accession No. AF010238) using LaserGene software (DNAStar, Perkin Elmer, Foster City, CA, USA) to identify and characterize the presence of mutations.  VHL methylation analysis Methylation status was determined using VHL methylation-specific PCR primers after DNA bisulfite modification. Genomic DNA was modified using a CpGenome™ DNA modification kit according to the manufacturer's protocol (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA, USA). The product then underwent PCR-based amplification using methylation-specific primers described in Herman et al. ( 38 ). Methylation status was determined by gel electrophoresis of the PCR products as described in Herman et al. ( 38 ).  Cell lysis and Western blotting For immunoblot analysis, cell lysates were prepared in radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA), containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.425 M NaCl, 0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA and ?-mercaptoethanol plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors ( 36 ). An aliquot of the cell lysate was electrophoresed on a 10% Bis-Tris or 12 % Tris-HCl gels. The separated proteins were electroblotted onto PVDF membranes and blocked in 5% non fat dry milk (NFDM) in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 0.05% Tween-20 (TBST) at room temperature for 1 h. The membrane was incubated with the primary antibody in 3% NFDM/TBST at 4°C (usually overnight), followed by a peroxidase labeled secondary antibody, diluted 40,000-fold, for 1 h at room temperature. The primary antibodies were survivin (polyclonal; Santa Cruz Biotech., Santa Cruz, CA, USA), actin (polyclonal), p21 (monoclonal), p53 (D01, monoclonal), VHL (11E12, mouse monoclonal, RB), and HIF1? (mouse monoclonal; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). The relative intensity of the signal was determined for the protein band of interest and normalized with the relative intensity of actin.  Proteasome activity assay Cell extracts were prepared in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, 1 mg/ml CHAPS and 1 mM PMSF) from control and treated cells retrieved at 6-12 h intervals, over a 48-h period, following treatment with different concentrations of bortezomib. Proteasome activity was determined using the substrate succinyl-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-7 amino methyl coumarin in a 20S Proteasome Assay Kit (Boston Biochem, Cambridge, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Fluorescence was determined in a Wallac Victor 2 multilabel counter (Perkin Elmer, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) and activity was expressed as a percentage that of the control normalized for protein content.  Survivin transcript expression RNA was isolated from approximately 2×106 cells using the Qiagen RNeasy RNA isolation kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Single-stranded cDNA was synthesized from 1 ?g of RNA using the SuperScript first-strand synthesis system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Following cDNA synthesis, relative levels of expression of survivin transcript in the renal cancer cell lines were determined in triplicate PCR reactions. The primers for survivin were forward: 5?-GGACCACCGCATC TCTACATTCAA-3? and reverse: 5?-CGTTCTCAGTGGGGCAGT GGAT-3?. The primers for ?2-microglobulin were forward: 5?-CTTGTCTTTCAGCAAGGACTGG-3? and reverse: 5?-CATGA TGCTGCTTACA-TGTCTC-3?. The PCR reaction was performed on a ABI7700 sequence detection system (ABI, Foster City, CA, USA). Relative survivin expression was determined by comparison of the critical amplification threshold values in the treatment group against those of the untreated control group after normalization with ?2-microglobulin expression (Sequence Detection System Software, ABI).  Microarray analyses Expression profiles were determined using a custom cancer cDNA array containing probes to 9240 cDNA clones corresponding to 4900 Unigenes or unclustered expressed sequence tags (ESTs) relevant to cancer or kidney development ( 39 ). The expression profiles of si-GFP and si-p53 transfected RC26B cells 24 hours after bortezomib treatment were simultaneously compared on the same slide and processed as described by Frevel et al. ( 39 ).  Results Cytotoxic response to bortezomib is independent of VHL in renal cancer cell lines Five renal cancer cell lines were treated with bortezomib, demonstrating a range of sensitivities to treatment ( Table I ). The VHL mutation/methylation status of these lines is presented in Table II . CAKI-1 is wild-type (WT) for VHL ; all the remaining lines harbored VHL mutations, with the exception of RC13, where the promoter of VHL was methylated. The IC50 for cells wt for VHL were within the range of the VHL-deficient lines suggesting that VHL does not play a critical role in bortezomib-mediated apoptosis. Two lines, RC13 and RC26B, both VHL-deficient due to promoter methylation and sequence mutation, respectively, were selected for further evaluation because they had demonstrated the largest differential response to bortezomib treatment in our panel. VHL inactivity in these lines is demonstrated with the lack of pVHL expression and elevated pHIF1? expression under normoxic conditions ( Figure 1 ). Differential response to bortezomib is associated with a persistent down-regulation of proteasome activity The differential response to bortezomib was associated with a persistent inhibition of proteasome activity to 25% that of the untreated control in RC26B cells beginning at 4 hours post treatment and continuing up to 48 hours. In contrast, while RC-13 cells demonstrated an initial similar decrease in proteasome activity at 4 hours post treatment, a bortezomib dose-dependent recovery in activity was observed at 24 and 48 hours ( Table III ). Differential response to bortezomib is associated with down-regulation of survivin and induction of p21 protein Our ongoing studies in human non-small cell lung carcinoma have suggested that down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein survivin, which is regulated by p53 ( 31 ), is linked to bortezomib-induced apoptosis ( 21 ). Thus, we determined protein levels of survivin and p21 in RC-13 and RC-26B cells treated for 30 min with 100 or 250 nM bortezomib and re-incubated in drug-free medium for 24 and 48 h. The data in Figure 2 demonstrate that unlike RC-13 cells, significant down-regulation of survivin and up-regulation of p21 protein occurs in RC-26B cells treated with bortezomib. The induction of p21 protein is also consistent with the markedly higher accumulation of cells in the G2+M fraction in RC-26B (40%) compared to RC-13 (9%) at 24 h following treatment with 250 nM bortezomib ( Figure 3 ). Using primers specific for survivin and ? 2-microglobulin as the internal control, the effect of bortezomib treatment on survivin transcript levels by real-time RT-PCR ( Figure 4 ) demonstrate that following bortezomib treatment there is persistent and significant down-regulation of survivin transcript levels in RC-26B compared to RC-13 cells. Down-regulation of p53 protein in RC-26B attenuates the apoptotic response to bortezomib Survivin is possibly regulated by p53 ( 40 ); thus, we sought to test the effect of manipulating p53 expression on cellular effects of bortezomib. To test the functional role of p53 in mediating the antiproliferative effects of bortezomib, RC-26B and RC-13 cells were selected for stable expression of si-RNA directed to p53 ( 35 ). Si-RNA directed to green fluorescent protein (GFP) was used as the control. The data in Figure 5 demonstrate significant down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (26B si-p53) and RC-13 (13 si-p53) compared to the respective control RC26B-siGFP and RC13-siGFP lines. Using these cells and the treatment protocol described earlier for data in Table I , we tested the cytotoxic effects of bortezomib. The data in Table IVA clearly demonstrate that down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (si-p53) cells led to a 2- to 12-fold decrease in the growth inhibitory effects of bortezomib compared to the 26B-siGFP line, suggesting a functional role for p53. In contrast, the cytotoxic effects did not significantly differ in the RC-13 sip53 lines compared to the RC-13 si-GFP cells ( Table IVB ). Differential gene expression in RC-26B si-P53 and RC-26BsiGFP following bortezomib treatment Microarray analysis was performed to determine the effects of bortezomib treatment on expression of p53-associated genes in the RC-26B si-p53 and RC-26B si-GFP lines. Data in Table V demonstrates that waf1/p21 and p21 were significantly down regulated in the si-p53 lines compared to the si-GFP lines following bortezomib treatment. In contrast, the IAP and cell proliferation-associated genes, survivin and topo II? , respectively, which are p53 regulated were up-regulated in si-p53 cells.  Results Cytotoxic response to bortezomib is independent of VHL in renal cancer cell lines Five renal cancer cell lines were treated with bortezomib, demonstrating a range of sensitivities to treatment ( Table I ). The VHL mutation/methylation status of these lines is presented in Table II . CAKI-1 is wild-type (WT) for VHL ; all the remaining lines harbored VHL mutations, with the exception of RC13, where the promoter of VHL was methylated. The IC50 for cells wt for VHL were within the range of the VHL-deficient lines suggesting that VHL does not play a critical role in bortezomib-mediated apoptosis. Two lines, RC13 and RC26B, both VHL-deficient due to promoter methylation and sequence mutation, respectively, were selected for further evaluation because they had demonstrated the largest differential response to bortezomib treatment in our panel. VHL inactivity in these lines is demonstrated with the lack of pVHL expression and elevated pHIF1? expression under normoxic conditions ( Figure 1 ). Differential response to bortezomib is associated with a persistent down-regulation of proteasome activity The differential response to bortezomib was associated with a persistent inhibition of proteasome activity to 25% that of the untreated control in RC26B cells beginning at 4 hours post treatment and continuing up to 48 hours. In contrast, while RC-13 cells demonstrated an initial similar decrease in proteasome activity at 4 hours post treatment, a bortezomib dose-dependent recovery in activity was observed at 24 and 48 hours ( Table III ). Differential response to bortezomib is associated with down-regulation of survivin and induction of p21 protein Our ongoing studies in human non-small cell lung carcinoma have suggested that down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein survivin, which is regulated by p53 ( 31 ), is linked to bortezomib-induced apoptosis ( 21 ). Thus, we determined protein levels of survivin and p21 in RC-13 and RC-26B cells treated for 30 min with 100 or 250 nM bortezomib and re-incubated in drug-free medium for 24 and 48 h. The data in Figure 2 demonstrate that unlike RC-13 cells, significant down-regulation of survivin and up-regulation of p21 protein occurs in RC-26B cells treated with bortezomib. The induction of p21 protein is also consistent with the markedly higher accumulation of cells in the G2+M fraction in RC-26B (40%) compared to RC-13 (9%) at 24 h following treatment with 250 nM bortezomib ( Figure 3 ). Using primers specific for survivin and ? 2-microglobulin as the internal control, the effect of bortezomib treatment on survivin transcript levels by real-time RT-PCR ( Figure 4 ) demonstrate that following bortezomib treatment there is persistent and significant down-regulation of survivin transcript levels in RC-26B compared to RC-13 cells. Down-regulation of p53 protein in RC-26B attenuates the apoptotic response to bortezomib Survivin is possibly regulated by p53 ( 40 ); thus, we sought to test the effect of manipulating p53 expression on cellular effects of bortezomib. To test the functional role of p53 in mediating the antiproliferative effects of bortezomib, RC-26B and RC-13 cells were selected for stable expression of si-RNA directed to p53 ( 35 ). Si-RNA directed to green fluorescent protein (GFP) was used as the control. The data in Figure 5 demonstrate significant down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (26B si-p53) and RC-13 (13 si-p53) compared to the respective control RC26B-siGFP and RC13-siGFP lines. Using these cells and the treatment protocol described earlier for data in Table I , we tested the cytotoxic effects of bortezomib. The data in Table IVA clearly demonstrate that down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (si-p53) cells led to a 2- to 12-fold decrease in the growth inhibitory effects of bortezomib compared to the 26B-siGFP line, suggesting a functional role for p53. In contrast, the cytotoxic effects did not significantly differ in the RC-13 sip53 lines compared to the RC-13 si-GFP cells ( Table IVB ). Differential gene expression in RC-26B si-P53 and RC-26BsiGFP following bortezomib treatment Microarray analysis was performed to determine the effects of bortezomib treatment on expression of p53-associated genes in the RC-26B si-p53 and RC-26B si-GFP lines. Data in Table V demonstrates that waf1/p21 and p21 were significantly down regulated in the si-p53 lines compared to the si-GFP lines following bortezomib treatment. In contrast, the IAP and cell proliferation-associated genes, survivin and topo II? , respectively, which are p53 regulated were up-regulated in si-p53 cells.  Cytotoxic response to bortezomib is independent of VHL in renal cancer cell lines Five renal cancer cell lines were treated with bortezomib, demonstrating a range of sensitivities to treatment ( Table I ). The VHL mutation/methylation status of these lines is presented in Table II . CAKI-1 is wild-type (WT) for VHL ; all the remaining lines harbored VHL mutations, with the exception of RC13, where the promoter of VHL was methylated. The IC50 for cells wt for VHL were within the range of the VHL-deficient lines suggesting that VHL does not play a critical role in bortezomib-mediated apoptosis. Two lines, RC13 and RC26B, both VHL-deficient due to promoter methylation and sequence mutation, respectively, were selected for further evaluation because they had demonstrated the largest differential response to bortezomib treatment in our panel. VHL inactivity in these lines is demonstrated with the lack of pVHL expression and elevated pHIF1? expression under normoxic conditions ( Figure 1 ).  Cytotoxic response to bortezomib is independent of VHL in renal cancer cell lines Five renal cancer cell lines were treated with bortezomib, demonstrating a range of sensitivities to treatment ( Table I ). The VHL mutation/methylation status of these lines is presented in Table II . CAKI-1 is wild-type (WT) for VHL ; all the remaining lines harbored VHL mutations, with the exception of RC13, where the promoter of VHL was methylated. The IC50 for cells wt for VHL were within the range of the VHL-deficient lines suggesting that VHL does not play a critical role in bortezomib-mediated apoptosis. Two lines, RC13 and RC26B, both VHL-deficient due to promoter methylation and sequence mutation, respectively, were selected for further evaluation because they had demonstrated the largest differential response to bortezomib treatment in our panel. VHL inactivity in these lines is demonstrated with the lack of pVHL expression and elevated pHIF1? expression under normoxic conditions ( Figure 1 ).  Differential response to bortezomib is associated with a persistent down-regulation of proteasome activity The differential response to bortezomib was associated with a persistent inhibition of proteasome activity to 25% that of the untreated control in RC26B cells beginning at 4 hours post treatment and continuing up to 48 hours. In contrast, while RC-13 cells demonstrated an initial similar decrease in proteasome activity at 4 hours post treatment, a bortezomib dose-dependent recovery in activity was observed at 24 and 48 hours ( Table III ).  Differential response to bortezomib is associated with a persistent down-regulation of proteasome activity The differential response to bortezomib was associated with a persistent inhibition of proteasome activity to 25% that of the untreated control in RC26B cells beginning at 4 hours post treatment and continuing up to 48 hours. In contrast, while RC-13 cells demonstrated an initial similar decrease in proteasome activity at 4 hours post treatment, a bortezomib dose-dependent recovery in activity was observed at 24 and 48 hours ( Table III ).  Differential response to bortezomib is associated with down-regulation of survivin and induction of p21 protein Our ongoing studies in human non-small cell lung carcinoma have suggested that down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein survivin, which is regulated by p53 ( 31 ), is linked to bortezomib-induced apoptosis ( 21 ). Thus, we determined protein levels of survivin and p21 in RC-13 and RC-26B cells treated for 30 min with 100 or 250 nM bortezomib and re-incubated in drug-free medium for 24 and 48 h. The data in Figure 2 demonstrate that unlike RC-13 cells, significant down-regulation of survivin and up-regulation of p21 protein occurs in RC-26B cells treated with bortezomib. The induction of p21 protein is also consistent with the markedly higher accumulation of cells in the G2+M fraction in RC-26B (40%) compared to RC-13 (9%) at 24 h following treatment with 250 nM bortezomib ( Figure 3 ). Using primers specific for survivin and ? 2-microglobulin as the internal control, the effect of bortezomib treatment on survivin transcript levels by real-time RT-PCR ( Figure 4 ) demonstrate that following bortezomib treatment there is persistent and significant down-regulation of survivin transcript levels in RC-26B compared to RC-13 cells.  Differential response to bortezomib is associated with down-regulation of survivin and induction of p21 protein Our ongoing studies in human non-small cell lung carcinoma have suggested that down-regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein survivin, which is regulated by p53 ( 31 ), is linked to bortezomib-induced apoptosis ( 21 ). Thus, we determined protein levels of survivin and p21 in RC-13 and RC-26B cells treated for 30 min with 100 or 250 nM bortezomib and re-incubated in drug-free medium for 24 and 48 h. The data in Figure 2 demonstrate that unlike RC-13 cells, significant down-regulation of survivin and up-regulation of p21 protein occurs in RC-26B cells treated with bortezomib. The induction of p21 protein is also consistent with the markedly higher accumulation of cells in the G2+M fraction in RC-26B (40%) compared to RC-13 (9%) at 24 h following treatment with 250 nM bortezomib ( Figure 3 ). Using primers specific for survivin and ? 2-microglobulin as the internal control, the effect of bortezomib treatment on survivin transcript levels by real-time RT-PCR ( Figure 4 ) demonstrate that following bortezomib treatment there is persistent and significant down-regulation of survivin transcript levels in RC-26B compared to RC-13 cells.  Down-regulation of p53 protein in RC-26B attenuates the apoptotic response to bortezomib Survivin is possibly regulated by p53 ( 40 ); thus, we sought to test the effect of manipulating p53 expression on cellular effects of bortezomib. To test the functional role of p53 in mediating the antiproliferative effects of bortezomib, RC-26B and RC-13 cells were selected for stable expression of si-RNA directed to p53 ( 35 ). Si-RNA directed to green fluorescent protein (GFP) was used as the control. The data in Figure 5 demonstrate significant down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (26B si-p53) and RC-13 (13 si-p53) compared to the respective control RC26B-siGFP and RC13-siGFP lines. Using these cells and the treatment protocol described earlier for data in Table I , we tested the cytotoxic effects of bortezomib. The data in Table IVA clearly demonstrate that down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (si-p53) cells led to a 2- to 12-fold decrease in the growth inhibitory effects of bortezomib compared to the 26B-siGFP line, suggesting a functional role for p53. In contrast, the cytotoxic effects did not significantly differ in the RC-13 sip53 lines compared to the RC-13 si-GFP cells ( Table IVB ).  Down-regulation of p53 protein in RC-26B attenuates the apoptotic response to bortezomib Survivin is possibly regulated by p53 ( 40 ); thus, we sought to test the effect of manipulating p53 expression on cellular effects of bortezomib. To test the functional role of p53 in mediating the antiproliferative effects of bortezomib, RC-26B and RC-13 cells were selected for stable expression of si-RNA directed to p53 ( 35 ). Si-RNA directed to green fluorescent protein (GFP) was used as the control. The data in Figure 5 demonstrate significant down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (26B si-p53) and RC-13 (13 si-p53) compared to the respective control RC26B-siGFP and RC13-siGFP lines. Using these cells and the treatment protocol described earlier for data in Table I , we tested the cytotoxic effects of bortezomib. The data in Table IVA clearly demonstrate that down-regulation of p53 protein in the RC-26B (si-p53) cells led to a 2- to 12-fold decrease in the growth inhibitory effects of bortezomib compared to the 26B-siGFP line, suggesting a functional role for p53. In contrast, the cytotoxic effects did not significantly differ in the RC-13 sip53 lines compared to the RC-13 si-GFP cells ( Table IVB ).  Differential gene expression in RC-26B si-P53 and RC-26BsiGFP following bortezomib treatment Microarray analysis was performed to determine the effects of bortezomib treatment on expression of p53-associated genes in the RC-26B si-p53 and RC-26B si-GFP lines. Data in Table V demonstrates that waf1/p21 and p21 were significantly down regulated in the si-p53 lines compared to the si-GFP lines following bortezomib treatment. In contrast, the IAP and cell proliferation-associated genes, survivin and topo II? , respectively, which are p53 regulated were up-regulated in si-p53 cells.  Differential gene expression in RC-26B si-P53 and RC-26BsiGFP following bortezomib treatment Microarray analysis was performed to determine the effects of bortezomib treatment on expression of p53-associated genes in the RC-26B si-p53 and RC-26B si-GFP lines. Data in Table V demonstrates that waf1/p21 and p21 were significantly down regulated in the si-p53 lines compared to the si-GFP lines following bortezomib treatment. In contrast, the IAP and cell proliferation-associated genes, survivin and topo II? , respectively, which are p53 regulated were up-regulated in si-p53 cells.  Discussion Our results demonstrate that bortezomib-mediated proteasome inhibition is p53 dependent in renal cancer cell lines. In addition, we found that VHL status does not impact on bortezomib-mediated cytotoxicity in our panel of renal cancer cell lines. Notably, transfection of the 786-0 line with wt VHL did not affect cytotoxic response to bortezomib ( Table I ). Interestingly, it was reported that VHL expression sensitized renal cancer cells to bortezomib with continuous exposure for 48 hours and that these effects are NF-?B dependent at concentrations of 1 micromolar or higher ( 41 ). In contrast, our treatment protocol was significantly different and likely addresses why pathways other than VHL and NF-?B may be critical in bortezomib-mediated toxicity. As previously outlined in this report, cells were treated for 30 minutes with bortezomib with concentrations at or below 1 micromolar, which are usually encountered in patients on bortezomib treatment. The differential effects on proteasome activity, survivin expression and p21 induction that were observed up to 48 hours after bortezomib was removed were also correlated with cytotoxicity determination 7 days post treatment. This protocol allows for the cells to recover post treatment over several population doublings and thus to assess the biological effects of the drug, in the absence of bortezomib. Our results further indicate that 30 minutes' exposure to bortezomib is sufficient for cells to either recover or commit to cell death and is possibly more relevant to treatment schedules used clinically. Proteasome activity was maximally suppressed 4 hours post bortezomib treatment across several concentrations, with no significant differences in the RC-13 (resistant) and RC-26B (sensitive) lines. However, proteasome activity recovered significantly in the RC-13 line at 24 and 48 hours post treatment, while there was no significant recovery in RC-26B. This demonstrates that while bortezomib down-regulates proteasome activity to a similar extent in both lines, the sensitivity to the bortezomib lies in the cell's ability to rebound or recover proteasome activity post bortezomib treatment. This suggests that differences in cell response among the lines may correlate to the duration of inhibition of proteasome activity. Our previous work in lung cancer and colon cancer cell lines demonstrated a p53 -dependent and NF-?B-independent pathway by which bortezomib mediates its cytotoxic effects ( 21 , 22 ), since apoptosis was demonstrated only in the wt p53 lines. Furthermore, manipulating p53 expression or down-regulating survivin in these lines inhibited apoptosis. In this study, we found that RC-26B which responded to bortezomib, displayed prolonged down-regulation of survivin transcript and protein expression as well as p21 induction, while RC-13, had only a transient decrease in survivin transcript expression, no decrease in survivin protein or induction of p21 protein expression. This correlated with a significant increase in the G2+M phase fraction in the RC-26B line compared to the RC-3 line 24 hours after treatment. These data coupled with results following targeted down-regulation of p53 suggest that p53 regulates bortezomib-mediated cytotoxicity. This also supported results of Ling et al. ( 17 ), who demonstrated that p53 may be involved in bortezomib-induced G2-M phase arrest and apoptosis in lung cancer cell lines. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated that bortezomib alone is not an effective agent in renal cell carcinoma treatment ( 28 , 29 ). One reason for this may be that bortezomib mediates its cytotoxic effects through p53. The expression of WT p53 is suppressed in renal cell carcinomas cells ( 42 ). Thus, in renal cell carcinoma, bortezomib may be useful when used in combination with agents that activate p53 , since the mechanism of p53 repression in renal cancer cells has been reported to be reversible with activating agents ( 42 ).  Discussion Our results demonstrate that bortezomib-mediated proteasome inhibition is p53 dependent in renal cancer cell lines. In addition, we found that VHL status does not impact on bortezomib-mediated cytotoxicity in our panel of renal cancer cell lines. Notably, transfection of the 786-0 line with wt VHL did not affect cytotoxic response to bortezomib ( Table I ). Interestingly, it was reported that VHL expression sensitized renal cancer cells to bortezomib with continuous exposure for 48 hours and that these effects are NF-?B dependent at concentrations of 1 micromolar or higher ( 41 ). In contrast, our treatment protocol was significantly different and likely addresses why pathways other than VHL and NF-?B may be critical in bortezomib-mediated toxicity. As previously outlined in this report, cells were treated for 30 minutes with bortezomib with concentrations at or below 1 micromolar, which are usually encountered in patients on bortezomib treatment. The differential effects on proteasome activity, survivin expression and p21 induction that were observed up to 48 hours after bortezomib was removed were also correlated with cytotoxicity determination 7 days post treatment. This protocol allows for the cells to recover post treatment over several population doublings and thus to assess the biological effects of the drug, in the absence of bortezomib. Our results further indicate that 30 minutes' exposure to bortezomib is sufficient for cells to either recover or commit to cell death and is possibly more relevant to treatment schedules used clinically. Proteasome activity was maximally suppressed 4 hours post bortezomib treatment across several concentrations, with no significant differences in the RC-13 (resistant) and RC-26B (sensitive) lines. However, proteasome activity recovered significantly in the RC-13 line at 24 and 48 hours post treatment, while there was no significant recovery in RC-26B. This demonstrates that while bortezomib down-regulates proteasome activity to a similar extent in both lines, the sensitivity to the bortezomib lies in the cell's ability to rebound or recover proteasome activity post bortezomib treatment. This suggests that differences in cell response among the lines may correlate to the duration of inhibition of proteasome activity. Our previous work in lung cancer and colon cancer cell lines demonstrated a p53 -dependent and NF-?B-independent pathway by which bortezomib mediates its cytotoxic effects ( 21 , 22 ), since apoptosis was demonstrated only in the wt p53 lines. Furthermore, manipulating p53 expression or down-regulating survivin in these lines inhibited apoptosis. In this study, we found that RC-26B which responded to bortezomib, displayed prolonged down-regulation of survivin transcript and protein expression as well as p21 induction, while RC-13, had only a transient decrease in survivin transcript expression, no decrease in survivin protein or induction of p21 protein expression. This correlated with a significant increase in the G2+M phase fraction in the RC-26B line compared to the RC-3 line 24 hours after treatment. These data coupled with results following targeted down-regulation of p53 suggest that p53 regulates bortezomib-mediated cytotoxicity. This also supported results of Ling et al. ( 17 ), who demonstrated that p53 may be involved in bortezomib-induced G2-M phase arrest and apoptosis in lung cancer cell lines. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated that bortezomib alone is not an effective agent in renal cell carcinoma treatment ( 28 , 29 ). One reason for this may be that bortezomib mediates its cytotoxic effects through p53. The expression of WT p53 is suppressed in renal cell carcinomas cells ( 42 ). Thus, in renal cell carcinoma, bortezomib may be useful when used in combination with agents that activate p53 , since the mechanism of p53 repression in renal cancer cells has been reported to be reversible with activating agents ( 42 ). 