Non-diagnostic Conjunctival Map Biopsies for Sebaceous Carcinoma Objective To compare the prevalence of non-diagnostic conjunctival map biopsies in patients with extensive pagetoid sebaceous carcinoma (defined as involvement of 3 or 4 quadrants of the ocular surface) and in patients without extensive pagetoid tumor (defined as involvement of 1 or 2 quadrants of the ocular surface). Methods Retrospective chart and pathologic specimen review of 20 patients treated for sebaceous carcinoma at a tertiary care center. Biopsies with artifactual loss of or damage to the epithelium were categorized as non-diagnostic. Results 144 map biopsies were reviewed; an average of 7.2 ± 4.4 biopsies per patient. Sixteen patients had extensive pagetoid tumor, four did not. Fifteen percent of biopsies were non-diagnostic. The frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies in patients with and without extensive pagetoid tumor was 37% and 10%, respectively. The odds ratio of non-diagnostic biopsy in the setting of extensive pagetoid tumor was 5.9 (95% CI: 2.3-15.6, p<0.01). Six of the sixteen patients (38%) without extensive pagetoid tumor had at least one non-diagnostic biopsy, with an average of 1.8 ± 1.6 non-diagnostic biopsies per patient (22% of biopsies). Two of the four patients (50%) with extensive pagetoid tumor had at least one non-diagnostic biopsy, with an average of 5.5 ± 3.5 non-diagnostic biopsies per patient (57% of biopsies). Conclusions Non-diagnostic, de-epithelialized conjunctival map biopsies are more common in patients with extensive pagetoid tumor than in those with limited or no pagetoid tumor. Artifactual epithelial loss may result from disruption of epithelial adhesion to the basement membrane by infiltrating tumor cells.  INTRODUCTION Sebaceous carcinoma accounts for 1-5% of eyelid malignancies. 1 Intraepithelial, or pagetoid tumor, defined as invasion of the ocular epithelial surface by tumor cells, is estimated to occur in 40-80% of cases, 2 , 3 and presents unique diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Because the standard treatment for sebaceous carcinoma is surgical excision, 1 extensive pagetoid tumor often requires orbital exenteration. Accurate staging is essential to determine the extent of resection required to adequately treat pagetoid sebaceous carcinoma which may extend for considerable distances along the ocular surface. Staging is based on slit-lamp biomicroscopic examination and conjunctival map biopsies. However, some biopsies do not contain epithelium when examined histopathologically, due to artifactual epithelial cell loss during specimen acquisition or processing. Biopsy specimens lacking epithelium cannot be used to determine the presence or absence of pagetoid tumor at their respective harvesting locations. We hypothesized that intraepithelial tumor results in greater propensity for artifactual epithelial loss due to disruption of normal epithelial adhesion to basement membrane by invading, discohesive tumor cells. The purpose of this study was to determine the frequency of de-epithelialized, non-diagnostic conjunctival map biopsies in patients with pagetoid sebaceous carcinoma and to test whether the frequency of these biopsies correlates with disease severity.  Methods Retrospective chart and pathologic specimen review of 20 patients treated for sebaceous carcinoma at a tertiary care center. Biopsies with artifactual loss of or damage to the epithelium were categorized as non-diagnostic.  Results 144 map biopsies were reviewed; an average of 7.2 ± 4.4 biopsies per patient. Sixteen patients had extensive pagetoid tumor, four did not. Fifteen percent of biopsies were non-diagnostic. The frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies in patients with and without extensive pagetoid tumor was 37% and 10%, respectively. The odds ratio of non-diagnostic biopsy in the setting of extensive pagetoid tumor was 5.9 (95% CI: 2.3-15.6, p<0.01). Six of the sixteen patients (38%) without extensive pagetoid tumor had at least one non-diagnostic biopsy, with an average of 1.8 ± 1.6 non-diagnostic biopsies per patient (22% of biopsies). Two of the four patients (50%) with extensive pagetoid tumor had at least one non-diagnostic biopsy, with an average of 5.5 ± 3.5 non-diagnostic biopsies per patient (57% of biopsies).  Conclusions Non-diagnostic, de-epithelialized conjunctival map biopsies are more common in patients with extensive pagetoid tumor than in those with limited or no pagetoid tumor. Artifactual epithelial loss may result from disruption of epithelial adhesion to the basement membrane by infiltrating tumor cells.  METHODS The clinical records and biopsy specimens of 20 patients referred to the University of Michigan for management of periocular sebaceous carcinoma between 1991 and 2007 were reviewed. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Michigan. Conjunctival map biopsies were performed in all cases to assess the extent of pagetoid tumor. At least four sections along the long axis of each map biopsy specimen were reviewed. If there was absence of epithelium or if artifacts rendered the epithelium inadequate for diagnosis, the biopsy was categorized as non-diagnostic. If adequate epithelium for diagnosis was present, the biopsy was categorized as diagnostic. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad ( http://www.graphpad.com/quickcalcs/contingency1.cfm ).  RESULTS The patient population contained eight men and twelve women, age 69 ± 18 years (mean ± standard deviation). The duration of symptoms was 17 ± 21 months. The follow-up period was 26 ± 19 months. There were no deaths. Four patients had extensive pagetoid tumor, defined as involvement of three or four quadrants of the ocular surface. These patients were treated with orbital exenteration. A total of 144 map biopsies were reviewed; on average, 7.2 ± 4.4 biopsies were sampled from each patient. The histopathologic analysis revealed variable specimen quality ( Figure 1 ). In diagnostic biopsies, the conjunctival epithelium was well preserved and a diagnosis could be made regarding the presence or absence of pagetoid disease (see Figure 1A-D ). Non-diagnostic biopsies had artifactual loss of or damage to the epithelium, particularly crush artifact, affecting the entire specimen (see Figure 1E-F ). Fifteen percent of the map biopsies were non-diagnostic. The overall frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies in patients with and without extensive pagetoid tumor was 37% and 10%, respectively. Categorical data analysis using 2-tailed Fisher’s exact test revealed that the frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies correlated with the presence of extensive pagetoid tumor ( Table 1 ) (p<0.01). The odds ratio of non-diagnostic biopsy in the setting of extensive pagetoid tumor was 5.9 (95% CI: 2.3-15.6, p<0.01). Diagnostic map biopsies averaged 3.1 ± 2.5 mm in greatest dimension, while non-diagnostic map biopsies averaged 5.0 ± 3.2 mm in greatest dimension. Thus, the propensity for loss of epithelium is not attributable to inadequate specimen size. Six of the sixteen patients (38%) without extensive pagetoid tumor had at least one non-diagnostic biopsy. For these six patients, the average number of non-diagnostic biopsies per patient was 1.8 ± 1.6 (22% of biopsies). In one patient repeat biopsy, in the vicinity of two previously non-diagnostic biopsies, was negative. The remaining five patients did not undergo repeat biopsy because of complete absence of pagetoid disease in their other map biopsies. None of the six patients developed tumor recurrence during follow-ups averaging 29 months (range 15-47 months). Two of the four patients (50%) with extensive pagetoid tumor had non-diagnostic biopsies. The average number of non-diagnostic biopsies for these two patients was 5.5 ± 3.5 (57% of biopsies) per patient. In both cases, subsequent re-excision, including exenteration, revealed that the conjunctiva was positive for tumor in the vicinity of the previous non-diagnostic biopsies. The difference in the frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies between patients with and without extensive pagetoid disease was statistically significant (2-tailed Fisher’s exact test, p<0.01).  RESULTS The patient population contained eight men and twelve women, age 69 ± 18 years (mean ± standard deviation). The duration of symptoms was 17 ± 21 months. The follow-up period was 26 ± 19 months. There were no deaths. Four patients had extensive pagetoid tumor, defined as involvement of three or four quadrants of the ocular surface. These patients were treated with orbital exenteration. A total of 144 map biopsies were reviewed; on average, 7.2 ± 4.4 biopsies were sampled from each patient. The histopathologic analysis revealed variable specimen quality ( Figure 1 ). In diagnostic biopsies, the conjunctival epithelium was well preserved and a diagnosis could be made regarding the presence or absence of pagetoid disease (see Figure 1A-D ). Non-diagnostic biopsies had artifactual loss of or damage to the epithelium, particularly crush artifact, affecting the entire specimen (see Figure 1E-F ). Fifteen percent of the map biopsies were non-diagnostic. The overall frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies in patients with and without extensive pagetoid tumor was 37% and 10%, respectively. Categorical data analysis using 2-tailed Fisher’s exact test revealed that the frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies correlated with the presence of extensive pagetoid tumor ( Table 1 ) (p<0.01). The odds ratio of non-diagnostic biopsy in the setting of extensive pagetoid tumor was 5.9 (95% CI: 2.3-15.6, p<0.01). Diagnostic map biopsies averaged 3.1 ± 2.5 mm in greatest dimension, while non-diagnostic map biopsies averaged 5.0 ± 3.2 mm in greatest dimension. Thus, the propensity for loss of epithelium is not attributable to inadequate specimen size. Six of the sixteen patients (38%) without extensive pagetoid tumor had at least one non-diagnostic biopsy. For these six patients, the average number of non-diagnostic biopsies per patient was 1.8 ± 1.6 (22% of biopsies). In one patient repeat biopsy, in the vicinity of two previously non-diagnostic biopsies, was negative. The remaining five patients did not undergo repeat biopsy because of complete absence of pagetoid disease in their other map biopsies. None of the six patients developed tumor recurrence during follow-ups averaging 29 months (range 15-47 months). Two of the four patients (50%) with extensive pagetoid tumor had non-diagnostic biopsies. The average number of non-diagnostic biopsies for these two patients was 5.5 ± 3.5 (57% of biopsies) per patient. In both cases, subsequent re-excision, including exenteration, revealed that the conjunctiva was positive for tumor in the vicinity of the previous non-diagnostic biopsies. The difference in the frequency of non-diagnostic biopsies between patients with and without extensive pagetoid disease was statistically significant (2-tailed Fisher’s exact test, p<0.01).  COMMENT We found that non-diagnostic, de-epithelialized conjunctival map biopsies are more common in patients with extensive pagetoid tumor than in those with limited or no pagetoid disease. Fortunately, our patients with extensive disease requiring exenteration were recognized as such due to either tumor invasion into the conjunctival stroma of the de-epithelialized biopsies or extensive pagetoid involvement of the remaining specimens which warranted exenteration. Artifactual epithelial loss may result from disruption of epithelial adhesion to the basement membrane by infiltrating, discohesive tumor cells ( Figure 1 ). Because these specimens are more fragile, clinicians and pathologists should take great care during specimen harvesting and processing to avoid de-epithelialization. In the context of known pagetoid spread from sebaceous carcinoma, total sloughing of the conjunctival epithelium is non-diagnostic but should not be interpreted as a ‘negative biopsy.’ Instead, the surgeon should be aware of the fact that artifactual sloughing of the conjunctival epithelium in the context of pagetoid spread may indicate involvement of the conjunctiva in this area by tumor. The threshold for repeat biopsy should be low, if the original specimen is non-diagnostic, especially because of the easy accessibility of the ocular surface. Recent advances in periocular reconstructive procedures have prompted study of tissue-sparing techniques, including cryotherapy 4 and topical mitomycin C 5 to treat pagetoid disease. Our results have implications for these modes treatment, because the extent of involvement is more likely to be underestimated in patients with heavier disease burden. 