Proteolytic Cleavage of PTPmu Regulates Glioblastoma Cell Migration Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the most common malignant primary brain tumor, represents a significant disease burden. GBM tumor cells disperse extensively throughout the brain parenchyma, and the need for tumor-specific drug targets and pharmacological agents to inhibit cell migration and dispersal is great. The receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase mu (PTPmu) is a homophilic cell adhesion molecule. The full-length form of PTPmu is downregulated in human glioblastoma. In this manuscript, overexpression of full-length PTPmu is demonstrated to suppress migration and survival of glioblastoma cells. Additionally, proteolytic cleavage is shown to be the mechanism of PTPmu downregulation in glioblastoma cells. Proteolysis of PTPmu generates a series of proteolytic fragments including a soluble catalytic intracellular domain (ICD) fragment that translocates to the nucleus. Only proteolyzed PTPmu fragments are detected in human glioblastomas. shRNA-mediated downregulation of PTPmu fragments decreases glioblastoma cell migration and survival. A peptide inhibitor of PTPmu function blocks fragment-induced glioblastoma cell migration, which may prove to be of therapeutic value in GBM treatment. These data suggest that loss of cell surface PTPmu by proteolysis generates catalytically active PTPmu fragments that contribute to migration and survival of glioblastoma cells.  INTRODUCTION Gliomas are malignancies of glial supporting cells of the central nervous system, including astrocytes and oligodendrocytes ( 1 , 2 ). These neoplasms are categorized by their putative cell of origin based upon morphological similarities to various types of normal glia ( 2 , 3 ). They are graded histologically between I and IV according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification system of tumor cellularity, proliferation, angiogenesis, and invasiveness ( 4 ). Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), a WHO grade IV glioma, has a poor prognosis with a mean survival time less than one year ( 5 ). The lethality of GBM can be attributed to the dispersive phenotype where cells migrate and develop foci throughout the brain ( 3 , 6 , 7 ). We recently demonstrated the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase mu (PTP?) negatively regulates GBM cell migration, and full-length PTP? protein is lost in human GBM tumors in comparison to low-grade astrocytomas ( 8 ). PTP? is the prototype of the type IIb subfamily of receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs). PTP? has been demonstrated to participate in homophilic binding. PTP? on the extracellular surface of one cell binds to PTP? on the surface of an adjacent cell ( 9 – 11 ). As a transmembrane adhesion receptor, PTP? has the ability to sense an extracellular signal via its extracellular segment and transduce this signal intracellularly via its phosphatase activity ( 12 – 14 ). The PTP? extracellular domain is composed of a MAM ( M eprin/ A 5-protein/PTP M u) domain, an immunoglobulin-like (Ig) domain, and four fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats ( 12 , 15 , 16 ). The intracellular domain of PTP? contains a juxtamembrane sequence with homology to cadherins and two phosphatase domains of which only the most membrane proximal is catalytically active ( 17 , 18 ). The juxtamembrane portion contains a helix-loop-helix wedge-shaped motif ( 14 ) that was targeted in the design of a peptide inhibitor of PTP? function. This wedge peptide inhibitor specifically blocks PTP? function in migration assays ( 19 , 20 ). PTP? is expressed as a 200 kDa protein that is proteolytically cleaved in the fourth FNIII repeat, resulting in a 100 kDa extracellular fragment (E-subunit) that remains associated with the 100 kDa transmembrane and intracellular portion (P-subunit) through a non-covalent interaction ( 11 , 21 , 22 ). This cleavage is mediated by a furin-like protease in the endoplasmic reticulum during intracellular trafficking ( 21 ). Another type IIb RPTP, PTP?, is also cleaved by a furin-like protease and further processed by an ?-secretase of the A D isintegrin A nd M etalloproteinase domain (ADAM) family and a ?-secretase ( 23 ). The extracellular ADAM cleaves the P-subunit adjacent to the membrane to generate P?E and shed the ectodomain ( 23 ). This cleavage primes PTP? P?E to be cleaved by ?-secretase, which releases the intracellular portion of PTP? containing the active phosphatase domain from the membrane ( 23 ). The intracellular fragment of PTP? translocates to the nucleus and controls ?-catenin transcription ( 23 ). We previously observed a similar fragment of PTP? containing the catalytically active intracellular domain (ICD) in the nucleus of a lung cell line ( 24 ). We have previously shown that PTP? protein is downregulated in glioblastoma ( 8 ). Here we show that overexpression of full-length PTP? in glioblastoma cells suppresses cell migration and growth factor-independent cell survival. In addition, we propose that PTP? downregulation in glioblastoma is the result of sequential cleavage of full-length PTP? protein to generate the intracellular fragments P?E and ICD. In support of this hypothesis, the intracellular fragments of PTP? are present in human glioblastoma samples and glioblastoma xenograft flank tumors. Surprisingly, shRNA-mediated downregulation of PTP? fragments decreases cell migration and growth factor-independent survival in glioblastoma cells. Furthermore, peptide inhibition of the function of PTP? fragments inhibits cell migration. These data suggest that proteolytic cleavage of full-length PTP? generates PTP? fragments that regulate cell migration and growth factor-independent survival in glioblastoma. These PTP? fragments can be targeted to develop novel therapeutic agents for glioblastoma patients.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines The human GBM cell lines U-87 MG and LN-229 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Human Gli36?5 glioblastoma cells have been described ( 25 ). Lentiviral transduction A human full-length PTP? cDNA construct in pMT2 has been described ( 26 ). Full-length PTP? was ligated into the lentiviral expression vector pCDH-MCS2 (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA). A full-length PTP?-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion construct has been described ( 27 ). The PTP?-GFP cassette was subcloned into pCDH-MCS2. An intracellular PTP?-GFP fusion construct corresponding to PTP? ICD has been described ( 24 ). Lentiviral shRNA constructs and the production of VSV-G-pseudotyped lentiviral particles have been described ( 8 ). Immunoblotting Cell lysates were prepared and immunoblotted as described ( 8 ) using normalized samples of ~20 ?g protein detected with monoclonal antibodies recognizing the intracellular segment of PTP? (SK-7 or SK-18) ( 28 ). An antibody against vinculin was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The GFP antibody JL-8 was from Clontech (Mountain View, CA). RT-PCR RT-PCR was performed as described ( 8 ). The PCR primers were as follows: extracellular forward (CGCGAATTCTAGAGACGTTCTCAGGTGGC), extracellular reverse (CCCGCAAGCTTACTTCTTCTCGCACTTG), intracellular forward (CGCGGATCCAAAGAGACCATGAGCAGCACCCGA), and intracellular reverse (CCGGAATTCTCATCTGTTCTCATCTTTCTTAGCCGA). Scratch wound assay Scratch wound assays were performed as described ( 8 ). Confluent monolayers of cells were scratched to induce a wound and analyzed by microscopy for the distance migrated by the leading edge of the wound at 0 and 24 hrs. Colony formation assays Growth factor-independent clonogenic colony assays were performed as described ( 29 ). Crystal violet-stained colonies were imaged with the Quantity One imaging software of the Gel Doc imaging system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Images were quantitated using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices) by measuring the thresholded area of each well to include only colonies. For the soft agarose assay, cells were seeded at a concentration of 75,000 cells/ml in 0.4% agarose and plated on an underlay of 0.8% agarose in a 6-well plate. Colonies were analyzed after four weeks by imaging Z-stacks of 20 random 10X fields using a Leica DMI6000B automated inverted microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) attached to a Retiga EXi camera (QImaging, Surrey, BC, Canada). The number of colonies in minimized Z-stacks from each microscope field was recorded. Biotinylation of cell surface proteins Cell surface biotinylation was performed using a Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin Kit (Pierce). Biotinylated proteins were isolated and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 6% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18) as described ( 30 ). Inhibitors The Furin Inhibitor I (Dec-RVKR-CMK, Calbiochem, Gibbstown, NJ) was used at 50 ?M for 17–20 hours. The ?-secretase inhibitors DAPT (Sigma-Aldrich) and L-685,458 (Sigma-Aldrich) were used at 2 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively, for 17–20 hours. The proteasome was inhibited with MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) at 20 ?M or epoxomicin (Calbiochem) at 5 ?M for 4 hours. GM6001 (Calbiochem) was used at 50 ?M as an MMP/ADAM inhibitor for 17–20 hours. Inhibitors were reconstituted in DMSO, which was used as a vehicle control. An inhibitor of PTP? function targeting the helix-loop-helix wedge domain has been demonstrated to inhibit PTP? function ( 19 , 20 ). The PTP? wedge peptide and a scrambled control peptide were synthesized to include a membrane-penetrant Tat-derived sequence at the C-terminus to promote cellular uptake. Peptides synthesized by Genemed Synthesis (San Antonio, TX) or GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) were reconstituted in water and added to cells at a final concentration of 5 ?M. Immunoprecipitations Cells were grown to confluence, treated with inhibitors, and lysed in 20mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1mM benzamidine, aprotinin (5 ?g/ml), leupeptin (5 ?g/ml) and pepstatin (1 ?g/ml). Samples were sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 minutes. Immunoprecipitations from ~400 ?g total protein were performed as described ( 27 ) using a PTP? antibody (SK-18) and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 8% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-7). Immunocytochemistry Immunofluorescent cell staining was performed as described ( 24 ). Fixed cells were probed with SK-7 or SK-18, which recognize intracellular PTP?, and detected with goat anti-mouse-Alexa 488 secondary antibody (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen). Slides were mounted with Citifluor Antifadent mounting medium (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) and imaged using the Leica system described above. Tumor specimens Fresh human brain and tumor tissue were obtained from surgical resections in accordance with an approved protocol from the University Hospitals Case Medical Center Institutional Review Board. GBM specimens of approximately 100mg each were obtained for protein extraction. Noncancerous, non-eloquent, cortical brain was also collected. GBM xenograft tumors were grown in NIH athymic nude female mice in accordance with an approved protocol from the Case Western Reserve University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. LN-229 or Gli36?5 cells (2 × 106 cells) were resuspended in a 1:1 dilution of Matrigel (BD Biosciences; Franklin Lakes, New Jersey) in PBS and were injected subcutaneously in the right flank region of the mouse. Tumors were harvested between 9–28 days after injection. Lysates of human and xenograft tumor specimens were prepared as described ( 8 ). Tumor samples were homogenized using a tissue tearor homogenizer or a 2ml dounce homogenizer. Cleared lysates (~20 ?g from human samples and ~50 ?g from xenograft samples) were analyzed by immunoblot on 8% gels with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18). Statistics Data presented represent at least three independent experiments. Replicates were normalized as a percent of the control, and the means were plotted using Microsoft Excel. Error bars indicate standard error. Data were analyzed for statistical significance using an unpaired student’s t-test.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines The human GBM cell lines U-87 MG and LN-229 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Human Gli36?5 glioblastoma cells have been described ( 25 ). Lentiviral transduction A human full-length PTP? cDNA construct in pMT2 has been described ( 26 ). Full-length PTP? was ligated into the lentiviral expression vector pCDH-MCS2 (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA). A full-length PTP?-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion construct has been described ( 27 ). The PTP?-GFP cassette was subcloned into pCDH-MCS2. An intracellular PTP?-GFP fusion construct corresponding to PTP? ICD has been described ( 24 ). Lentiviral shRNA constructs and the production of VSV-G-pseudotyped lentiviral particles have been described ( 8 ). Immunoblotting Cell lysates were prepared and immunoblotted as described ( 8 ) using normalized samples of ~20 ?g protein detected with monoclonal antibodies recognizing the intracellular segment of PTP? (SK-7 or SK-18) ( 28 ). An antibody against vinculin was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The GFP antibody JL-8 was from Clontech (Mountain View, CA). RT-PCR RT-PCR was performed as described ( 8 ). The PCR primers were as follows: extracellular forward (CGCGAATTCTAGAGACGTTCTCAGGTGGC), extracellular reverse (CCCGCAAGCTTACTTCTTCTCGCACTTG), intracellular forward (CGCGGATCCAAAGAGACCATGAGCAGCACCCGA), and intracellular reverse (CCGGAATTCTCATCTGTTCTCATCTTTCTTAGCCGA). Scratch wound assay Scratch wound assays were performed as described ( 8 ). Confluent monolayers of cells were scratched to induce a wound and analyzed by microscopy for the distance migrated by the leading edge of the wound at 0 and 24 hrs. Colony formation assays Growth factor-independent clonogenic colony assays were performed as described ( 29 ). Crystal violet-stained colonies were imaged with the Quantity One imaging software of the Gel Doc imaging system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Images were quantitated using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices) by measuring the thresholded area of each well to include only colonies. For the soft agarose assay, cells were seeded at a concentration of 75,000 cells/ml in 0.4% agarose and plated on an underlay of 0.8% agarose in a 6-well plate. Colonies were analyzed after four weeks by imaging Z-stacks of 20 random 10X fields using a Leica DMI6000B automated inverted microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) attached to a Retiga EXi camera (QImaging, Surrey, BC, Canada). The number of colonies in minimized Z-stacks from each microscope field was recorded. Biotinylation of cell surface proteins Cell surface biotinylation was performed using a Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin Kit (Pierce). Biotinylated proteins were isolated and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 6% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18) as described ( 30 ). Inhibitors The Furin Inhibitor I (Dec-RVKR-CMK, Calbiochem, Gibbstown, NJ) was used at 50 ?M for 17–20 hours. The ?-secretase inhibitors DAPT (Sigma-Aldrich) and L-685,458 (Sigma-Aldrich) were used at 2 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively, for 17–20 hours. The proteasome was inhibited with MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) at 20 ?M or epoxomicin (Calbiochem) at 5 ?M for 4 hours. GM6001 (Calbiochem) was used at 50 ?M as an MMP/ADAM inhibitor for 17–20 hours. Inhibitors were reconstituted in DMSO, which was used as a vehicle control. An inhibitor of PTP? function targeting the helix-loop-helix wedge domain has been demonstrated to inhibit PTP? function ( 19 , 20 ). The PTP? wedge peptide and a scrambled control peptide were synthesized to include a membrane-penetrant Tat-derived sequence at the C-terminus to promote cellular uptake. Peptides synthesized by Genemed Synthesis (San Antonio, TX) or GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) were reconstituted in water and added to cells at a final concentration of 5 ?M. Immunoprecipitations Cells were grown to confluence, treated with inhibitors, and lysed in 20mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1mM benzamidine, aprotinin (5 ?g/ml), leupeptin (5 ?g/ml) and pepstatin (1 ?g/ml). Samples were sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 minutes. Immunoprecipitations from ~400 ?g total protein were performed as described ( 27 ) using a PTP? antibody (SK-18) and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 8% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-7). Immunocytochemistry Immunofluorescent cell staining was performed as described ( 24 ). Fixed cells were probed with SK-7 or SK-18, which recognize intracellular PTP?, and detected with goat anti-mouse-Alexa 488 secondary antibody (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen). Slides were mounted with Citifluor Antifadent mounting medium (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) and imaged using the Leica system described above. Tumor specimens Fresh human brain and tumor tissue were obtained from surgical resections in accordance with an approved protocol from the University Hospitals Case Medical Center Institutional Review Board. GBM specimens of approximately 100mg each were obtained for protein extraction. Noncancerous, non-eloquent, cortical brain was also collected. GBM xenograft tumors were grown in NIH athymic nude female mice in accordance with an approved protocol from the Case Western Reserve University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. LN-229 or Gli36?5 cells (2 × 106 cells) were resuspended in a 1:1 dilution of Matrigel (BD Biosciences; Franklin Lakes, New Jersey) in PBS and were injected subcutaneously in the right flank region of the mouse. Tumors were harvested between 9–28 days after injection. Lysates of human and xenograft tumor specimens were prepared as described ( 8 ). Tumor samples were homogenized using a tissue tearor homogenizer or a 2ml dounce homogenizer. Cleared lysates (~20 ?g from human samples and ~50 ?g from xenograft samples) were analyzed by immunoblot on 8% gels with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18). Statistics Data presented represent at least three independent experiments. Replicates were normalized as a percent of the control, and the means were plotted using Microsoft Excel. Error bars indicate standard error. Data were analyzed for statistical significance using an unpaired student’s t-test.  Cell lines The human GBM cell lines U-87 MG and LN-229 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Human Gli36?5 glioblastoma cells have been described ( 25 ).  Cell lines The human GBM cell lines U-87 MG and LN-229 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). Human Gli36?5 glioblastoma cells have been described ( 25 ).  Lentiviral transduction A human full-length PTP? cDNA construct in pMT2 has been described ( 26 ). Full-length PTP? was ligated into the lentiviral expression vector pCDH-MCS2 (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA). A full-length PTP?-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion construct has been described ( 27 ). The PTP?-GFP cassette was subcloned into pCDH-MCS2. An intracellular PTP?-GFP fusion construct corresponding to PTP? ICD has been described ( 24 ). Lentiviral shRNA constructs and the production of VSV-G-pseudotyped lentiviral particles have been described ( 8 ).  Lentiviral transduction A human full-length PTP? cDNA construct in pMT2 has been described ( 26 ). Full-length PTP? was ligated into the lentiviral expression vector pCDH-MCS2 (System Biosciences, Mountain View, CA). A full-length PTP?-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion construct has been described ( 27 ). The PTP?-GFP cassette was subcloned into pCDH-MCS2. An intracellular PTP?-GFP fusion construct corresponding to PTP? ICD has been described ( 24 ). Lentiviral shRNA constructs and the production of VSV-G-pseudotyped lentiviral particles have been described ( 8 ).  Immunoblotting Cell lysates were prepared and immunoblotted as described ( 8 ) using normalized samples of ~20 ?g protein detected with monoclonal antibodies recognizing the intracellular segment of PTP? (SK-7 or SK-18) ( 28 ). An antibody against vinculin was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The GFP antibody JL-8 was from Clontech (Mountain View, CA).  Immunoblotting Cell lysates were prepared and immunoblotted as described ( 8 ) using normalized samples of ~20 ?g protein detected with monoclonal antibodies recognizing the intracellular segment of PTP? (SK-7 or SK-18) ( 28 ). An antibody against vinculin was from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The GFP antibody JL-8 was from Clontech (Mountain View, CA).  RT-PCR RT-PCR was performed as described ( 8 ). The PCR primers were as follows: extracellular forward (CGCGAATTCTAGAGACGTTCTCAGGTGGC), extracellular reverse (CCCGCAAGCTTACTTCTTCTCGCACTTG), intracellular forward (CGCGGATCCAAAGAGACCATGAGCAGCACCCGA), and intracellular reverse (CCGGAATTCTCATCTGTTCTCATCTTTCTTAGCCGA).  RT-PCR RT-PCR was performed as described ( 8 ). The PCR primers were as follows: extracellular forward (CGCGAATTCTAGAGACGTTCTCAGGTGGC), extracellular reverse (CCCGCAAGCTTACTTCTTCTCGCACTTG), intracellular forward (CGCGGATCCAAAGAGACCATGAGCAGCACCCGA), and intracellular reverse (CCGGAATTCTCATCTGTTCTCATCTTTCTTAGCCGA).  Scratch wound assay Scratch wound assays were performed as described ( 8 ). Confluent monolayers of cells were scratched to induce a wound and analyzed by microscopy for the distance migrated by the leading edge of the wound at 0 and 24 hrs.  Scratch wound assay Scratch wound assays were performed as described ( 8 ). Confluent monolayers of cells were scratched to induce a wound and analyzed by microscopy for the distance migrated by the leading edge of the wound at 0 and 24 hrs.  Colony formation assays Growth factor-independent clonogenic colony assays were performed as described ( 29 ). Crystal violet-stained colonies were imaged with the Quantity One imaging software of the Gel Doc imaging system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Images were quantitated using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices) by measuring the thresholded area of each well to include only colonies. For the soft agarose assay, cells were seeded at a concentration of 75,000 cells/ml in 0.4% agarose and plated on an underlay of 0.8% agarose in a 6-well plate. Colonies were analyzed after four weeks by imaging Z-stacks of 20 random 10X fields using a Leica DMI6000B automated inverted microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) attached to a Retiga EXi camera (QImaging, Surrey, BC, Canada). The number of colonies in minimized Z-stacks from each microscope field was recorded.  Colony formation assays Growth factor-independent clonogenic colony assays were performed as described ( 29 ). Crystal violet-stained colonies were imaged with the Quantity One imaging software of the Gel Doc imaging system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Images were quantitated using MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices) by measuring the thresholded area of each well to include only colonies. For the soft agarose assay, cells were seeded at a concentration of 75,000 cells/ml in 0.4% agarose and plated on an underlay of 0.8% agarose in a 6-well plate. Colonies were analyzed after four weeks by imaging Z-stacks of 20 random 10X fields using a Leica DMI6000B automated inverted microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) attached to a Retiga EXi camera (QImaging, Surrey, BC, Canada). The number of colonies in minimized Z-stacks from each microscope field was recorded.  Biotinylation of cell surface proteins Cell surface biotinylation was performed using a Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin Kit (Pierce). Biotinylated proteins were isolated and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 6% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18) as described ( 30 ).  Biotinylation of cell surface proteins Cell surface biotinylation was performed using a Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin Kit (Pierce). Biotinylated proteins were isolated and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 6% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18) as described ( 30 ).  Inhibitors The Furin Inhibitor I (Dec-RVKR-CMK, Calbiochem, Gibbstown, NJ) was used at 50 ?M for 17–20 hours. The ?-secretase inhibitors DAPT (Sigma-Aldrich) and L-685,458 (Sigma-Aldrich) were used at 2 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively, for 17–20 hours. The proteasome was inhibited with MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) at 20 ?M or epoxomicin (Calbiochem) at 5 ?M for 4 hours. GM6001 (Calbiochem) was used at 50 ?M as an MMP/ADAM inhibitor for 17–20 hours. Inhibitors were reconstituted in DMSO, which was used as a vehicle control. An inhibitor of PTP? function targeting the helix-loop-helix wedge domain has been demonstrated to inhibit PTP? function ( 19 , 20 ). The PTP? wedge peptide and a scrambled control peptide were synthesized to include a membrane-penetrant Tat-derived sequence at the C-terminus to promote cellular uptake. Peptides synthesized by Genemed Synthesis (San Antonio, TX) or GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) were reconstituted in water and added to cells at a final concentration of 5 ?M.  Inhibitors The Furin Inhibitor I (Dec-RVKR-CMK, Calbiochem, Gibbstown, NJ) was used at 50 ?M for 17–20 hours. The ?-secretase inhibitors DAPT (Sigma-Aldrich) and L-685,458 (Sigma-Aldrich) were used at 2 ?M and 5 ?M, respectively, for 17–20 hours. The proteasome was inhibited with MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) at 20 ?M or epoxomicin (Calbiochem) at 5 ?M for 4 hours. GM6001 (Calbiochem) was used at 50 ?M as an MMP/ADAM inhibitor for 17–20 hours. Inhibitors were reconstituted in DMSO, which was used as a vehicle control. An inhibitor of PTP? function targeting the helix-loop-helix wedge domain has been demonstrated to inhibit PTP? function ( 19 , 20 ). The PTP? wedge peptide and a scrambled control peptide were synthesized to include a membrane-penetrant Tat-derived sequence at the C-terminus to promote cellular uptake. Peptides synthesized by Genemed Synthesis (San Antonio, TX) or GenScript (Piscataway, NJ) were reconstituted in water and added to cells at a final concentration of 5 ?M.  Immunoprecipitations Cells were grown to confluence, treated with inhibitors, and lysed in 20mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1mM benzamidine, aprotinin (5 ?g/ml), leupeptin (5 ?g/ml) and pepstatin (1 ?g/ml). Samples were sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 minutes. Immunoprecipitations from ~400 ?g total protein were performed as described ( 27 ) using a PTP? antibody (SK-18) and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 8% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-7).  Immunoprecipitations Cells were grown to confluence, treated with inhibitors, and lysed in 20mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 1% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1mM benzamidine, aprotinin (5 ?g/ml), leupeptin (5 ?g/ml) and pepstatin (1 ?g/ml). Samples were sonicated and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 minutes. Immunoprecipitations from ~400 ?g total protein were performed as described ( 27 ) using a PTP? antibody (SK-18) and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 8% gels followed by immunoblotting with an antibody to PTP? (SK-7).  Immunocytochemistry Immunofluorescent cell staining was performed as described ( 24 ). Fixed cells were probed with SK-7 or SK-18, which recognize intracellular PTP?, and detected with goat anti-mouse-Alexa 488 secondary antibody (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen). Slides were mounted with Citifluor Antifadent mounting medium (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) and imaged using the Leica system described above.  Immunocytochemistry Immunofluorescent cell staining was performed as described ( 24 ). Fixed cells were probed with SK-7 or SK-18, which recognize intracellular PTP?, and detected with goat anti-mouse-Alexa 488 secondary antibody (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen). Slides were mounted with Citifluor Antifadent mounting medium (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) and imaged using the Leica system described above.  Tumor specimens Fresh human brain and tumor tissue were obtained from surgical resections in accordance with an approved protocol from the University Hospitals Case Medical Center Institutional Review Board. GBM specimens of approximately 100mg each were obtained for protein extraction. Noncancerous, non-eloquent, cortical brain was also collected. GBM xenograft tumors were grown in NIH athymic nude female mice in accordance with an approved protocol from the Case Western Reserve University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. LN-229 or Gli36?5 cells (2 × 106 cells) were resuspended in a 1:1 dilution of Matrigel (BD Biosciences; Franklin Lakes, New Jersey) in PBS and were injected subcutaneously in the right flank region of the mouse. Tumors were harvested between 9–28 days after injection. Lysates of human and xenograft tumor specimens were prepared as described ( 8 ). Tumor samples were homogenized using a tissue tearor homogenizer or a 2ml dounce homogenizer. Cleared lysates (~20 ?g from human samples and ~50 ?g from xenograft samples) were analyzed by immunoblot on 8% gels with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18).  Tumor specimens Fresh human brain and tumor tissue were obtained from surgical resections in accordance with an approved protocol from the University Hospitals Case Medical Center Institutional Review Board. GBM specimens of approximately 100mg each were obtained for protein extraction. Noncancerous, non-eloquent, cortical brain was also collected. GBM xenograft tumors were grown in NIH athymic nude female mice in accordance with an approved protocol from the Case Western Reserve University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. LN-229 or Gli36?5 cells (2 × 106 cells) were resuspended in a 1:1 dilution of Matrigel (BD Biosciences; Franklin Lakes, New Jersey) in PBS and were injected subcutaneously in the right flank region of the mouse. Tumors were harvested between 9–28 days after injection. Lysates of human and xenograft tumor specimens were prepared as described ( 8 ). Tumor samples were homogenized using a tissue tearor homogenizer or a 2ml dounce homogenizer. Cleared lysates (~20 ?g from human samples and ~50 ?g from xenograft samples) were analyzed by immunoblot on 8% gels with an antibody to PTP? (SK-18).  Statistics Data presented represent at least three independent experiments. Replicates were normalized as a percent of the control, and the means were plotted using Microsoft Excel. Error bars indicate standard error. Data were analyzed for statistical significance using an unpaired student’s t-test.  Statistics Data presented represent at least three independent experiments. Replicates were normalized as a percent of the control, and the means were plotted using Microsoft Excel. Error bars indicate standard error. Data were analyzed for statistical significance using an unpaired student’s t-test.  RESULTS PTP? protein is downregulated in the human glioblastoma cell line LN-229 We recently demonstrated that PTP? is endogenously expressed in the human GBM cell line U-87 MG and that shRNA-mediated downregulation of PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration and dispersal ( 8 ). Furthermore, PTP? protein is downregulated in human GBM tumors and the migratory human GBM cell line LN-229. In the current study, PTP? was overexpressed in LN-229 cells via a lentiviral construct, and both the full-length and normally produced P-subunit were detected by immunoblotting with an intracellular antibody to PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). Lentiviral overexpression of PTP? generated doublets at molecular weights corresponding to both full-length and P-subunit PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). These doublets likely are due to post-translational modifications. mRNA expression of PTP? was examined by RT-PCR in both U-87 MG and LN-229 cells. U-87 MG cells expressed PTP? transcript as expected. Surprisingly, PTP? transcript was also detected in LN-229 cells despite their lack of PTP? protein expression ( Fig. 1B ). PTP? shRNA downregulated PTP? transcript but did not affect control GAPDH ( Fig. 1C ). These data suggest that the downregulation of PTP? in glioblastoma is due to a post-transcriptional mechanism. Overexpression of PTP? suppresses cell migration and growth factor-independent cell survival We demonstrated recently that shRNA-mediated downregulation of endogenous PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration ( 8 ). Based on this data, we hypothesized that overexpression of PTP? in LN-229 cells would suppress cell migration. We evaluated this hypothesis using a scratch wound assay. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells overexpressing either vector or PTP? were scratched to form a wound. After 24 hours, control LN-229 cells at the leading edge of the wound migrated an average of 150 ?m ( Fig. 2A ). However, LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? had impaired migration with a 3-fold reduction in the distance migrated ( Fig. 2A ). Additionally, overexpression of PTP? induced a morphological change in LN-229 cells and made the cells noticeably elongated ( Fig. 2A ). Because this assay occurred over 24 hours, it was possible that changes in cell proliferation could account for the difference in wound size. To rule out this possibility, LN-229 cells infected with vector or PTP? were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry revealed no significant changes in cell proliferation between the vector- and PTP?-infected cells (data not shown). Therefore, we concluded that the difference in wound size was due to a decrease in migration resulting from PTP? overexpression, indicating PTP? suppresses migration of LN-229 glioblastoma cells. Growth factor-independent survival is a hallmark of tumorigenesis. To assess the effect of PTP? overexpression on growth factor-independent survival, a colony formation assay was used. After two weeks of growth factor deprivation, control LN-229 cells formed abundant colonies ( Fig. 2B ). In contrast, overexpression of PTP? reduced colony formation by 2-fold ( Fig. 2B ). Therefore, PTP? overexpression suppresses migration in two-dimensional culture and reduces growth factor-independent survival in three-dimensional culture of glioblastoma cells. Proteolysis of PTP? contributes to its downregulation in glioblastoma Other receptor tyrosine phosphatases are sequentially cleaved by a furin-like protease, an ADAM-type matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), and a ?-secretase to release a soluble intracellular fragment ( 23 , 31 , 32 ). Since GBMs are known to have upregulated proteases ( 33 ), we hypothesized that constitutive proteolysis of PTP? may be the mechanism of PTP? downregulation in GBM. We first determined whether full-length PTP? could be detected in parental LN-229 cells. Since we cannot detect PTP? in a total cell lysate of parental LN-229 cells, we biotinylated cell surface proteins and used avidin resin to enrich the pool of biotinylated cell surface proteins. Despite the lack of PTP? in the total cell lysate, the biotinylated cell surface fraction contained trace amounts of PTP? ( Fig. 3A ). PTP? is known to be cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P- subunits of PTP? ( 11 , 21 , 22 ). As expected, treatment of cells with an inhibitor of furin activity resulted in an accumulation of full-length PTP? (200 kDa) at the cell surface. These data imply there is a trace amount of endogenous PTP? in LN-229 cells that is processed by proteolysis. Biotinylation of cell surface proteins from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of full-length PTP? accumulation at the cell surface upon furin inhibition ( Fig. 3A ). After furin cleavage, PTP?, another PTP?-subfamily member, is subsequently cleaved by ?- and ?-secretases ( 23 ). We hypothesized that PTP? is cleaved similarly. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells were treated with inhibitors of ?- and ?-secretases. Proteasome inhibitors were used for biochemical detection to prevent rapid degradation of these fragments ( 23 ). Since we cannot detect PTP? in whole cell lysates, the PTP? fragments were immunoprecipitated from LN-229 cells treated with inhibitors using antibody to the intracellular domain of PTP?. The ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT stabilized a fragment that corresponds by molecular weight to a membrane-tethered truncated P-subunit termed P?E ( Fig. 3B ). Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 led to the accumulation of both P?E and a soluble fragment termed PTP? intracellular domain (ICD) ( Fig. 3B ). The MMP inhibitor GM6001 limited the formation of PTP? P?E and ICD fragments, indicating cleavage by an MMP is required for subsequent processing ( Fig. 3B ). MG132 has been reported to inhibit ?-secretase activity in addition to proteasome activity, leading to the accumulation of ?- and ?-secretase products ( 23 , 34 ). Subsequent experiments included a more specific proteasome inhibitor, epoxomicin, to distinguish these events. Overall, these data support our hypothesis that the endogenous PTP? expressed in LN-229 cells is constitutively cleaved to generate PTP? P?E and ICD. As a result, little full-length PTP? is present to function at the cell surface in LN-229 cells. Total cell lysates from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of cleavage products upon inhibitor treatment ( Fig. 3C ). Stabilization of PTP? ICD with treatment of epoxomicin confirmed that this fragment is labile and can only be seen when stabilized by the addition of a proteasome inhibitor. Treatment with MG132 and ?-secretase inhibitors (DAPT and L685,458) showed accumulation of PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 3C ). To verify the cleavage products include the C-terminus of the intracellular domain of PTP?, we overexpressed a PTP? construct with a C-terminal GFP-tag (PTP?-GFP) in LN-229 cells. Cells expressing PTP?-GFP were treated with inhibitors as above, and total cell lysates were immunoblotted with GFP to detect the PTP?-GFP fragments. A GFP antibody detected a similar pattern of fragments, suggesting PTP? P?E and ICD fragments include the C-terminus of PTP? ( Figure 3C ). These data support the model depicted in Figure 3D . Full-length PTP? is cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P-subunits in “normal” proteolytic processing. Cleavage by an ADAM-type MMP (?-secretase) in GBM cells generates PTP? P?E. Subsequently, P?E is cleaved by ?-secretase to generate PTP? ICD. PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment that translocates to the nucleus in another cell type ( 24 ). To determine the subcellular localization of PTP? ICD in glioblastoma cells, we performed immunocytochemistry on LN-229 cells. Antibodies recognizing the juxtamembrane (SK-7) and first phosphatase (SK-18) domains of PTP? detected an endogenous PTP? species with a nuclear pattern of localization similar to DAPI-stained nuclei ( Fig. 4A ). The epitopes of these antibodies suggest that this species is PTP? ICD. Overexpression of GFP-tagged PTP? ICD also localized to the nucleus and confirmed these findings. In contrast, overexpression of GFP-tagged full-length PTP? resulted in a cell-cell contact and filopodial staining pattern as reported previously ( 35 ). Full-length PTP? likely senses extracellular adhesive cues to suppress migration by contact inhibition, whereas PTP? ICD distributes to the cytoplasm and nucleus. These data suggest that full-length PTP? and PTP? ICD have distinct localization patterns, potentially leading to differences in their downstream signaling. Intracellular fragments of PTP? are expressed in human glioblastoma tumors and glioblastoma xenograft tumors We previously demonstrated that PTP? protein expression is downregulated in human GBM tumor samples ( 8 ). However, immunoblotting fresh GBM tumor tissue lysates on higher percentage gels indicated that fragments of PTP? corresponding to PTP? P?E and ICD are expressed in human GBM tumor samples in comparison to normal brain tissue from the same patient ( Fig. 4B ). Full-length PTP? was undetectable in these GBM tumor samples ( Fig. 4B ). PTP? P?E and ICD were identified in normal tissue samples that retain significant expression of full-length PTP? ( Fig. 4B ). Therefore, it is the expression of full-length PTP? that differs between normal brain and GBM tumor tissue. Normal brain tissue expresses full-length PTP?, whereas GBM tumor tissue does not express full-length PTP? but retains PTP? P?E and ICD. Neither full-length PTP? nor PTP? P?E and ICD are detectable in LN-229 total cell lysates by immunoblot. We assessed human GBM cell line tumor xenografts grown in mouse flanks to determine if the three-dimensional architecture of the tumor would stabilize PTP? fragments in the GBM cells. Flank tumor lysates from LN-229 xenografts expressed little detectable full-length PTP? but expressed abundant PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 4C ). Similar results were obtained using xenografts prepared with another glioma cell line, Gli36?5 ( Fig. 4C ). These data suggest that three-dimensional human glioblastoma tumors and in vivo glioblastoma tumor models favor PTP? proteolysis and stabilize PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, in vivo . PTP? fragments contribute to glioblastoma cell migration and both growth factor-independent and anchorage-independent cell survival PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment generated from P?E that translocates to the nucleus ( Fig. 4A ). PTP? ICD contains the catalytic domain of PTP? and has the potential to signal differently than that of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? due to changes in substrate availability in different cellular compartments. Overexpression of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? suppressed GBM cell migration and growth factor-independent survival ( Fig. 2 ). We hypothesized that PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, may signal differently and affect the migration and growth factor-independent survival of GBM cells. First, the effect of PTP? fragments on cell migration was analyzed using a scratch wound assay. PTP? mRNA is expressed in LN-229 cells, but the only detectable proteins are PTP? fragments ( Fig. 4 ). Therefore, we were able to use shRNA to downregulate PTP? fragments. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing either control or two different PTP? shRNA constructs were scratched and allowed to migrate ( Fig. 5A ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments by both shRNA constructs suppressed cell migration by 2-fold ( Fig. 5A ). To rule out changes in cell proliferation, LN-229 cells infected with control or PTP? shRNA were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. No significant changes in cell proliferation were detected (data not shown). Both PTP? P?E and ICD are partially stabilized by the ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT and are not formed when ADAMs are inhibited ( Fig. 3B ). These inhibitors were used in a scratch wound assay to analyze their effects on PTP? fragment-mediated cell migration. Stabilization of PTP? fragments with DAPT increased migration, and prevention of PTP? fragment formation by GM6001 decreased migration ( Supplemental Fig. 1 ). These data suggest that proteolysis of PTP? promotes LN-229 cell migration. Because PTP? overexpression affected growth factor-independent cell survival, we hypothesized that PTP? fragments may also affect cell survival. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were seeded at low density and allowed to form colonies over two weeks ( Fig. 5B ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments via shRNA reduced the number of colonies in comparison to control cells by 3-fold ( Fig. 5B ). These findings were confirmed in a soft agarose assay for anchorage-independent survival. PTP? shRNA reduced the number of colonies in this assay by 5-fold ( Fig. 5C ). These data suggest PTP? fragments promote both cell migration and growth factor-independent survival of glioblastoma cells. Catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is required for glioblastoma cell migration Soluble intracellular PTP? has been demonstrated to retain catalytic activity ( 24 , 28 ). To examine whether the catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is important in the regulation of cell migration, PTP? function was inhibited using a PTP?-specific peptide inhibitor ( 19 ). Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells were treated with a membrane-penetrant PTP? wedge peptide or a control scrambled peptide prior to scratching to induce a wound ( Fig. 6 ). The PTP? wedge peptide significantly reduced migration of LN-229 cells ( Fig. 6 ). This suppression is likely due to inhibition of the signaling of the PTP? fragments as they are the only detectable PTP? protein stabilized in LN-229 cells ( Fig. 4 ). These data suggest that PTP? fragments must be catalytically active to induce GBM cell migration. Therefore, the wedge peptide inhibitor of PTP? may have therapeutic value in the treatment of human glioblastoma.  RESULTS PTP? protein is downregulated in the human glioblastoma cell line LN-229 We recently demonstrated that PTP? is endogenously expressed in the human GBM cell line U-87 MG and that shRNA-mediated downregulation of PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration and dispersal ( 8 ). Furthermore, PTP? protein is downregulated in human GBM tumors and the migratory human GBM cell line LN-229. In the current study, PTP? was overexpressed in LN-229 cells via a lentiviral construct, and both the full-length and normally produced P-subunit were detected by immunoblotting with an intracellular antibody to PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). Lentiviral overexpression of PTP? generated doublets at molecular weights corresponding to both full-length and P-subunit PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). These doublets likely are due to post-translational modifications. mRNA expression of PTP? was examined by RT-PCR in both U-87 MG and LN-229 cells. U-87 MG cells expressed PTP? transcript as expected. Surprisingly, PTP? transcript was also detected in LN-229 cells despite their lack of PTP? protein expression ( Fig. 1B ). PTP? shRNA downregulated PTP? transcript but did not affect control GAPDH ( Fig. 1C ). These data suggest that the downregulation of PTP? in glioblastoma is due to a post-transcriptional mechanism. Overexpression of PTP? suppresses cell migration and growth factor-independent cell survival We demonstrated recently that shRNA-mediated downregulation of endogenous PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration ( 8 ). Based on this data, we hypothesized that overexpression of PTP? in LN-229 cells would suppress cell migration. We evaluated this hypothesis using a scratch wound assay. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells overexpressing either vector or PTP? were scratched to form a wound. After 24 hours, control LN-229 cells at the leading edge of the wound migrated an average of 150 ?m ( Fig. 2A ). However, LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? had impaired migration with a 3-fold reduction in the distance migrated ( Fig. 2A ). Additionally, overexpression of PTP? induced a morphological change in LN-229 cells and made the cells noticeably elongated ( Fig. 2A ). Because this assay occurred over 24 hours, it was possible that changes in cell proliferation could account for the difference in wound size. To rule out this possibility, LN-229 cells infected with vector or PTP? were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry revealed no significant changes in cell proliferation between the vector- and PTP?-infected cells (data not shown). Therefore, we concluded that the difference in wound size was due to a decrease in migration resulting from PTP? overexpression, indicating PTP? suppresses migration of LN-229 glioblastoma cells. Growth factor-independent survival is a hallmark of tumorigenesis. To assess the effect of PTP? overexpression on growth factor-independent survival, a colony formation assay was used. After two weeks of growth factor deprivation, control LN-229 cells formed abundant colonies ( Fig. 2B ). In contrast, overexpression of PTP? reduced colony formation by 2-fold ( Fig. 2B ). Therefore, PTP? overexpression suppresses migration in two-dimensional culture and reduces growth factor-independent survival in three-dimensional culture of glioblastoma cells. Proteolysis of PTP? contributes to its downregulation in glioblastoma Other receptor tyrosine phosphatases are sequentially cleaved by a furin-like protease, an ADAM-type matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), and a ?-secretase to release a soluble intracellular fragment ( 23 , 31 , 32 ). Since GBMs are known to have upregulated proteases ( 33 ), we hypothesized that constitutive proteolysis of PTP? may be the mechanism of PTP? downregulation in GBM. We first determined whether full-length PTP? could be detected in parental LN-229 cells. Since we cannot detect PTP? in a total cell lysate of parental LN-229 cells, we biotinylated cell surface proteins and used avidin resin to enrich the pool of biotinylated cell surface proteins. Despite the lack of PTP? in the total cell lysate, the biotinylated cell surface fraction contained trace amounts of PTP? ( Fig. 3A ). PTP? is known to be cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P- subunits of PTP? ( 11 , 21 , 22 ). As expected, treatment of cells with an inhibitor of furin activity resulted in an accumulation of full-length PTP? (200 kDa) at the cell surface. These data imply there is a trace amount of endogenous PTP? in LN-229 cells that is processed by proteolysis. Biotinylation of cell surface proteins from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of full-length PTP? accumulation at the cell surface upon furin inhibition ( Fig. 3A ). After furin cleavage, PTP?, another PTP?-subfamily member, is subsequently cleaved by ?- and ?-secretases ( 23 ). We hypothesized that PTP? is cleaved similarly. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells were treated with inhibitors of ?- and ?-secretases. Proteasome inhibitors were used for biochemical detection to prevent rapid degradation of these fragments ( 23 ). Since we cannot detect PTP? in whole cell lysates, the PTP? fragments were immunoprecipitated from LN-229 cells treated with inhibitors using antibody to the intracellular domain of PTP?. The ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT stabilized a fragment that corresponds by molecular weight to a membrane-tethered truncated P-subunit termed P?E ( Fig. 3B ). Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 led to the accumulation of both P?E and a soluble fragment termed PTP? intracellular domain (ICD) ( Fig. 3B ). The MMP inhibitor GM6001 limited the formation of PTP? P?E and ICD fragments, indicating cleavage by an MMP is required for subsequent processing ( Fig. 3B ). MG132 has been reported to inhibit ?-secretase activity in addition to proteasome activity, leading to the accumulation of ?- and ?-secretase products ( 23 , 34 ). Subsequent experiments included a more specific proteasome inhibitor, epoxomicin, to distinguish these events. Overall, these data support our hypothesis that the endogenous PTP? expressed in LN-229 cells is constitutively cleaved to generate PTP? P?E and ICD. As a result, little full-length PTP? is present to function at the cell surface in LN-229 cells. Total cell lysates from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of cleavage products upon inhibitor treatment ( Fig. 3C ). Stabilization of PTP? ICD with treatment of epoxomicin confirmed that this fragment is labile and can only be seen when stabilized by the addition of a proteasome inhibitor. Treatment with MG132 and ?-secretase inhibitors (DAPT and L685,458) showed accumulation of PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 3C ). To verify the cleavage products include the C-terminus of the intracellular domain of PTP?, we overexpressed a PTP? construct with a C-terminal GFP-tag (PTP?-GFP) in LN-229 cells. Cells expressing PTP?-GFP were treated with inhibitors as above, and total cell lysates were immunoblotted with GFP to detect the PTP?-GFP fragments. A GFP antibody detected a similar pattern of fragments, suggesting PTP? P?E and ICD fragments include the C-terminus of PTP? ( Figure 3C ). These data support the model depicted in Figure 3D . Full-length PTP? is cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P-subunits in “normal” proteolytic processing. Cleavage by an ADAM-type MMP (?-secretase) in GBM cells generates PTP? P?E. Subsequently, P?E is cleaved by ?-secretase to generate PTP? ICD. PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment that translocates to the nucleus in another cell type ( 24 ). To determine the subcellular localization of PTP? ICD in glioblastoma cells, we performed immunocytochemistry on LN-229 cells. Antibodies recognizing the juxtamembrane (SK-7) and first phosphatase (SK-18) domains of PTP? detected an endogenous PTP? species with a nuclear pattern of localization similar to DAPI-stained nuclei ( Fig. 4A ). The epitopes of these antibodies suggest that this species is PTP? ICD. Overexpression of GFP-tagged PTP? ICD also localized to the nucleus and confirmed these findings. In contrast, overexpression of GFP-tagged full-length PTP? resulted in a cell-cell contact and filopodial staining pattern as reported previously ( 35 ). Full-length PTP? likely senses extracellular adhesive cues to suppress migration by contact inhibition, whereas PTP? ICD distributes to the cytoplasm and nucleus. These data suggest that full-length PTP? and PTP? ICD have distinct localization patterns, potentially leading to differences in their downstream signaling. Intracellular fragments of PTP? are expressed in human glioblastoma tumors and glioblastoma xenograft tumors We previously demonstrated that PTP? protein expression is downregulated in human GBM tumor samples ( 8 ). However, immunoblotting fresh GBM tumor tissue lysates on higher percentage gels indicated that fragments of PTP? corresponding to PTP? P?E and ICD are expressed in human GBM tumor samples in comparison to normal brain tissue from the same patient ( Fig. 4B ). Full-length PTP? was undetectable in these GBM tumor samples ( Fig. 4B ). PTP? P?E and ICD were identified in normal tissue samples that retain significant expression of full-length PTP? ( Fig. 4B ). Therefore, it is the expression of full-length PTP? that differs between normal brain and GBM tumor tissue. Normal brain tissue expresses full-length PTP?, whereas GBM tumor tissue does not express full-length PTP? but retains PTP? P?E and ICD. Neither full-length PTP? nor PTP? P?E and ICD are detectable in LN-229 total cell lysates by immunoblot. We assessed human GBM cell line tumor xenografts grown in mouse flanks to determine if the three-dimensional architecture of the tumor would stabilize PTP? fragments in the GBM cells. Flank tumor lysates from LN-229 xenografts expressed little detectable full-length PTP? but expressed abundant PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 4C ). Similar results were obtained using xenografts prepared with another glioma cell line, Gli36?5 ( Fig. 4C ). These data suggest that three-dimensional human glioblastoma tumors and in vivo glioblastoma tumor models favor PTP? proteolysis and stabilize PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, in vivo . PTP? fragments contribute to glioblastoma cell migration and both growth factor-independent and anchorage-independent cell survival PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment generated from P?E that translocates to the nucleus ( Fig. 4A ). PTP? ICD contains the catalytic domain of PTP? and has the potential to signal differently than that of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? due to changes in substrate availability in different cellular compartments. Overexpression of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? suppressed GBM cell migration and growth factor-independent survival ( Fig. 2 ). We hypothesized that PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, may signal differently and affect the migration and growth factor-independent survival of GBM cells. First, the effect of PTP? fragments on cell migration was analyzed using a scratch wound assay. PTP? mRNA is expressed in LN-229 cells, but the only detectable proteins are PTP? fragments ( Fig. 4 ). Therefore, we were able to use shRNA to downregulate PTP? fragments. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing either control or two different PTP? shRNA constructs were scratched and allowed to migrate ( Fig. 5A ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments by both shRNA constructs suppressed cell migration by 2-fold ( Fig. 5A ). To rule out changes in cell proliferation, LN-229 cells infected with control or PTP? shRNA were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. No significant changes in cell proliferation were detected (data not shown). Both PTP? P?E and ICD are partially stabilized by the ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT and are not formed when ADAMs are inhibited ( Fig. 3B ). These inhibitors were used in a scratch wound assay to analyze their effects on PTP? fragment-mediated cell migration. Stabilization of PTP? fragments with DAPT increased migration, and prevention of PTP? fragment formation by GM6001 decreased migration ( Supplemental Fig. 1 ). These data suggest that proteolysis of PTP? promotes LN-229 cell migration. Because PTP? overexpression affected growth factor-independent cell survival, we hypothesized that PTP? fragments may also affect cell survival. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were seeded at low density and allowed to form colonies over two weeks ( Fig. 5B ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments via shRNA reduced the number of colonies in comparison to control cells by 3-fold ( Fig. 5B ). These findings were confirmed in a soft agarose assay for anchorage-independent survival. PTP? shRNA reduced the number of colonies in this assay by 5-fold ( Fig. 5C ). These data suggest PTP? fragments promote both cell migration and growth factor-independent survival of glioblastoma cells. Catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is required for glioblastoma cell migration Soluble intracellular PTP? has been demonstrated to retain catalytic activity ( 24 , 28 ). To examine whether the catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is important in the regulation of cell migration, PTP? function was inhibited using a PTP?-specific peptide inhibitor ( 19 ). Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells were treated with a membrane-penetrant PTP? wedge peptide or a control scrambled peptide prior to scratching to induce a wound ( Fig. 6 ). The PTP? wedge peptide significantly reduced migration of LN-229 cells ( Fig. 6 ). This suppression is likely due to inhibition of the signaling of the PTP? fragments as they are the only detectable PTP? protein stabilized in LN-229 cells ( Fig. 4 ). These data suggest that PTP? fragments must be catalytically active to induce GBM cell migration. Therefore, the wedge peptide inhibitor of PTP? may have therapeutic value in the treatment of human glioblastoma.  PTP? protein is downregulated in the human glioblastoma cell line LN-229 We recently demonstrated that PTP? is endogenously expressed in the human GBM cell line U-87 MG and that shRNA-mediated downregulation of PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration and dispersal ( 8 ). Furthermore, PTP? protein is downregulated in human GBM tumors and the migratory human GBM cell line LN-229. In the current study, PTP? was overexpressed in LN-229 cells via a lentiviral construct, and both the full-length and normally produced P-subunit were detected by immunoblotting with an intracellular antibody to PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). Lentiviral overexpression of PTP? generated doublets at molecular weights corresponding to both full-length and P-subunit PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). These doublets likely are due to post-translational modifications. mRNA expression of PTP? was examined by RT-PCR in both U-87 MG and LN-229 cells. U-87 MG cells expressed PTP? transcript as expected. Surprisingly, PTP? transcript was also detected in LN-229 cells despite their lack of PTP? protein expression ( Fig. 1B ). PTP? shRNA downregulated PTP? transcript but did not affect control GAPDH ( Fig. 1C ). These data suggest that the downregulation of PTP? in glioblastoma is due to a post-transcriptional mechanism.  PTP? protein is downregulated in the human glioblastoma cell line LN-229 We recently demonstrated that PTP? is endogenously expressed in the human GBM cell line U-87 MG and that shRNA-mediated downregulation of PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration and dispersal ( 8 ). Furthermore, PTP? protein is downregulated in human GBM tumors and the migratory human GBM cell line LN-229. In the current study, PTP? was overexpressed in LN-229 cells via a lentiviral construct, and both the full-length and normally produced P-subunit were detected by immunoblotting with an intracellular antibody to PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). Lentiviral overexpression of PTP? generated doublets at molecular weights corresponding to both full-length and P-subunit PTP? ( Fig. 1A ). These doublets likely are due to post-translational modifications. mRNA expression of PTP? was examined by RT-PCR in both U-87 MG and LN-229 cells. U-87 MG cells expressed PTP? transcript as expected. Surprisingly, PTP? transcript was also detected in LN-229 cells despite their lack of PTP? protein expression ( Fig. 1B ). PTP? shRNA downregulated PTP? transcript but did not affect control GAPDH ( Fig. 1C ). These data suggest that the downregulation of PTP? in glioblastoma is due to a post-transcriptional mechanism.  Overexpression of PTP? suppresses cell migration and growth factor-independent cell survival We demonstrated recently that shRNA-mediated downregulation of endogenous PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration ( 8 ). Based on this data, we hypothesized that overexpression of PTP? in LN-229 cells would suppress cell migration. We evaluated this hypothesis using a scratch wound assay. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells overexpressing either vector or PTP? were scratched to form a wound. After 24 hours, control LN-229 cells at the leading edge of the wound migrated an average of 150 ?m ( Fig. 2A ). However, LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? had impaired migration with a 3-fold reduction in the distance migrated ( Fig. 2A ). Additionally, overexpression of PTP? induced a morphological change in LN-229 cells and made the cells noticeably elongated ( Fig. 2A ). Because this assay occurred over 24 hours, it was possible that changes in cell proliferation could account for the difference in wound size. To rule out this possibility, LN-229 cells infected with vector or PTP? were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry revealed no significant changes in cell proliferation between the vector- and PTP?-infected cells (data not shown). Therefore, we concluded that the difference in wound size was due to a decrease in migration resulting from PTP? overexpression, indicating PTP? suppresses migration of LN-229 glioblastoma cells. Growth factor-independent survival is a hallmark of tumorigenesis. To assess the effect of PTP? overexpression on growth factor-independent survival, a colony formation assay was used. After two weeks of growth factor deprivation, control LN-229 cells formed abundant colonies ( Fig. 2B ). In contrast, overexpression of PTP? reduced colony formation by 2-fold ( Fig. 2B ). Therefore, PTP? overexpression suppresses migration in two-dimensional culture and reduces growth factor-independent survival in three-dimensional culture of glioblastoma cells.  Overexpression of PTP? suppresses cell migration and growth factor-independent cell survival We demonstrated recently that shRNA-mediated downregulation of endogenous PTP? in U-87 MG cells promotes cell migration ( 8 ). Based on this data, we hypothesized that overexpression of PTP? in LN-229 cells would suppress cell migration. We evaluated this hypothesis using a scratch wound assay. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells overexpressing either vector or PTP? were scratched to form a wound. After 24 hours, control LN-229 cells at the leading edge of the wound migrated an average of 150 ?m ( Fig. 2A ). However, LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? had impaired migration with a 3-fold reduction in the distance migrated ( Fig. 2A ). Additionally, overexpression of PTP? induced a morphological change in LN-229 cells and made the cells noticeably elongated ( Fig. 2A ). Because this assay occurred over 24 hours, it was possible that changes in cell proliferation could account for the difference in wound size. To rule out this possibility, LN-229 cells infected with vector or PTP? were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry revealed no significant changes in cell proliferation between the vector- and PTP?-infected cells (data not shown). Therefore, we concluded that the difference in wound size was due to a decrease in migration resulting from PTP? overexpression, indicating PTP? suppresses migration of LN-229 glioblastoma cells. Growth factor-independent survival is a hallmark of tumorigenesis. To assess the effect of PTP? overexpression on growth factor-independent survival, a colony formation assay was used. After two weeks of growth factor deprivation, control LN-229 cells formed abundant colonies ( Fig. 2B ). In contrast, overexpression of PTP? reduced colony formation by 2-fold ( Fig. 2B ). Therefore, PTP? overexpression suppresses migration in two-dimensional culture and reduces growth factor-independent survival in three-dimensional culture of glioblastoma cells.  Proteolysis of PTP? contributes to its downregulation in glioblastoma Other receptor tyrosine phosphatases are sequentially cleaved by a furin-like protease, an ADAM-type matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), and a ?-secretase to release a soluble intracellular fragment ( 23 , 31 , 32 ). Since GBMs are known to have upregulated proteases ( 33 ), we hypothesized that constitutive proteolysis of PTP? may be the mechanism of PTP? downregulation in GBM. We first determined whether full-length PTP? could be detected in parental LN-229 cells. Since we cannot detect PTP? in a total cell lysate of parental LN-229 cells, we biotinylated cell surface proteins and used avidin resin to enrich the pool of biotinylated cell surface proteins. Despite the lack of PTP? in the total cell lysate, the biotinylated cell surface fraction contained trace amounts of PTP? ( Fig. 3A ). PTP? is known to be cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P- subunits of PTP? ( 11 , 21 , 22 ). As expected, treatment of cells with an inhibitor of furin activity resulted in an accumulation of full-length PTP? (200 kDa) at the cell surface. These data imply there is a trace amount of endogenous PTP? in LN-229 cells that is processed by proteolysis. Biotinylation of cell surface proteins from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of full-length PTP? accumulation at the cell surface upon furin inhibition ( Fig. 3A ). After furin cleavage, PTP?, another PTP?-subfamily member, is subsequently cleaved by ?- and ?-secretases ( 23 ). We hypothesized that PTP? is cleaved similarly. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells were treated with inhibitors of ?- and ?-secretases. Proteasome inhibitors were used for biochemical detection to prevent rapid degradation of these fragments ( 23 ). Since we cannot detect PTP? in whole cell lysates, the PTP? fragments were immunoprecipitated from LN-229 cells treated with inhibitors using antibody to the intracellular domain of PTP?. The ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT stabilized a fragment that corresponds by molecular weight to a membrane-tethered truncated P-subunit termed P?E ( Fig. 3B ). Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 led to the accumulation of both P?E and a soluble fragment termed PTP? intracellular domain (ICD) ( Fig. 3B ). The MMP inhibitor GM6001 limited the formation of PTP? P?E and ICD fragments, indicating cleavage by an MMP is required for subsequent processing ( Fig. 3B ). MG132 has been reported to inhibit ?-secretase activity in addition to proteasome activity, leading to the accumulation of ?- and ?-secretase products ( 23 , 34 ). Subsequent experiments included a more specific proteasome inhibitor, epoxomicin, to distinguish these events. Overall, these data support our hypothesis that the endogenous PTP? expressed in LN-229 cells is constitutively cleaved to generate PTP? P?E and ICD. As a result, little full-length PTP? is present to function at the cell surface in LN-229 cells. Total cell lysates from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of cleavage products upon inhibitor treatment ( Fig. 3C ). Stabilization of PTP? ICD with treatment of epoxomicin confirmed that this fragment is labile and can only be seen when stabilized by the addition of a proteasome inhibitor. Treatment with MG132 and ?-secretase inhibitors (DAPT and L685,458) showed accumulation of PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 3C ). To verify the cleavage products include the C-terminus of the intracellular domain of PTP?, we overexpressed a PTP? construct with a C-terminal GFP-tag (PTP?-GFP) in LN-229 cells. Cells expressing PTP?-GFP were treated with inhibitors as above, and total cell lysates were immunoblotted with GFP to detect the PTP?-GFP fragments. A GFP antibody detected a similar pattern of fragments, suggesting PTP? P?E and ICD fragments include the C-terminus of PTP? ( Figure 3C ). These data support the model depicted in Figure 3D . Full-length PTP? is cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P-subunits in “normal” proteolytic processing. Cleavage by an ADAM-type MMP (?-secretase) in GBM cells generates PTP? P?E. Subsequently, P?E is cleaved by ?-secretase to generate PTP? ICD. PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment that translocates to the nucleus in another cell type ( 24 ). To determine the subcellular localization of PTP? ICD in glioblastoma cells, we performed immunocytochemistry on LN-229 cells. Antibodies recognizing the juxtamembrane (SK-7) and first phosphatase (SK-18) domains of PTP? detected an endogenous PTP? species with a nuclear pattern of localization similar to DAPI-stained nuclei ( Fig. 4A ). The epitopes of these antibodies suggest that this species is PTP? ICD. Overexpression of GFP-tagged PTP? ICD also localized to the nucleus and confirmed these findings. In contrast, overexpression of GFP-tagged full-length PTP? resulted in a cell-cell contact and filopodial staining pattern as reported previously ( 35 ). Full-length PTP? likely senses extracellular adhesive cues to suppress migration by contact inhibition, whereas PTP? ICD distributes to the cytoplasm and nucleus. These data suggest that full-length PTP? and PTP? ICD have distinct localization patterns, potentially leading to differences in their downstream signaling.  Proteolysis of PTP? contributes to its downregulation in glioblastoma Other receptor tyrosine phosphatases are sequentially cleaved by a furin-like protease, an ADAM-type matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), and a ?-secretase to release a soluble intracellular fragment ( 23 , 31 , 32 ). Since GBMs are known to have upregulated proteases ( 33 ), we hypothesized that constitutive proteolysis of PTP? may be the mechanism of PTP? downregulation in GBM. We first determined whether full-length PTP? could be detected in parental LN-229 cells. Since we cannot detect PTP? in a total cell lysate of parental LN-229 cells, we biotinylated cell surface proteins and used avidin resin to enrich the pool of biotinylated cell surface proteins. Despite the lack of PTP? in the total cell lysate, the biotinylated cell surface fraction contained trace amounts of PTP? ( Fig. 3A ). PTP? is known to be cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P- subunits of PTP? ( 11 , 21 , 22 ). As expected, treatment of cells with an inhibitor of furin activity resulted in an accumulation of full-length PTP? (200 kDa) at the cell surface. These data imply there is a trace amount of endogenous PTP? in LN-229 cells that is processed by proteolysis. Biotinylation of cell surface proteins from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of full-length PTP? accumulation at the cell surface upon furin inhibition ( Fig. 3A ). After furin cleavage, PTP?, another PTP?-subfamily member, is subsequently cleaved by ?- and ?-secretases ( 23 ). We hypothesized that PTP? is cleaved similarly. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells were treated with inhibitors of ?- and ?-secretases. Proteasome inhibitors were used for biochemical detection to prevent rapid degradation of these fragments ( 23 ). Since we cannot detect PTP? in whole cell lysates, the PTP? fragments were immunoprecipitated from LN-229 cells treated with inhibitors using antibody to the intracellular domain of PTP?. The ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT stabilized a fragment that corresponds by molecular weight to a membrane-tethered truncated P-subunit termed P?E ( Fig. 3B ). Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 led to the accumulation of both P?E and a soluble fragment termed PTP? intracellular domain (ICD) ( Fig. 3B ). The MMP inhibitor GM6001 limited the formation of PTP? P?E and ICD fragments, indicating cleavage by an MMP is required for subsequent processing ( Fig. 3B ). MG132 has been reported to inhibit ?-secretase activity in addition to proteasome activity, leading to the accumulation of ?- and ?-secretase products ( 23 , 34 ). Subsequent experiments included a more specific proteasome inhibitor, epoxomicin, to distinguish these events. Overall, these data support our hypothesis that the endogenous PTP? expressed in LN-229 cells is constitutively cleaved to generate PTP? P?E and ICD. As a result, little full-length PTP? is present to function at the cell surface in LN-229 cells. Total cell lysates from LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? showed a similar pattern of cleavage products upon inhibitor treatment ( Fig. 3C ). Stabilization of PTP? ICD with treatment of epoxomicin confirmed that this fragment is labile and can only be seen when stabilized by the addition of a proteasome inhibitor. Treatment with MG132 and ?-secretase inhibitors (DAPT and L685,458) showed accumulation of PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 3C ). To verify the cleavage products include the C-terminus of the intracellular domain of PTP?, we overexpressed a PTP? construct with a C-terminal GFP-tag (PTP?-GFP) in LN-229 cells. Cells expressing PTP?-GFP were treated with inhibitors as above, and total cell lysates were immunoblotted with GFP to detect the PTP?-GFP fragments. A GFP antibody detected a similar pattern of fragments, suggesting PTP? P?E and ICD fragments include the C-terminus of PTP? ( Figure 3C ). These data support the model depicted in Figure 3D . Full-length PTP? is cleaved by a furin-like protease to generate the E- and P-subunits in “normal” proteolytic processing. Cleavage by an ADAM-type MMP (?-secretase) in GBM cells generates PTP? P?E. Subsequently, P?E is cleaved by ?-secretase to generate PTP? ICD. PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment that translocates to the nucleus in another cell type ( 24 ). To determine the subcellular localization of PTP? ICD in glioblastoma cells, we performed immunocytochemistry on LN-229 cells. Antibodies recognizing the juxtamembrane (SK-7) and first phosphatase (SK-18) domains of PTP? detected an endogenous PTP? species with a nuclear pattern of localization similar to DAPI-stained nuclei ( Fig. 4A ). The epitopes of these antibodies suggest that this species is PTP? ICD. Overexpression of GFP-tagged PTP? ICD also localized to the nucleus and confirmed these findings. In contrast, overexpression of GFP-tagged full-length PTP? resulted in a cell-cell contact and filopodial staining pattern as reported previously ( 35 ). Full-length PTP? likely senses extracellular adhesive cues to suppress migration by contact inhibition, whereas PTP? ICD distributes to the cytoplasm and nucleus. These data suggest that full-length PTP? and PTP? ICD have distinct localization patterns, potentially leading to differences in their downstream signaling.  Intracellular fragments of PTP? are expressed in human glioblastoma tumors and glioblastoma xenograft tumors We previously demonstrated that PTP? protein expression is downregulated in human GBM tumor samples ( 8 ). However, immunoblotting fresh GBM tumor tissue lysates on higher percentage gels indicated that fragments of PTP? corresponding to PTP? P?E and ICD are expressed in human GBM tumor samples in comparison to normal brain tissue from the same patient ( Fig. 4B ). Full-length PTP? was undetectable in these GBM tumor samples ( Fig. 4B ). PTP? P?E and ICD were identified in normal tissue samples that retain significant expression of full-length PTP? ( Fig. 4B ). Therefore, it is the expression of full-length PTP? that differs between normal brain and GBM tumor tissue. Normal brain tissue expresses full-length PTP?, whereas GBM tumor tissue does not express full-length PTP? but retains PTP? P?E and ICD. Neither full-length PTP? nor PTP? P?E and ICD are detectable in LN-229 total cell lysates by immunoblot. We assessed human GBM cell line tumor xenografts grown in mouse flanks to determine if the three-dimensional architecture of the tumor would stabilize PTP? fragments in the GBM cells. Flank tumor lysates from LN-229 xenografts expressed little detectable full-length PTP? but expressed abundant PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 4C ). Similar results were obtained using xenografts prepared with another glioma cell line, Gli36?5 ( Fig. 4C ). These data suggest that three-dimensional human glioblastoma tumors and in vivo glioblastoma tumor models favor PTP? proteolysis and stabilize PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, in vivo .  Intracellular fragments of PTP? are expressed in human glioblastoma tumors and glioblastoma xenograft tumors We previously demonstrated that PTP? protein expression is downregulated in human GBM tumor samples ( 8 ). However, immunoblotting fresh GBM tumor tissue lysates on higher percentage gels indicated that fragments of PTP? corresponding to PTP? P?E and ICD are expressed in human GBM tumor samples in comparison to normal brain tissue from the same patient ( Fig. 4B ). Full-length PTP? was undetectable in these GBM tumor samples ( Fig. 4B ). PTP? P?E and ICD were identified in normal tissue samples that retain significant expression of full-length PTP? ( Fig. 4B ). Therefore, it is the expression of full-length PTP? that differs between normal brain and GBM tumor tissue. Normal brain tissue expresses full-length PTP?, whereas GBM tumor tissue does not express full-length PTP? but retains PTP? P?E and ICD. Neither full-length PTP? nor PTP? P?E and ICD are detectable in LN-229 total cell lysates by immunoblot. We assessed human GBM cell line tumor xenografts grown in mouse flanks to determine if the three-dimensional architecture of the tumor would stabilize PTP? fragments in the GBM cells. Flank tumor lysates from LN-229 xenografts expressed little detectable full-length PTP? but expressed abundant PTP? P?E and ICD ( Fig. 4C ). Similar results were obtained using xenografts prepared with another glioma cell line, Gli36?5 ( Fig. 4C ). These data suggest that three-dimensional human glioblastoma tumors and in vivo glioblastoma tumor models favor PTP? proteolysis and stabilize PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, in vivo .  PTP? fragments contribute to glioblastoma cell migration and both growth factor-independent and anchorage-independent cell survival PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment generated from P?E that translocates to the nucleus ( Fig. 4A ). PTP? ICD contains the catalytic domain of PTP? and has the potential to signal differently than that of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? due to changes in substrate availability in different cellular compartments. Overexpression of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? suppressed GBM cell migration and growth factor-independent survival ( Fig. 2 ). We hypothesized that PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, may signal differently and affect the migration and growth factor-independent survival of GBM cells. First, the effect of PTP? fragments on cell migration was analyzed using a scratch wound assay. PTP? mRNA is expressed in LN-229 cells, but the only detectable proteins are PTP? fragments ( Fig. 4 ). Therefore, we were able to use shRNA to downregulate PTP? fragments. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing either control or two different PTP? shRNA constructs were scratched and allowed to migrate ( Fig. 5A ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments by both shRNA constructs suppressed cell migration by 2-fold ( Fig. 5A ). To rule out changes in cell proliferation, LN-229 cells infected with control or PTP? shRNA were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. No significant changes in cell proliferation were detected (data not shown). Both PTP? P?E and ICD are partially stabilized by the ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT and are not formed when ADAMs are inhibited ( Fig. 3B ). These inhibitors were used in a scratch wound assay to analyze their effects on PTP? fragment-mediated cell migration. Stabilization of PTP? fragments with DAPT increased migration, and prevention of PTP? fragment formation by GM6001 decreased migration ( Supplemental Fig. 1 ). These data suggest that proteolysis of PTP? promotes LN-229 cell migration. Because PTP? overexpression affected growth factor-independent cell survival, we hypothesized that PTP? fragments may also affect cell survival. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were seeded at low density and allowed to form colonies over two weeks ( Fig. 5B ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments via shRNA reduced the number of colonies in comparison to control cells by 3-fold ( Fig. 5B ). These findings were confirmed in a soft agarose assay for anchorage-independent survival. PTP? shRNA reduced the number of colonies in this assay by 5-fold ( Fig. 5C ). These data suggest PTP? fragments promote both cell migration and growth factor-independent survival of glioblastoma cells.  PTP? fragments contribute to glioblastoma cell migration and both growth factor-independent and anchorage-independent cell survival PTP? ICD is a soluble fragment generated from P?E that translocates to the nucleus ( Fig. 4A ). PTP? ICD contains the catalytic domain of PTP? and has the potential to signal differently than that of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? due to changes in substrate availability in different cellular compartments. Overexpression of membrane-bound, cell surface-associated PTP? suppressed GBM cell migration and growth factor-independent survival ( Fig. 2 ). We hypothesized that PTP? ICD and its precursor, P?E, may signal differently and affect the migration and growth factor-independent survival of GBM cells. First, the effect of PTP? fragments on cell migration was analyzed using a scratch wound assay. PTP? mRNA is expressed in LN-229 cells, but the only detectable proteins are PTP? fragments ( Fig. 4 ). Therefore, we were able to use shRNA to downregulate PTP? fragments. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing either control or two different PTP? shRNA constructs were scratched and allowed to migrate ( Fig. 5A ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments by both shRNA constructs suppressed cell migration by 2-fold ( Fig. 5A ). To rule out changes in cell proliferation, LN-229 cells infected with control or PTP? shRNA were labeled with propidium iodide and analyzed by flow cytometry. No significant changes in cell proliferation were detected (data not shown). Both PTP? P?E and ICD are partially stabilized by the ?-secretase inhibitor DAPT and are not formed when ADAMs are inhibited ( Fig. 3B ). These inhibitors were used in a scratch wound assay to analyze their effects on PTP? fragment-mediated cell migration. Stabilization of PTP? fragments with DAPT increased migration, and prevention of PTP? fragment formation by GM6001 decreased migration ( Supplemental Fig. 1 ). These data suggest that proteolysis of PTP? promotes LN-229 cell migration. Because PTP? overexpression affected growth factor-independent cell survival, we hypothesized that PTP? fragments may also affect cell survival. To test this hypothesis, LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were seeded at low density and allowed to form colonies over two weeks ( Fig. 5B ). Downregulation of PTP? fragments via shRNA reduced the number of colonies in comparison to control cells by 3-fold ( Fig. 5B ). These findings were confirmed in a soft agarose assay for anchorage-independent survival. PTP? shRNA reduced the number of colonies in this assay by 5-fold ( Fig. 5C ). These data suggest PTP? fragments promote both cell migration and growth factor-independent survival of glioblastoma cells.  Catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is required for glioblastoma cell migration Soluble intracellular PTP? has been demonstrated to retain catalytic activity ( 24 , 28 ). To examine whether the catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is important in the regulation of cell migration, PTP? function was inhibited using a PTP?-specific peptide inhibitor ( 19 ). Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells were treated with a membrane-penetrant PTP? wedge peptide or a control scrambled peptide prior to scratching to induce a wound ( Fig. 6 ). The PTP? wedge peptide significantly reduced migration of LN-229 cells ( Fig. 6 ). This suppression is likely due to inhibition of the signaling of the PTP? fragments as they are the only detectable PTP? protein stabilized in LN-229 cells ( Fig. 4 ). These data suggest that PTP? fragments must be catalytically active to induce GBM cell migration. Therefore, the wedge peptide inhibitor of PTP? may have therapeutic value in the treatment of human glioblastoma.  Catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is required for glioblastoma cell migration Soluble intracellular PTP? has been demonstrated to retain catalytic activity ( 24 , 28 ). To examine whether the catalytic activity of PTP? fragments is important in the regulation of cell migration, PTP? function was inhibited using a PTP?-specific peptide inhibitor ( 19 ). Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells were treated with a membrane-penetrant PTP? wedge peptide or a control scrambled peptide prior to scratching to induce a wound ( Fig. 6 ). The PTP? wedge peptide significantly reduced migration of LN-229 cells ( Fig. 6 ). This suppression is likely due to inhibition of the signaling of the PTP? fragments as they are the only detectable PTP? protein stabilized in LN-229 cells ( Fig. 4 ). These data suggest that PTP? fragments must be catalytically active to induce GBM cell migration. Therefore, the wedge peptide inhibitor of PTP? may have therapeutic value in the treatment of human glioblastoma.  DISCUSSION Downregulation of PTP? in a human glioblastoma cell line that expresses PTP? was reported to induce cell migration and dispersal ( 8 ). In this study, we demonstrate that overexpression of PTP? suppresses migration and growth factor-independent survival of glioblastoma cells. Furthermore, downregulation of PTP? in GBM is due to proteolytic processing into a series of fragments. Human glioblastoma tumor samples selectively retain PTP? fragments, both ICD and its precursor, P?E, in comparison to patient matched normal brain tissue. In the absence of full-length PTP?, this PTP? fragment signal promotes cell migration and growth factor-independent survival. The balance of full-length PTP? and PTP? fragment signaling is likely important in regulating the contact inhibition switch between cell adhesion and cell migration. The receptor tyrosine phosphatases PTP?, PTP ?/?, and LAR are regulated by sequential proteolysis ( 23 , 31 , 32 ). Furthermore, other transmembrane receptors such as Notch are similarly cleaved. Notch signaling is regulated by sequential cleavage by furin, ADAMs, and ?-secretase that ultimately generates an intracellular fragment ( 36 ). This fragment translocates to the nucleus and regulates the CBF1 transcription complex to control cellular processes such as differentiation and tumorigenesis ( 37 ). This regulation of cell surface receptors by proteolysis during development might be recapitulated during tumorigenesis as GBM cells have de-differentiated, stem cell-like characteristics ( 3 ). Differences in full-length PTP? and PTP? fragment signaling likely depend upon the availability of PTP? binding partners and downstream effectors. Furthermore, as a homophilic cell adhesion molecule, it may be that cell surface PTP? and PTP? fragment signaling pathways regulate the adhesive versus migratory switch of contact inhibited or dispersive cells, respectively. Cell surface PTP? binds and regulates cadherins and catenins ( 12 ), key components of classical adherens junctions. Four classical cadherin subtypes, E-, N-, R-, and VE-cadherin, associate with PTP? ( 35 , 38 – 40 ). The cadherin binding partner p120-catenin (p120) has been implicated as a PTP? binding partner and substrate ( 41 ) and contributes to tumorigenesis by regulating cell migration ( 42 ). p120 can translocate to the nucleus and associate with the transcription factor Kaiso ( 43 ). Interestingly, a proteolytically cleaved intracellular fragment of E-cadherin requires p120 for its nuclear translocation ( 44 ). The cytoplasmic domain of N-cadherin can also be proteolytically processed and translocate to the nucleus ( 45 ). p120 is involved in the recruitment of ?-secretase to N-cadherin for its cleavage ( 46 ). It is interesting to speculate that PTP? fragments generated from the proteolytic cleavage of PTP? may regulate a nuclear complex of N-cadherin and p120 given that PTP? interacts with cadherins and p120 via its intracellular domain ( 35 , 41 ). Computer-based searches for a canonical nuclear localization sequence (NLS) in PTP? were unsuccessful. However, both p120 and another PTP?-interacting protein, BCCIP ( 24 ), contain NLS motifs ( 47 , 48 ). The yeast homologue of BCCIP has been demonstrated to regulate nuclear export ( 49 ). Therefore, p120 and BCCIP may aid in the shuttling of PTP? ICD in and out of the nucleus. Migration and dispersal of glioblastoma cells remains a clinical problem due to the lack of effective specific therapies ( 1 – 3 ). Individual glioblastoma cells migrate and disperse throughout the brain parenchyma to form new foci. These cells must have elevated growth factor-independent survival signaling to evade anoikis-mediated cell death and to clonally expand. Therefore, it is interesting that both migration and growth factor-independent survival pathways are regulated by PTP? fragments. Furthermore, a peptide inhibitor targeting PTP? fragment function reduces cell migration. A small molecule inhibitor that mimics this peptide will be developed to target PTP? fragments and suppress glioblastoma cell migration and dispersal in vivo . Such an advance in the field of targeted therapeutics would fulfill a vast need for specific therapy in glioblastoma treatment.  DISCUSSION Downregulation of PTP? in a human glioblastoma cell line that expresses PTP? was reported to induce cell migration and dispersal ( 8 ). In this study, we demonstrate that overexpression of PTP? suppresses migration and growth factor-independent survival of glioblastoma cells. Furthermore, downregulation of PTP? in GBM is due to proteolytic processing into a series of fragments. Human glioblastoma tumor samples selectively retain PTP? fragments, both ICD and its precursor, P?E, in comparison to patient matched normal brain tissue. In the absence of full-length PTP?, this PTP? fragment signal promotes cell migration and growth factor-independent survival. The balance of full-length PTP? and PTP? fragment signaling is likely important in regulating the contact inhibition switch between cell adhesion and cell migration. The receptor tyrosine phosphatases PTP?, PTP ?/?, and LAR are regulated by sequential proteolysis ( 23 , 31 , 32 ). Furthermore, other transmembrane receptors such as Notch are similarly cleaved. Notch signaling is regulated by sequential cleavage by furin, ADAMs, and ?-secretase that ultimately generates an intracellular fragment ( 36 ). This fragment translocates to the nucleus and regulates the CBF1 transcription complex to control cellular processes such as differentiation and tumorigenesis ( 37 ). This regulation of cell surface receptors by proteolysis during development might be recapitulated during tumorigenesis as GBM cells have de-differentiated, stem cell-like characteristics ( 3 ). Differences in full-length PTP? and PTP? fragment signaling likely depend upon the availability of PTP? binding partners and downstream effectors. Furthermore, as a homophilic cell adhesion molecule, it may be that cell surface PTP? and PTP? fragment signaling pathways regulate the adhesive versus migratory switch of contact inhibited or dispersive cells, respectively. Cell surface PTP? binds and regulates cadherins and catenins ( 12 ), key components of classical adherens junctions. Four classical cadherin subtypes, E-, N-, R-, and VE-cadherin, associate with PTP? ( 35 , 38 – 40 ). The cadherin binding partner p120-catenin (p120) has been implicated as a PTP? binding partner and substrate ( 41 ) and contributes to tumorigenesis by regulating cell migration ( 42 ). p120 can translocate to the nucleus and associate with the transcription factor Kaiso ( 43 ). Interestingly, a proteolytically cleaved intracellular fragment of E-cadherin requires p120 for its nuclear translocation ( 44 ). The cytoplasmic domain of N-cadherin can also be proteolytically processed and translocate to the nucleus ( 45 ). p120 is involved in the recruitment of ?-secretase to N-cadherin for its cleavage ( 46 ). It is interesting to speculate that PTP? fragments generated from the proteolytic cleavage of PTP? may regulate a nuclear complex of N-cadherin and p120 given that PTP? interacts with cadherins and p120 via its intracellular domain ( 35 , 41 ). Computer-based searches for a canonical nuclear localization sequence (NLS) in PTP? were unsuccessful. However, both p120 and another PTP?-interacting protein, BCCIP ( 24 ), contain NLS motifs ( 47 , 48 ). The yeast homologue of BCCIP has been demonstrated to regulate nuclear export ( 49 ). Therefore, p120 and BCCIP may aid in the shuttling of PTP? ICD in and out of the nucleus. Migration and dispersal of glioblastoma cells remains a clinical problem due to the lack of effective specific therapies ( 1 – 3 ). Individual glioblastoma cells migrate and disperse throughout the brain parenchyma to form new foci. These cells must have elevated growth factor-independent survival signaling to evade anoikis-mediated cell death and to clonally expand. Therefore, it is interesting that both migration and growth factor-independent survival pathways are regulated by PTP? fragments. Furthermore, a peptide inhibitor targeting PTP? fragment function reduces cell migration. A small molecule inhibitor that mimics this peptide will be developed to target PTP? fragments and suppress glioblastoma cell migration and dispersal in vivo . Such an advance in the field of targeted therapeutics would fulfill a vast need for specific therapy in glioblastoma treatment.  Supplementary Material 1 2  Supplementary Material 1 2  Figures Figure 1 PTP? expression is post-transcriptionally regulated. (A) Lysates from U-87 MG cells, parental LN-229 cells, and LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? were analyzed by immunoblotting. PTP? was detected using an antibody to the intracellular domain (SK-18) that recognizes both the full-length (FL) (200 kDa) protein and the furin-cleaved intracellular P-subunit (P) (100 kDa). U-87 MG cells express PTP?, but LN-229 cells downregulated PTP? protein. PTP? was overexpressed in LN-229 cells. Vinculin (117 kDa) was used as a loading control. (B) RT-PCR analysis of LN-229 and U-87 MG mRNA indicated PTP? mRNA is expressed in both cell lines when compared to the PCR product of a control PTP?-containing plasmid with primers derived from both the extracellular and intracellular domains. Size is indicated in basepairs. (C) PTP? shRNA but not control shRNA downregulated PTP? transcript; however, there was no change in GAPDH mRNA. Figure 2 Overexpression of PTP? suppresses glioblastoma cell migration and growth factor-independent survival. (A) Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing vector or PTP? were scratched and imaged at 0 and 24 hours. Dashed lines indicate the position of the wounded edge at 0 hours. The scale bar represents 200 ?m. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant 3-fold reduction in migration (p<0.0001, n=4). (B) LN-229 cells expressing vector or PTP? were deprived of growth factor stimulation and allowed to form colonies. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant 2-fold reduction in colony formation (p<0.0001, n=3). Figure 3 PTP? is proteolytically processed to release a catalytically active intracellular fragment from the membrane. (A) Lysates from parental LN-229 cells and LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? were biotinylated and immunoblotted for PTP? with an antibody against the intracellular segment of PTP? (SK-18). Trace amounts of PTP? protein were detected in cell surface-labeled LN-229 cells. Treatment with an inhibitor of furin prevented P-subunit formation. (B) LN-229 cells treated with protease inhibitors were immunoprecipitated with SK-18 and immunoblotted with an antibody against the juxtamembrane domain of PTP? (SK-7). Proteolyzed membrane-associated (P?E) and soluble (ICD) fragments of PTP? were stabilized with ?-secretase (DAPT) and proteasome (MG132) inhibitors. (C) Lysates from LN-229 cells treated with specific protease inhibitors and overexpressing PTP? or PTP?-GFP were immunoblotted with SK-7 and GFP antibodies, respectively. PTP? P?E and ICD were stabilized with ?-secretase (DAPT, L685,458) and proteasome (MG132, epoxomicin) inhibitors. Vinculin was used as a loading control. (D) PTP? is sequentially cleaved by a furin-like protease, an ?-secretase (ADAM-type MMP), and a ?-secretase to generate a membrane-free ICD that translocates to the nucleus. Figure 4 PTP? ICD localizes to the nucleus, and P?E and ICD are expressed in human glioblastoma tumors and glioblastoma xenografts. (A) LN-229 cells expressing endogenous ICD were analyzed by immunocytochemistry using intracellular antibodies to PTP? (SK-7 and SK-18). LN-229 cells overexpressing GFP-tagged PTP? ICD or full-length PTP? were also examined. The scale bar represents 20 ?m. (B) PTP? expression in human normal brain and glioblastoma tissue from four patients was analyzed by immunoblotting with SK-18. Vinculin was used as a loading control. (B) PTP? P?E and ICD expression was analyzed in LN-229 and Gli36?5 xenografts from mouse flank by immunoblotting with SK-18. A human GBM tumor (T) was loaded at the end for comparison. Vinculin was used as a loading control. The human GBM tumor specimen was loaded with 2-fold less protein, as its PTP? P?E and ICD expression is significantly higher than that of the xenograft specimens (see vinculin lane). Figure 5 PTP? fragments contribute to glioblastoma cell migration and both growth factor- and anchorage-independent cell survival. (A) Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA constructs were scratched and imaged at 0 and 24 hours. Dashed lines indicate the position of the wounded edge at 0 hours. The scale bar represents 200 ?m. Asterisks indicate a statistically significant reduction in migration (PTP? shRNA #1, n=4; PTP? shRNA #2, n=6; p<0.05). (B) LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were deprived of growth factor stimulation and allowed to form colonies. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant reduction in colony formation (p<0.001, n=2). (C) Colonies of LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were allowed to form in soft agarose over four weeks. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant reduction in colony formation (p<0.0001, n=20). Figure 6 PTP? fragment-induced migration of glioblastoma cells is abrogated by a peptide inhibitor of PTP? function. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells were treated with the PTP? wedge inhibitor peptide or a scrambled control, scratched to form a wound, and imaged at 0 and 24 hours. Dashed lines indicate the position of the wounded edge at 0 hours. The scale bar represents 200 ?m. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant difference in migration (p<0.02, n=6).  Figures Figure 1 PTP? expression is post-transcriptionally regulated. (A) Lysates from U-87 MG cells, parental LN-229 cells, and LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? were analyzed by immunoblotting. PTP? was detected using an antibody to the intracellular domain (SK-18) that recognizes both the full-length (FL) (200 kDa) protein and the furin-cleaved intracellular P-subunit (P) (100 kDa). U-87 MG cells express PTP?, but LN-229 cells downregulated PTP? protein. PTP? was overexpressed in LN-229 cells. Vinculin (117 kDa) was used as a loading control. (B) RT-PCR analysis of LN-229 and U-87 MG mRNA indicated PTP? mRNA is expressed in both cell lines when compared to the PCR product of a control PTP?-containing plasmid with primers derived from both the extracellular and intracellular domains. Size is indicated in basepairs. (C) PTP? shRNA but not control shRNA downregulated PTP? transcript; however, there was no change in GAPDH mRNA. Figure 2 Overexpression of PTP? suppresses glioblastoma cell migration and growth factor-independent survival. (A) Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing vector or PTP? were scratched and imaged at 0 and 24 hours. Dashed lines indicate the position of the wounded edge at 0 hours. The scale bar represents 200 ?m. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant 3-fold reduction in migration (p<0.0001, n=4). (B) LN-229 cells expressing vector or PTP? were deprived of growth factor stimulation and allowed to form colonies. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant 2-fold reduction in colony formation (p<0.0001, n=3). Figure 3 PTP? is proteolytically processed to release a catalytically active intracellular fragment from the membrane. (A) Lysates from parental LN-229 cells and LN-229 cells overexpressing PTP? were biotinylated and immunoblotted for PTP? with an antibody against the intracellular segment of PTP? (SK-18). Trace amounts of PTP? protein were detected in cell surface-labeled LN-229 cells. Treatment with an inhibitor of furin prevented P-subunit formation. (B) LN-229 cells treated with protease inhibitors were immunoprecipitated with SK-18 and immunoblotted with an antibody against the juxtamembrane domain of PTP? (SK-7). Proteolyzed membrane-associated (P?E) and soluble (ICD) fragments of PTP? were stabilized with ?-secretase (DAPT) and proteasome (MG132) inhibitors. (C) Lysates from LN-229 cells treated with specific protease inhibitors and overexpressing PTP? or PTP?-GFP were immunoblotted with SK-7 and GFP antibodies, respectively. PTP? P?E and ICD were stabilized with ?-secretase (DAPT, L685,458) and proteasome (MG132, epoxomicin) inhibitors. Vinculin was used as a loading control. (D) PTP? is sequentially cleaved by a furin-like protease, an ?-secretase (ADAM-type MMP), and a ?-secretase to generate a membrane-free ICD that translocates to the nucleus. Figure 4 PTP? ICD localizes to the nucleus, and P?E and ICD are expressed in human glioblastoma tumors and glioblastoma xenografts. (A) LN-229 cells expressing endogenous ICD were analyzed by immunocytochemistry using intracellular antibodies to PTP? (SK-7 and SK-18). LN-229 cells overexpressing GFP-tagged PTP? ICD or full-length PTP? were also examined. The scale bar represents 20 ?m. (B) PTP? expression in human normal brain and glioblastoma tissue from four patients was analyzed by immunoblotting with SK-18. Vinculin was used as a loading control. (B) PTP? P?E and ICD expression was analyzed in LN-229 and Gli36?5 xenografts from mouse flank by immunoblotting with SK-18. A human GBM tumor (T) was loaded at the end for comparison. Vinculin was used as a loading control. The human GBM tumor specimen was loaded with 2-fold less protein, as its PTP? P?E and ICD expression is significantly higher than that of the xenograft specimens (see vinculin lane). Figure 5 PTP? fragments contribute to glioblastoma cell migration and both growth factor- and anchorage-independent cell survival. (A) Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA constructs were scratched and imaged at 0 and 24 hours. Dashed lines indicate the position of the wounded edge at 0 hours. The scale bar represents 200 ?m. Asterisks indicate a statistically significant reduction in migration (PTP? shRNA #1, n=4; PTP? shRNA #2, n=6; p<0.05). (B) LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were deprived of growth factor stimulation and allowed to form colonies. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant reduction in colony formation (p<0.001, n=2). (C) Colonies of LN-229 cells expressing control or PTP? shRNA were allowed to form in soft agarose over four weeks. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant reduction in colony formation (p<0.0001, n=20). Figure 6 PTP? fragment-induced migration of glioblastoma cells is abrogated by a peptide inhibitor of PTP? function. Confluent monolayers of LN-229 cells were treated with the PTP? wedge inhibitor peptide or a scrambled control, scratched to form a wound, and imaged at 0 and 24 hours. Dashed lines indicate the position of the wounded edge at 0 hours. The scale bar represents 200 ?m. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant difference in migration (p<0.02, n=6). 