Normal and Cancer-Related Functions of the p160 Steroid Receptor Coactivator (SRC) Family The three homologous members of the p160 SRC family (SRC-1, SRC-2 and SRC-3) mediate the transcriptional functions of nuclear receptors and other transcription factors, and are the most studied of all transcriptional coactivators. Recent work has indicated that the SRC genes are subject to amplification and overexpression in various human cancers. Some of the molecular mechanisms responsible for SRC overexpression along with the mechanisms by which SRCs promote breast and prostate cancer cell proliferation and survival have been identified, as have the specific contributions of individual SRC family members in spontaneous breast and prostate carcinogenesis in genetically manipulated mouse models. These studies have identified new challenges for cancer research and therapy.  Introduction Nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) are ligand-dependent, DNA-binding transcription factors that regulate gene expression and various physiological functions. Understanding how NRs control gene transcription has been a long and difficult journey. Initially, it was thought that NRs enabled general transcription factors (GTFs) and RNA polymerase II to assemble at the promoter to turn on mRNA synthesis. However, work began in the 1970s to search for nuclear non histone helper proteins that were thought to aid the binding to DNA and the transcriptional function of NRs 1 , 2 . The finding that activation of one overexpressed NR could indirectly inhibit the transcriptional activity of another NR 3 , 4 and that in vitro transcription systems consisting of purified NRs and GTFs were inefficient further suggested that additional transcription activators were required for efficient hormone-induced transcriptional activation 5 . In 1995, the steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) was cloned as the first authentic NR coactivator. SRC-1 interacted with steroid receptors in a hormone-dependent manner and robustly increased the transcriptional activities of steroid receptors 6 . Soon after, two other homologous proteins, SRC-2 (TIF2 or GRIP1) 7 , 8 and SRC-3 (p/CIP, RAC3, AIB1, ACTR or TRAM-1) 9 – 13 , were characterized as NR coactivators. These three homologous proteins comprise the p160 SRC family. In this review, we summarize our current knowledge regarding the molecular features, functional mechanisms, posttranslational modifications and physiological functions of the SRC family members. Our major emphasis will be on the contributions and mechanisms of the SRC family in cancer.  Structural and functional characteristics of the SRC family SRCs contain three structural domains. The N-terminal basic helix-loop-helix-Per/ARNT/Sim (bHLH-PAS) domain is the most conserved region and is required for protein-protein interactions 14 – 16 . The bHLH-PAS domain can interact with several transcription factors such as myogenin, MEF-2C and TEF to potentiate transcription 17 , 18 . The central region contains three LXXLL (L for leucine and X for any amino acid) motifs, which form amphipathic ?-helices and are responsible for interacting with NRs 19 – 21 . The C-terminus contains two transcriptional activation domains (AD1 and AD2). AD1 binds CBP and p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT), and the recruitment of CBP or p300 by SRCs to the chromatin context is essential for SRC-mediated transcriptional activation. AD2 interacts with coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1) and protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMT1), which are histone methyltransferases 22 – 29 . The C-termini of SRC-1 and SRC-3 contain HAT activity domains, although their cellular substrates are incompletely identified 12 , 30 . These molecular features provide SRCs with a suitable structural base for recruiting additional coregulators and general transcription factors, which in turn results in chromatin remodeling, assembly of general transcription factors and recruitment of RNA Polymerase II for transcriptional activation 31 , 32 . The basic SRC structural domains and the simplified functional mechanisms for SRCs in NR-dependent transcriptional activation are sketched in Fig. 1 . In addition to serving as coactivators for NRs, SRCs also serve as coactivators for other transcription factors, including NF-?B, Smads, E2F1, STATs, HIF1, p53 and RB ( Table 1 ). SRCs also can promote gene transcription by interacting with kinases, phosphatases, ubiquitin/sumo ligases, histone acetyltransferases and histone methyltransferases ( Table 1 ). By modulating gene expression controlled by a broad range of NRs and non-NR transcription factors, SRCs regulate many diverse physiological functions. The molecular targets of SRCs are numerous ( Box 1 ). Genetic ablation of SRC-1 altered gene expression patterns involved in cell cycle and energy metabolism pathways such as glycolysis, glycogen synthesis and fatty acid synthesis 33 . Genetic ablation of SRC-2 increased gene expression for energy expenditure but decreased gene expression for energy storage 33 . SRC-3 is required for the expression of several genes for cell cycle and apoptosis in breast cancer cells 34 . Box 1 SRC knockout mice Although SRC-1 null ( Src1 ?/?) mice display no gross defects in development and growth, careful analyses revealed that SRC-1 plays important in vivo roles in organ physiology. In reproductive organs, SRC-1 deficiency reduces oestrogen-induced uterine growth, oestrogen- and progesterone-dependent uterine decidual response, mammary gland ductal side branching and alveolar formation, and testosterone-stimulated prostate growth 139 . In addition to partial resistance to sex steroids, partial resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) also exists in Src1 ?/? mice 140 , 141 . In the liver, SRC-1 is an essential coactivator for CEBP?, which together with PPAR? regulates the pyruvate carboxylase gene, the limiting enzyme for gluconeogenesis. In brown fat, activation of PPAR? triggers the recruitment of a coactivator complex containing PGC-1, SRC-1 and CBP/p300 142 and inactivation of SRC-1 impairs the thermogenic activity of PGC-1, decreasing energy expenditure and resulting in obesity with a high fat diet 143 . Assessment of Src2 ?/? ( Tif2 ?/? ) mice demonstrated an important function of SRC-2 in reproductive organs and in the regulation of metabolism. Src2 ?/? Sertoli cells are unable to support normal spermatogenesis 144 and SRC-2 is the dominant member of the SRC family that mediates androgen receptor function in the testis 145 . The hypofertility of female Src2 ?/? mice is partially due to a placental hypoplasia 144 and specific ablation of SRC-2 in the PR-positive cell linage inhibits the progesterone-induced decidual response and causes a block in embryo implantation. SRC-2 ablation also results in reduced ductal side branching and alveologenesis in the mammary gland 137 . In white adipose tissue, SRC-2 deficiency increases leptin expression and decreases the expression of genes responsible for anti-lipolysis and fatty acid uptake and trapping. In brown adipose tissue, SRC-2 deficiency increases levels of UCP-1, PGC-1 and acetyl CoA oxidase, promoting energy expenditure. As a result, Src2 ?/? mice exhibit higher body temperature under cold conditions, less fat accumulation, lower levels of fasting glycemia and triglycerides, and higher insulin sensitivity 143 . In the liver, SRC-2 enhances ROR?-mediated G6Pase expression to regulate fasting hepatic glucose release from the liver. SRC-2 ablation recapitulates the human syndrome of Von Gierke’s disease (glycogen storage disease-1a) 146 . Src3 ?/? mice show growth retardation, delayed puberty, reduced female reproductive function and blunted mammary gland development 147 , 148 . In agreement with the growth retardation, circulating IGF-I levels in Src3 ?/? mice are significantly reduced. SRC-3 is required for vitamin D receptor-mediated expression of IGFBP-3, a binding protein maintaining IGF-I stability in the circulation 149 . In the mammary gland, SRC-3 deficiency decreases oestrogen and progesterone-induced mammary ductal growth and alveologenesis, revealing SRC-3’s role in ER and PR function 147 . SRC-3 is not required for castration-induced regression and testosterone-stimulated regeneration of the prostate in mice, suggesting that SRC-3 is not essential for androgen and androgen receptor-dependent prostate morphogenesis 118 . Four SRC-1 splicing isoforms have been reported 35 . In comparison with SRC-1a, SRC-1b lacks a N-terminal region, while SRC-1c, SRC-1d and SRC-1e differ from SRC-1a and from each other at their unique C-terminal sequences. It has been shown that SRC-1a and SRC-1b have different abilities to enhance ER? activity in cultured cells 36 . A SRC-3 isoform, AIB1-?3, also has been reported 37 . AIB1-?3 lacks the N-terminal PAS/bHLH domain and it may be a more active coactivator for ER? and PR compared with the full-length SRC-3. However, the in vivo expression profiles and physiological significances of these SRC-1 and SRC-3 isoforms are currently unclear.  Posttranslational modifications of SRCs The limiting concentrations of cellular SRCs suggest that changes in SRC levels and/or activities are efficient means for the cell to regulate gene expression. A number of studies have demonstrated that signaling pathways activated by extracellular stimuli such as hormones, growth factors and cytokines induce multiple posttranslational modifications of SRCs, including phosphorylation, ubiquitination, sumoylation, acetylation and methylation ( Fig. 2 ). These dynamic and often reversible post translational modifications have crucial roles in determining the protein stability, the transcription factor-interactive specificity and the transcriptional activity of SRCs, and they link SRC functions to cellular responses to environmental cues. Deregulated post translational modifcation of SRC molecules have significant implications in human diseases such as cancer. Phosphorylation Phosphorylation of SRCs changes their affinity for select NRs and modulates NR-dependent gene expression 38 – 41 . Epidermal growth factor (EGF), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and cAMP treatments stimulate proline-directed kinase phosphorylation of SRC-1 on Thr1179 and Ser1185 and phosphorylated SRC-1 has higher coactivator function in both ligand-dependent and ligand-independent NR pathways 39 , 42 . Interestingly, EGF induced phosphorylation of SRC-1 enhances progesterone receptor (PR)-dependent transcription 39 ; IL6 mediated SRC-1 phosphorylation promotes androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcription in a ligand-independent manner 42 ; and cAMP induced phosphorylation of SRC-1 enables recruitment of p300 and CBP and PR-dependent transcription in a ligand-independent manner 43 . Furthermore, MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of SRC-1 on Thr1179 and Ser1185 increase its affinity for AR in prostate cancer cells, perhaps contributing to prostate cancer recurrence 42 , 44 . In endometrial cancer cells, Src-mediated SRC-1 phosphorylation significantly increases the agonist activity of tamoxifen, indicating that SRC-1 has a role in tamoxifen-induced endometrial proliferation and increase the risk of endometrial cancer associated with use of tamoxifen 45 , 46 . For SRC-2, Ser736 is phosphorylated by MAPKs, including oestrogen-induced p38 and EGF-induced ERKs. Phosphorylation of Ser736 enhances SRC-2 and p300/CBP interaction and increases SRC-2 coactivation function for oestrogen receptor ? (ER?), PR and AR 38 , 44 , 47 . Protein kinase A (PKA) also phosphorylates SRC-2, resulting in a rapid increase in SRC-2 coactivator activity followed by accelerated SRC-2 degradation 48 , 49 . In SRC-3, seven Ser/Thr (Thr24, Ser505, Ser543, Ser601, Ser857, Ser860 and Ser867) and one Tyr (Tyr1357) phosphorylation sites are functionally important 40 , 41 , 50 . The kinases that phosphorylate and activate SRC-3 include MAPK, IKK, Akt (by inhibiting GSK3) and CK1?, suggesting a role for SRC-3 in accepting signals from multiple pathways. SRC-3 is also a target of the c-Abl tyrosine kinase that can be activated by oestrogen and growth factors. Phosphorylation of Tyr1357 by c-Abl facilitates SRC-3 action in mediating ER?, PR and NF-?B-dependent transcription by enhancing SRC-3 binding to p300 and transcription factors 50 . Importantly, Tyr1357 phosphorylation is elevated in ERBB2-induced mouse breast tumors, suggesting that phosphor-Tyr1357 plays a role in oncogenesis. Moreover, levels of SRC-3 Tyr1357 phosphorylation might serve as a marker for evaluating the efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Clinical studies have shown that SRC-3 expression levels are increased in a subset of breast tumors, and high SRC-3 levels are commonly associated with ERBB2 expression, tamoxifen resistance, disease recurrence and poor prognosis 51 – 53 . This unfavorable outcome can be explained by a series of linked molecular events. ERBB2 expression activates MAPK and Akt and causes phosphorylation of SRC-3 and ER, resulting in transcriptional activation and cell proliferation. Furthermore, Akt can stabilize SRC-3 by inhibiting GSK3 54 , suggesting a positive feedback mechanism between SRC-3 levels and Akt activity. Akt over activation is frequently observed in human cancers. Interestingly, SRC-3 function and cellular concentrations are counter-regulated by kinases and phosphatases. Phosphatases PDXP and PP2A dephosphorylate SRC-3, inhibit SRC-3 interaction with ER and reduce SRC-3 coactivator activity 55 . Phosphatase PP1 de-phosphorylates phospho-Serines 101 and 102, which decreases SRC-3 transcriptional activity and increases SRC-3 stability 55 ( Fig. 2 ). In contrast, atypical PKC (aPKC)-mediated SRC-3 phosphorylation stabilizes SRC-3 by targeting an acidic region of amino acid residues 1031–1097 and preventing SRC-3 from interacting with the C8 subunit of the 20S core proteasome 56 . Since both aPKC and SRC-3 are frequently overexpressed in cancers, they may synergistically promote carcinogenesis. The transcriptional activities of SRCs also are regulated by subcellular localization and intracellular trafficking. SRCs contain nuclear import and export signals and locate in both cytoplasm and nucleus 57 – 59 . Post translational modifications can alter the availability of SRCs in a subcellular compartment by regulating their nucleo-cytoplasmic trafficking. For example, TNF? and EGF-induced phopshorylation of SRC-3 causes its redistribution from cytoplasm to nucleus 60 , 61 .In the cytoplasm, oestrogen-induced SRC-3 phosphorylation leads to SRC-3 and ER? interaction, suggesting that activation of SRC-3 may play a role in oestrogen-induced non-genomic effects 62 . SRC-3 also is associated with and phosphorylated by IKK and c-Abl in the cytoplasm in response to TNF? or growth factor stimulation, indicating a role for SRC-3 in these kinase pathways 50 , 61 . Furthermore, SRC-3 can interact with TIA-1 and TIAR, two translational repressors associated with AU-rich regions in the 3’-UTR of cytokine mRNAs in the cytoplasm, thereby inhibiting translation of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-? mRNAs 63 . Ubiquitination 26S proteasome-mediated degradation regulates the function of NRs and the turnover of activated NRs and SRCs 64 – 68 . Recently, two SCF-dependent mono-ubiquitination sites (Lys723 and Lys786) within the NR interaction domain of SRC-3 were identified 54 . Phosphorylation of Ser505 by GSK3 and Ser860 by p38 MAPK not only enhances SRC-3 interaction with ER and AR but also regulates its ubiquitination and protein stability 54 , 69 . Sequential phosphorylation-dependent mono- to poly-ubiquitination events couple transcriptional activation with SRC-3 degradation, ensuring a proper termination of transcription ( Fig. 2 ). In contrast to GSK3-mediated phosphorylation that causes SRC-3 degradation, aPKC-mediated SRC-3 phosphorylation protects SRC-3 from proteasomal degradation in an ER?-dependent manner, leading to an increased oestrogen-induced breast cancer cell growth 56 . Although the structure of the small ubiqitin-related modifier (SUMO) is similar to ubiquitin, the fate of a sumoylated protein is usually distinct from that of a ubiquitinated protein. Sumoylation can either antagonize SRC ubiquitination by targeting a common lysine substrate to prevent degradation and enhance its concentration, or change SRC into an inactive confirmation 70 – 76 ( Fig. 2 ). In addition to ubiquitin-dependent turnover, REG?, a proteasome activator that stimulates the trypsin-like activity of the 20S proteasome, binds and promotes SRC-3 degradation in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner 77 . Acetylation and methylation The function of SRCs can be modulated by acetylation. After transcriptional initiation, SRC-3 is acetylated by p300/CBP, resulting in disassembly of the NR and SRC-3 complex and termination of transcription 78 ( Fig. 2 ). After initial stimulation, oestrogen treatment enhances CARM-1-mediated SRC-3 methylation on Arg1171 and terminates transcription by disassembling the SRC-3 coactivator complexes 79 and increasing SRC-3 degradation 80 ( Fig. 2 ). Combined posttranslational modifications Different combinations of posttranslational modifications determine SRC coactivator potency and selectivity and allow SRCs to integrate multiple upstream signals into finely tuned regulation of gene expression. For example, retinoic acid and p38 MAPK-induced SRC-3 phosphorylation initially enhances SRC-3 interaction with retinoic acid receptor ? (RAR?) to activate transcription. Subsequently, the phosphorylated SRC-3 is subjected to ubiquitination and degradation, thereby leading to transcriptional termination. Another study demonstrated that phosphorylation of SRC-3 on Ser509 primed it for phosphorylation on Ser505. This then triggered SRC-3 mono- and subsequent poly-ubiquitination, which are responsible for activation and degradation of SRC-3, respectively 54 ( Fig. 2 ). Oestrogen-induced MAPK-dependent SRC-3 phosphorylation inhibited SRC-3 sumoylation conversely, de-phosphorylation increased SRC-3 sumoylation and decreased SRC-3 activity 76 . As ubiquitination and sumoylation can occur on the same lysine residue, different phosphorylation codes may determine whether SRC-3 is ubiquitinated or sumoylated, methylated or acetylated. As postranslational modifications largely influence both the cellular concentrations and the coactivator activities of SRCs, interventions that modulate SRC post translational modification have potential for controlling the detrimental roles of overexpressed SRCs in cancer.  Phosphorylation Phosphorylation of SRCs changes their affinity for select NRs and modulates NR-dependent gene expression 38 – 41 . Epidermal growth factor (EGF), interleukin 6 (IL-6) and cAMP treatments stimulate proline-directed kinase phosphorylation of SRC-1 on Thr1179 and Ser1185 and phosphorylated SRC-1 has higher coactivator function in both ligand-dependent and ligand-independent NR pathways 39 , 42 . Interestingly, EGF induced phosphorylation of SRC-1 enhances progesterone receptor (PR)-dependent transcription 39 ; IL6 mediated SRC-1 phosphorylation promotes androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcription in a ligand-independent manner 42 ; and cAMP induced phosphorylation of SRC-1 enables recruitment of p300 and CBP and PR-dependent transcription in a ligand-independent manner 43 . Furthermore, MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of SRC-1 on Thr1179 and Ser1185 increase its affinity for AR in prostate cancer cells, perhaps contributing to prostate cancer recurrence 42 , 44 . In endometrial cancer cells, Src-mediated SRC-1 phosphorylation significantly increases the agonist activity of tamoxifen, indicating that SRC-1 has a role in tamoxifen-induced endometrial proliferation and increase the risk of endometrial cancer associated with use of tamoxifen 45 , 46 . For SRC-2, Ser736 is phosphorylated by MAPKs, including oestrogen-induced p38 and EGF-induced ERKs. Phosphorylation of Ser736 enhances SRC-2 and p300/CBP interaction and increases SRC-2 coactivation function for oestrogen receptor ? (ER?), PR and AR 38 , 44 , 47 . Protein kinase A (PKA) also phosphorylates SRC-2, resulting in a rapid increase in SRC-2 coactivator activity followed by accelerated SRC-2 degradation 48 , 49 . In SRC-3, seven Ser/Thr (Thr24, Ser505, Ser543, Ser601, Ser857, Ser860 and Ser867) and one Tyr (Tyr1357) phosphorylation sites are functionally important 40 , 41 , 50 . The kinases that phosphorylate and activate SRC-3 include MAPK, IKK, Akt (by inhibiting GSK3) and CK1?, suggesting a role for SRC-3 in accepting signals from multiple pathways. SRC-3 is also a target of the c-Abl tyrosine kinase that can be activated by oestrogen and growth factors. Phosphorylation of Tyr1357 by c-Abl facilitates SRC-3 action in mediating ER?, PR and NF-?B-dependent transcription by enhancing SRC-3 binding to p300 and transcription factors 50 . Importantly, Tyr1357 phosphorylation is elevated in ERBB2-induced mouse breast tumors, suggesting that phosphor-Tyr1357 plays a role in oncogenesis. Moreover, levels of SRC-3 Tyr1357 phosphorylation might serve as a marker for evaluating the efficacy of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Clinical studies have shown that SRC-3 expression levels are increased in a subset of breast tumors, and high SRC-3 levels are commonly associated with ERBB2 expression, tamoxifen resistance, disease recurrence and poor prognosis 51 – 53 . This unfavorable outcome can be explained by a series of linked molecular events. ERBB2 expression activates MAPK and Akt and causes phosphorylation of SRC-3 and ER, resulting in transcriptional activation and cell proliferation. Furthermore, Akt can stabilize SRC-3 by inhibiting GSK3 54 , suggesting a positive feedback mechanism between SRC-3 levels and Akt activity. Akt over activation is frequently observed in human cancers. Interestingly, SRC-3 function and cellular concentrations are counter-regulated by kinases and phosphatases. Phosphatases PDXP and PP2A dephosphorylate SRC-3, inhibit SRC-3 interaction with ER and reduce SRC-3 coactivator activity 55 . Phosphatase PP1 de-phosphorylates phospho-Serines 101 and 102, which decreases SRC-3 transcriptional activity and increases SRC-3 stability 55 ( Fig. 2 ). In contrast, atypical PKC (aPKC)-mediated SRC-3 phosphorylation stabilizes SRC-3 by targeting an acidic region of amino acid residues 1031–1097 and preventing SRC-3 from interacting with the C8 subunit of the 20S core proteasome 56 . Since both aPKC and SRC-3 are frequently overexpressed in cancers, they may synergistically promote carcinogenesis. The transcriptional activities of SRCs also are regulated by subcellular localization and intracellular trafficking. SRCs contain nuclear import and export signals and locate in both cytoplasm and nucleus 57 – 59 . Post translational modifications can alter the availability of SRCs in a subcellular compartment by regulating their nucleo-cytoplasmic trafficking. For example, TNF? and EGF-induced phopshorylation of SRC-3 causes its redistribution from cytoplasm to nucleus 60 , 61 .In the cytoplasm, oestrogen-induced SRC-3 phosphorylation leads to SRC-3 and ER? interaction, suggesting that activation of SRC-3 may play a role in oestrogen-induced non-genomic effects 62 . SRC-3 also is associated with and phosphorylated by IKK and c-Abl in the cytoplasm in response to TNF? or growth factor stimulation, indicating a role for SRC-3 in these kinase pathways 50 , 61 . Furthermore, SRC-3 can interact with TIA-1 and TIAR, two translational repressors associated with AU-rich regions in the 3’-UTR of cytokine mRNAs in the cytoplasm, thereby inhibiting translation of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-? mRNAs 63 .  Ubiquitination 26S proteasome-mediated degradation regulates the function of NRs and the turnover of activated NRs and SRCs 64 – 68 . Recently, two SCF-dependent mono-ubiquitination sites (Lys723 and Lys786) within the NR interaction domain of SRC-3 were identified 54 . Phosphorylation of Ser505 by GSK3 and Ser860 by p38 MAPK not only enhances SRC-3 interaction with ER and AR but also regulates its ubiquitination and protein stability 54 , 69 . Sequential phosphorylation-dependent mono- to poly-ubiquitination events couple transcriptional activation with SRC-3 degradation, ensuring a proper termination of transcription ( Fig. 2 ). In contrast to GSK3-mediated phosphorylation that causes SRC-3 degradation, aPKC-mediated SRC-3 phosphorylation protects SRC-3 from proteasomal degradation in an ER?-dependent manner, leading to an increased oestrogen-induced breast cancer cell growth 56 . Although the structure of the small ubiqitin-related modifier (SUMO) is similar to ubiquitin, the fate of a sumoylated protein is usually distinct from that of a ubiquitinated protein. Sumoylation can either antagonize SRC ubiquitination by targeting a common lysine substrate to prevent degradation and enhance its concentration, or change SRC into an inactive confirmation 70 – 76 ( Fig. 2 ). In addition to ubiquitin-dependent turnover, REG?, a proteasome activator that stimulates the trypsin-like activity of the 20S proteasome, binds and promotes SRC-3 degradation in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner 77 .  Acetylation and methylation The function of SRCs can be modulated by acetylation. After transcriptional initiation, SRC-3 is acetylated by p300/CBP, resulting in disassembly of the NR and SRC-3 complex and termination of transcription 78 ( Fig. 2 ). After initial stimulation, oestrogen treatment enhances CARM-1-mediated SRC-3 methylation on Arg1171 and terminates transcription by disassembling the SRC-3 coactivator complexes 79 and increasing SRC-3 degradation 80 ( Fig. 2 ).  Combined posttranslational modifications Different combinations of posttranslational modifications determine SRC coactivator potency and selectivity and allow SRCs to integrate multiple upstream signals into finely tuned regulation of gene expression. For example, retinoic acid and p38 MAPK-induced SRC-3 phosphorylation initially enhances SRC-3 interaction with retinoic acid receptor ? (RAR?) to activate transcription. Subsequently, the phosphorylated SRC-3 is subjected to ubiquitination and degradation, thereby leading to transcriptional termination. Another study demonstrated that phosphorylation of SRC-3 on Ser509 primed it for phosphorylation on Ser505. This then triggered SRC-3 mono- and subsequent poly-ubiquitination, which are responsible for activation and degradation of SRC-3, respectively 54 ( Fig. 2 ). Oestrogen-induced MAPK-dependent SRC-3 phosphorylation inhibited SRC-3 sumoylation conversely, de-phosphorylation increased SRC-3 sumoylation and decreased SRC-3 activity 76 . As ubiquitination and sumoylation can occur on the same lysine residue, different phosphorylation codes may determine whether SRC-3 is ubiquitinated or sumoylated, methylated or acetylated. As postranslational modifications largely influence both the cellular concentrations and the coactivator activities of SRCs, interventions that modulate SRC post translational modification have potential for controlling the detrimental roles of overexpressed SRCs in cancer.  <italic>In vivo</italic> functions of SRC Family Members Our knowledge of the diverse in vivo functions of the SRC family is primarily gleaned from the characterization of knockout mouse models ( Box 1 ). These studies indicate that each SRC family member has specific physiological functions. However, the additive severity of the phenotypes observed in double knockout mice indicates certain cooperative physiological functions among SRC family members. Most Src1 ?/?; Src2 ?/? mice do not survive and male and female Src1 +/?; Src2 ?/? mice are completely infertile 81 . SRC-1 and SRC-3 cooperatively regulate viability, metabolism and energy balance. Most Src1 ?/?; Src 3?/? mice die before birth, and mice that do survive exhibit compromised regulation of selective PPAR? target genes involved in adipogenesis and mitochondrial uncoupling, a higher leptin level, a developmental arrest in interscapular brown fat and a defect in adaptive thermogenesis. As a result, these mice eat more, but are lean and resistant to high-fat-diet-induced obesity due to a high basal metabolic rate and increased physical activity 82 .  SRC genes in cancer Each SRC has been found to be overexpressed in many types of human cancer, and in steroid hormone-promoted breast and prostate cancers in particular. Amplification of SRC1 or SRC2 is rare in cancers — by contrast, SRC3 on human chromosome 20q21 is more frequently amplified in cancer ( Table 2, a – c ). The precise mechanisms that underlie over expression of SRCs in human cancer are still unclear. Many studies have investigated the mechanisms through which SRCs promote carcinogenesis and indicate that SRCs have important and distinct roles in promoting cancer initiation, progression and metastasis through alterations of multiple signaling pathways ( Fig. 3 ).  SRC expression and function in breast cancer In normal human breast, the levels of the three SRC proteins in epithelial cells are variable, but they are usually low or undetectable as assayed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) 83 – 88 . A number of studies examined the expression profiles of SRC mRNA and protein levels in human breast tumors and these data are considered below alongside data from mouse models and cell lines. SRC1 Several studies demonstrated that SRC-1 protein is significantly elevated in 19% to 29% of breast tumors 83 – 86 . More importantly, SRC-1 elevation positively correlates with ERBB2 expression, lymph node metastasis, disease recurrence and poor disease-free survival (DFS) ( Table 2a ) 83 – 85 . Interestingly, a recent clinical study revealed elevated SRC-1 to be an excellent independent predictor of breast cancer recurrence following therapy 89 . In vitro , SRC-1 plays a role in cancer cell proliferation and invasion through multiple pathways. In MCF-7 breast cancer cells, SRC-1 overexpression potentiates cell growth stimulated by oestrogen in accordance with an increase in expression of oestrogen-responsive genes, indicating that SRC-1 plays an important role in oestrogen receptor-mediated cell growth 90 . In contrast, reduction of SRC-1 in MCF-7 cells decreases oestrogen-dependent DNA synthesis and the oestrogen-responsive pS2 gene expression 91 . Interestingly, MUC1, an ER? interactive protein overexpressed in breast carcinomas, can stimulate ER?-mediated transcription by aiding SRC-1 recruitment to oestrogen-responsive promoters, suggesting that SRC-1 acts in MUC1-stimulated cell growth 92 . Furthermore, MCF-7 cells lacking SRC-1 do not show increases in oestrogen-induced SDF-1? expression and cell proliferation and invasion, suggesting that SRC-1 may regulate cell proliferation and invasion through autocrine/paracrine activity of the SDF-1?–CXCL12 signaling pathway 93 . In MMTV-polyoma middle T (PyMT) mammary tumor-prone mice, SRC-1 levels are increased during tumorigenesis. Knockout of Src1 does not affect PyMT-induced mammary tumor initiation and growth, but it helps to maintain epithelial differentiation and polarity, and importantly, prevents tumor cell metastasis to the lung. Further analyses revealed that SRC-1 deficiency reduced ERBB2 expression and Akt activation and also inhibited colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) expression and macrophage recruitment to the tumor site 94 . In addition, a recent study demonstrated that SRC-1 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), migration, invasion and metastasis of mammary tumor cells by coactivating PEA3-mediated Twist expression 95 . SRC2 One study reported no significant change in the levels of SRC-2 protein in breast tumors, while another study reported the correlation of SRC-2 with cyclin D1 expression in ER?+ breast tumors 86 , 96 ( Table 2b ). In MCF-7 breast cancer cells, knockdown of SRC-2 reduces oestrogen-induced cell proliferation and target gene expression 91 and like SRC-1, SRC-2 overexpression may also promote cell proliferation and invasion through inducing SDF-1? expression 93 . SRC3 In separate studies of breast tumors, the frequencies of SRC3 amplification were 9.5% as measured by FISH 11 and 4.8% as measured by Southern blot 97 . The levels of SRC-3 mRNA and protein in breast cancer have been extensively analyzed. SRC-3 mRNA overexpression was found in 64% 11 , 31.6% 98 , 31% 51 and 13% 99 of independent breast tumor cohorts. SRC-3 protein overproduction was identified in 9.8% 87 and 20% 86 of two different breast tumor cohorts. Interestingly, SRC-3 overexpression in breast cancer usually correlates with the expression of ERBB2, matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2), MMP9 and PEA3 and with larger tumor size, higher tumor grade, and/or poor DFS 11 , 51 , 52 , 86 , 88 , 96 – 98 ( Table 2c ). In tamoxifen-treated patients, high levels of SRC-3 expression are associated with tamoxifen resistance and a poorer DFS. Importantly, patients with high levels of both SRC-3 and ERBB2 exhibit early and severe resistance to selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERM) therapy 52 . As ERBB2 activates MAPK, which in turn phosphorylates ER and activates SRC-3 100 , the overexpression of both ERBB2 and SRC-3 significantly enhances the agonist activity of tamoxifen and therefore, reduces its antitumor activity in patients with breast cancer 101 . In breast cancer cells, SRC-3 can be recruited to the oestrogen responsive CCND1 promoter to enhance cyclin D1 expression 102 – depletion of SRC-3 in MCF-7 cells significantly reduces oestrogen-mediated cell proliferation and survival. Down-regulation of SRC-3 in MCF-7 cells also reduces oestrogen-dependent colony formation in soft agar and tumor growth in nude mice 103 . The in vivo role of SRC-3 in breast cancer initiation and progression has been investigated in multiple mouse models. In mice harboring the MMTV–v -ras ( ras ) transgene, breast tumor incidence was reduced dramatically in Src3 ?/?; ras virgin mice and inhibited completely in ovariectomized Src3 ?/?; ras mice 104 . Breast tumor latency and growth were delayed significantly in Src3 ?/?; ras virgin mice with natural oestrous cycles, multiparous mice with cyclically elevated reproductive hormones and virgin mice bearing pituitary isografts with persistently elevated hormones. Interestingly, SRC-3 deficiency did not alter the expression of oestrogen and progesterone-responsive genes in the mammary gland and tumors, but it caused partial resistance to insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1) because of a significant reduction in insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) and IRS-2. The impaired IGF-I signaling pathway in Src3 ?/?; ras mammary epithelium and tumor cells may be responsible in part for the suppression of mammary tumorigenesis and metastasis. In a second model, the role of SRC-3 in susceptibility of the mammary gland to chemical carcinogens was characterized 105 . This study demonstrated that mammary ductal outgrowths emanating from the Src3 ?/? mammary epithelial transplants in WT mice were attenuated, indicating that the role of SRC-3 in mammary ductal growth is mammary epithelial cell autonomous. In mice treated with the chemical carcinogen 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA), SRC-3 deficiency protected the mammary gland, but not the skin, from tumorigenesis. In this model, SRC-3 deficiency also suppressed the up-regulation of both IRS-1 and IRS-2 and thereby inhibited the activation of Akt, the expression of cyclin D1 and cell proliferation. In a third model, the role of SRC-3 in breast tumorigenesis was assessed in MMTV- Erbb2 -induced mammary tumorigenesis in WT and Src3 ?/? mice 106 . This study showed that ERBB2-induced mammary tumor development was significantly delayed in Src3 +/? mice and completely suppressed in Src3 ?/? mice. In comparison with WT; Erbb2 tumors, Src3 +/?; Erbb2 tumors exhibited a decrease in phosphorylated ERBB2, cyclin D1 and cyclin E, reduced activity of Akt and JNK, and decreased cell proliferation. These findings suggest that SRC-3 is required for ERBB2 oncogenic activity and SRC-3 reduction in the mammary epithelium should potentiate therapies aimed at inhibiting ERBB2 signaling in breast cancer 106 . In a fourth model, the role of SRC-3 in breast cancer metastasis was investigated by using MMTV-PyMT mice 88 . This study demonstrated that genetic ablation of Src3 in MMTV-PyMT mice significantly reduced lung metastasis and the effect was cell autonomous. Cellular and molecular analyses revealed that SRC-3 interacted with PEA3 and directly enhanced the activity of the MMP2 and MMP9 promoters and increased the expression of MMP2 and MMP9 in WT;PyMT tumor cells. Therefore, SRC-3 can aid breast cancer metastasis through MMP2- and MMP9-mediated EMT and cell invasiveness. This correlates with data from human breast tumors where SRC-3 expression is associated with high PEA3, MMP2 and MMP9 expression levels 88 . Finally and importantly, the oncogenic role of SRC-3 overexpression in the mammary gland was directly demonstrated by generating and characterizing MMTV- Src3 transgenic mice. This study demonstrated that SRC-3 overexpression caused mammary hypertrophy, hyperplasia, abnormal post-weaning involution, and the spontaneous development of malignant mammary tumors. Tumor incidence was increased in other organs, including the pituitary and uterus 107 . In agreement with the down-regulation of the IGF-I signaling pathway in Src3 ?/?; ras mammary tumors 104 , SRC-3 overexpression-induced mammary tumors have a hyperactive IGF-I signaling pathway 107 . In summary, consensus results indicate that both SRC-1 and SRC-3 are overexpressed in a subpopulation of breast cancers without clear relevance to ER and PR expression. Overproduction of SRC-1 and SRC-3 are generally detrimental to patients. SRC-2 expression profiles in breast cancer are less conclusive due to lack of sufficient data. Data from mouse models and cell lines indicate that SRC-1 and SRC-3 have important functions in breast cancer, including tumour initiation and progression. Data from SRC-3 mouse models highlight the oncogenic nature of this protein when its expression is deregulated.  SRC1 Several studies demonstrated that SRC-1 protein is significantly elevated in 19% to 29% of breast tumors 83 – 86 . More importantly, SRC-1 elevation positively correlates with ERBB2 expression, lymph node metastasis, disease recurrence and poor disease-free survival (DFS) ( Table 2a ) 83 – 85 . Interestingly, a recent clinical study revealed elevated SRC-1 to be an excellent independent predictor of breast cancer recurrence following therapy 89 . In vitro , SRC-1 plays a role in cancer cell proliferation and invasion through multiple pathways. In MCF-7 breast cancer cells, SRC-1 overexpression potentiates cell growth stimulated by oestrogen in accordance with an increase in expression of oestrogen-responsive genes, indicating that SRC-1 plays an important role in oestrogen receptor-mediated cell growth 90 . In contrast, reduction of SRC-1 in MCF-7 cells decreases oestrogen-dependent DNA synthesis and the oestrogen-responsive pS2 gene expression 91 . Interestingly, MUC1, an ER? interactive protein overexpressed in breast carcinomas, can stimulate ER?-mediated transcription by aiding SRC-1 recruitment to oestrogen-responsive promoters, suggesting that SRC-1 acts in MUC1-stimulated cell growth 92 . Furthermore, MCF-7 cells lacking SRC-1 do not show increases in oestrogen-induced SDF-1? expression and cell proliferation and invasion, suggesting that SRC-1 may regulate cell proliferation and invasion through autocrine/paracrine activity of the SDF-1?–CXCL12 signaling pathway 93 . In MMTV-polyoma middle T (PyMT) mammary tumor-prone mice, SRC-1 levels are increased during tumorigenesis. Knockout of Src1 does not affect PyMT-induced mammary tumor initiation and growth, but it helps to maintain epithelial differentiation and polarity, and importantly, prevents tumor cell metastasis to the lung. Further analyses revealed that SRC-1 deficiency reduced ERBB2 expression and Akt activation and also inhibited colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) expression and macrophage recruitment to the tumor site 94 . In addition, a recent study demonstrated that SRC-1 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), migration, invasion and metastasis of mammary tumor cells by coactivating PEA3-mediated Twist expression 95 .  SRC2 One study reported no significant change in the levels of SRC-2 protein in breast tumors, while another study reported the correlation of SRC-2 with cyclin D1 expression in ER?+ breast tumors 86 , 96 ( Table 2b ). In MCF-7 breast cancer cells, knockdown of SRC-2 reduces oestrogen-induced cell proliferation and target gene expression 91 and like SRC-1, SRC-2 overexpression may also promote cell proliferation and invasion through inducing SDF-1? expression 93 .  SRC3 In separate studies of breast tumors, the frequencies of SRC3 amplification were 9.5% as measured by FISH 11 and 4.8% as measured by Southern blot 97 . The levels of SRC-3 mRNA and protein in breast cancer have been extensively analyzed. SRC-3 mRNA overexpression was found in 64% 11 , 31.6% 98 , 31% 51 and 13% 99 of independent breast tumor cohorts. SRC-3 protein overproduction was identified in 9.8% 87 and 20% 86 of two different breast tumor cohorts. Interestingly, SRC-3 overexpression in breast cancer usually correlates with the expression of ERBB2, matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2), MMP9 and PEA3 and with larger tumor size, higher tumor grade, and/or poor DFS 11 , 51 , 52 , 86 , 88 , 96 – 98 ( Table 2c ). In tamoxifen-treated patients, high levels of SRC-3 expression are associated with tamoxifen resistance and a poorer DFS. Importantly, patients with high levels of both SRC-3 and ERBB2 exhibit early and severe resistance to selective oestrogen receptor modulators (SERM) therapy 52 . As ERBB2 activates MAPK, which in turn phosphorylates ER and activates SRC-3 100 , the overexpression of both ERBB2 and SRC-3 significantly enhances the agonist activity of tamoxifen and therefore, reduces its antitumor activity in patients with breast cancer 101 . In breast cancer cells, SRC-3 can be recruited to the oestrogen responsive CCND1 promoter to enhance cyclin D1 expression 102 – depletion of SRC-3 in MCF-7 cells significantly reduces oestrogen-mediated cell proliferation and survival. Down-regulation of SRC-3 in MCF-7 cells also reduces oestrogen-dependent colony formation in soft agar and tumor growth in nude mice 103 . The in vivo role of SRC-3 in breast cancer initiation and progression has been investigated in multiple mouse models. In mice harboring the MMTV–v -ras ( ras ) transgene, breast tumor incidence was reduced dramatically in Src3 ?/?; ras virgin mice and inhibited completely in ovariectomized Src3 ?/?; ras mice 104 . Breast tumor latency and growth were delayed significantly in Src3 ?/?; ras virgin mice with natural oestrous cycles, multiparous mice with cyclically elevated reproductive hormones and virgin mice bearing pituitary isografts with persistently elevated hormones. Interestingly, SRC-3 deficiency did not alter the expression of oestrogen and progesterone-responsive genes in the mammary gland and tumors, but it caused partial resistance to insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1) because of a significant reduction in insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) and IRS-2. The impaired IGF-I signaling pathway in Src3 ?/?; ras mammary epithelium and tumor cells may be responsible in part for the suppression of mammary tumorigenesis and metastasis. In a second model, the role of SRC-3 in susceptibility of the mammary gland to chemical carcinogens was characterized 105 . This study demonstrated that mammary ductal outgrowths emanating from the Src3 ?/? mammary epithelial transplants in WT mice were attenuated, indicating that the role of SRC-3 in mammary ductal growth is mammary epithelial cell autonomous. In mice treated with the chemical carcinogen 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA), SRC-3 deficiency protected the mammary gland, but not the skin, from tumorigenesis. In this model, SRC-3 deficiency also suppressed the up-regulation of both IRS-1 and IRS-2 and thereby inhibited the activation of Akt, the expression of cyclin D1 and cell proliferation. In a third model, the role of SRC-3 in breast tumorigenesis was assessed in MMTV- Erbb2 -induced mammary tumorigenesis in WT and Src3 ?/? mice 106 . This study showed that ERBB2-induced mammary tumor development was significantly delayed in Src3 +/? mice and completely suppressed in Src3 ?/? mice. In comparison with WT; Erbb2 tumors, Src3 +/?; Erbb2 tumors exhibited a decrease in phosphorylated ERBB2, cyclin D1 and cyclin E, reduced activity of Akt and JNK, and decreased cell proliferation. These findings suggest that SRC-3 is required for ERBB2 oncogenic activity and SRC-3 reduction in the mammary epithelium should potentiate therapies aimed at inhibiting ERBB2 signaling in breast cancer 106 . In a fourth model, the role of SRC-3 in breast cancer metastasis was investigated by using MMTV-PyMT mice 88 . This study demonstrated that genetic ablation of Src3 in MMTV-PyMT mice significantly reduced lung metastasis and the effect was cell autonomous. Cellular and molecular analyses revealed that SRC-3 interacted with PEA3 and directly enhanced the activity of the MMP2 and MMP9 promoters and increased the expression of MMP2 and MMP9 in WT;PyMT tumor cells. Therefore, SRC-3 can aid breast cancer metastasis through MMP2- and MMP9-mediated EMT and cell invasiveness. This correlates with data from human breast tumors where SRC-3 expression is associated with high PEA3, MMP2 and MMP9 expression levels 88 . Finally and importantly, the oncogenic role of SRC-3 overexpression in the mammary gland was directly demonstrated by generating and characterizing MMTV- Src3 transgenic mice. This study demonstrated that SRC-3 overexpression caused mammary hypertrophy, hyperplasia, abnormal post-weaning involution, and the spontaneous development of malignant mammary tumors. Tumor incidence was increased in other organs, including the pituitary and uterus 107 . In agreement with the down-regulation of the IGF-I signaling pathway in Src3 ?/?; ras mammary tumors 104 , SRC-3 overexpression-induced mammary tumors have a hyperactive IGF-I signaling pathway 107 . In summary, consensus results indicate that both SRC-1 and SRC-3 are overexpressed in a subpopulation of breast cancers without clear relevance to ER and PR expression. Overproduction of SRC-1 and SRC-3 are generally detrimental to patients. SRC-2 expression profiles in breast cancer are less conclusive due to lack of sufficient data. Data from mouse models and cell lines indicate that SRC-1 and SRC-3 have important functions in breast cancer, including tumour initiation and progression. Data from SRC-3 mouse models highlight the oncogenic nature of this protein when its expression is deregulated.  Prostate cancer The expression profiles of SRC family members have been investigated in prostate tumors ( Table 2, a – c ). Amplification of SRC-1 is rare in human tumors and one study reported that SRC1 was amplified in only 2 out of 70 specimens that included prostate cancer cell lines, xenografts and primary tumors 108 . However, several studies have found that the expression levels of both SRC-1 mRNA and protein are positively correlated with prostate tumor grades 109 – 111 . In addition, one study found more nuclear localized SRC-1 protein in androgen-independent prostate tumors 108 , while another study using quantitative RT-PCR failed to detect significant correlations between SRC-1 mRNA and prostate tumor progression 112 . Overall, SRC-1 is thought to be elevated in certain prostate tumors, but its overexpression frequency has not been accurately determined. In prostate cancer cells, SRC-1 is able to enhance AR-mediated cell proliferation in culture. Src1 knockdown inhibits proliferation of the androgen-dependent LNCaP cells in culture. More interestingly, SRC-1 knockdown inhibits the growth of C4-2 prostate cancer cells that depend on AR for growth in androgen-depleted medium 109 . However, reduction of SRC-1 has no effect on the growth of the AR-negative PC-3 and DU145 prostate cancer cells 109 . These results suggest that SRC-1 promotes prostate cancer growth through enhancing AR function in an androgen-dependent and -independent manner. The in vivo role of SRC-1 in prostate cancer has been investigated in transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice harboring the SV40 large and small T antigen transgene driven by a probasin promoter 113 . During prostate carcinogenesis, SRC-1 protein levels remained constant in prostate tumors of TRAMP mice. TRAMP; Src1 ?/? mice exhibited similar prostate tumor initiation, progression and metastasis when compared to that observed in WT mice. Interestingly, in both WT and Src1 ?/? TRAMP mice, prostate carcinogenesis induced SRC-3 overexpression. Thus, the role of SRC-1 in murine prostate carcinogenesis may be nonessential due to possible compensations from SRC-3 or overexpression of other coactivators. SRC-2 expression in prostate tumors was found to be elevated but the frequency of SRC-2 overexpression has not been characterized well. It was reported that SRC-2 expression in a subgroup of prostate cancer was positively associated with high tumor cell proliferation, high tumor grade and/or disease recurrence 110 , 114 . In AR-positive prostate cancer cells, high levels of androgen repress SRC-2 expression. Depletion of SRC-2 reduces AR target gene expression, and inhibits proliferation of AR-dependent and AR-independent prostate cancer cells, suggesting that SRC-2 also enhances prostate cancer cell growth through both AR-dependent and AR-independent pathways 114 . SRC-3 expression in prostate tumors has been examined in two studies. One study with a small number of samples found that SRC-3 protein was overproduced in 38% of tumor samples 115 . The other study with a large number of tumor samples found that SRC-3 levels were positively correlated with increasing PSA levels indicating tumour recurrence, Akt activation and tumor cell proliferation 116 . In prostate cancer cells, SRC-3 activates the Akt–mTOR signaling pathway and stimulates cell growth by increasing cell size. SRC-3 knockdown decreases cancer cell proliferation and xenograft tumor growth in nude mice and increases apoptosis 116 , 117 . The role of SRC-3 in spontaneous prostate cancer was investigated by comparing tumor initiation and progression in TRAMP and TRAMP; Src3 ?/? mice 118 . SRC-3 was nonessential for normal androgen–AR-dependent prostate growth and high levels of SRC-3 expression were found in stromal and basal cells, but not in luminal epithelial cells. Of note, high levels of SRC-3 expression were detected in prostate tumor cells during progression toward more malignant stages. In agreement with this finding, development of prostate epithelial hyperplasia and the initiation of well-differentiated tumors were not affected by loss of SRC3, but it efficiently arrested prostate tumor growth and progression at the well-differentiated stage and significantly extended the animal life 118 . These results indicate that de novo induction of SRC-3 expression in partially transformed epithelial cells is essential for progression of prostate tumorigenesis into poorly differentiated carcinoma. Inhibition of SRC-3 expression or function in the prostate epithelium may be a potential strategy to suppress prostate cancer progression. Taken together, these findings suggest that overexpressed SRC family members have detrimental roles in promotion of prostate cancer initiation and progression.  Other cancers The expression profiles of SRC family members in other types of cancers are summarized in Table 2, a – c ). Briefly, in colorectal cancer, high levels of SRC-3 protein were detected in 35% tumors and were positively associated with tumor grades 119 . In endometrial carcinoma, one study reported an increase in SRC-1 and SRC-2 mRNAs 120 , while another study reported a decrease in SRC-1 protein 121 . SRC-3 mRNA and protein levels were found to be increased in endometrial carcinomas, and various overexpression frequencies were reported in different studies 99 , 120 , 122 . SRC-3 overexpression was detected in 46% of esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and 40% of gastric cancers, and SRC-3 expression levels were positively associated with higher cell proliferation, metastasis and poor prognosis 123 , 124 . Up-regulated SRC-3 protein was found in 64% of high-grade ovarian cancer specimens and 65% of pancreatic cancer specimens; SRC-3 levels in these cancers were positively correlated with disease degrees 125 , 126 . An abnormal chromosomal rearrangement of inv(8)(p11p13) has been identified in a subset of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 127 , 128 . This rearrangement results in a fusion between the 5’ portion of MOZ mRNA and the 3’ portion of SRC2 mRNA; the fusion encodes a transcriptional activator domain that binds nucleosomes through MOZ and recruits CBP through a SRC-2 domain 127 – 129 . MOZ–SRC-2-transduced myeloid progenitors can be continuously passaged in culture and induce acute myeloid leukemia in vivo 130 . These findings reinforce the concept that deregulation of a transcriptional coactivator can lead to malignant disease in humans. Intriguingly, one study reported that SRC-3 could inhibit I?B kinase to stabilize I?B and suppress NF-?B activation in the lymphoid lineage 131 . Genetic ablation of SRC-3 resulted in the release of I?B kinase inhibition and constitutive NF-?B activation. Consequently, a subset of old Src3 ?/? mice developed lymphocyte proliferation and spontaneous ?-cell lymphoma 131 . Another study demonstrated that SRC-3 deficiency in macrophages did not affect NF-?B-mediated gene transcription, but inhibited the production of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-? at the translational level 63 . It is currently unknown if the increased inflammatory cytokines in Src3 ?/? mice are responsible in part for the development of ?-cell lymphoma. Taken together, these findings suggest that SRC-3 regulates cell proliferation in a cellular and signaling context-dependent manner, ranging from proliferative and tumorigenenic effects in most endocrine target organ epithelial cells to paradoxical antiproliferative effects in lymphoid cells. Overall, one can conclude that miss-expression of SRC family members occurs not only in steroid hormone-promoted breast and prostate cancers but also in steroid-independent cancers, suggesting SRC family members promote carcinogenesis through both steroid dependent and independent pathways.  Summary and perspectives Since SRC-1 was identified as a NR coactivator in 1995 6 , the NR coregulator field has experienced an explosion in research aimed at understanding the mechanism of NR coactivator function, much of which has been applied to studies of hormone-related cancers. Emanating from these studies, many previously unknown proteins such as SRCs, MTA1 and PGC-1 have been found to be ‘Master Genetic Regulators’ 2 . In this review, we have summarized our present knowledge about the molecular features, post translational modifications ( Fig. 2 ), interactive proteins ( Table 1 ), molecular targets and physiological functions of SRCs. By interacting with and coactivating most NRs and certain other transcription factors, SRCs coordinate expression of many genes directed to accomplishing larger physiological goals. Importantly, overexpression of SRC-3 in mammary epithelial cells has been shown to be sufficient to induce spontaneous mammary tumors in mice, indicating that overexpression of SRC-3 is oncogenic 107 . Conversely, knockout of SRC-3 in mice suppresses oncogene- and carcinogen-induced breast cancer initiation, progression and metastasis 88 , 104 – 106 . However, knockout of SRC-3 only inhibits prostate cancer progression and metastasis and does not affect the initiation of prostate tumorigenesis in TRAMP mice 118 . Interestingly, knockout of SRC-1 only suppresses mammary tumor metastasis without affecting primary tumor formation, and does not affect prostate cancer initiation and progression 94 , 95 , suggesting differing contributions from SRC-1 and SRC-3. Many studies have investigated the mechanisms responsible for SRCs to promote carcinogenesis. These studies revealed that SRC-1 can enhance the expression of ERBB2, colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) and TWIST expression to promote breast cancer metastasis 94 , 95 . SRC-3 overexpression can enhance v- ras -mediated cell transformation and activate ER?, EGFR and cyclin D1 expression, as well as the Akt pathway, MMPs and FAK to promote tumor initiation, growth and metastasis 88 , 102 , 104 – 106 , 117 , 132 , 133 . Although progress has been made in understanding the function of SRCs in various cancers and the molecular mechanisms by which SRCs influence carcinogenesis, important questions remain to be addressed. First, the molecular mechanisms responsible for SRC-1 and SRC-3 gene amplification and mRNA overexpression in cancers are still not fully understood. A limited number of studies suggested that SRC-3 elevation in cancers might be attributed to both transcriptional activation and posttranslational stabilization. On one hand, SRC-3 serves as a coactivator for E2F1, which drives cell proliferation 134 , 135 . Both E2F1 and SRC-3 can be tethered to the proximal region of the SRC-3 gene promoter through interacting with SP1, which enhances SRC-3 mRNA transcription. In this manner, E2F1 and SRC-3 form a positive regulatory loop that can constitutively enhance SRC-3 overexpression in cancer cells ( Fig. 3 ) 136 . On the other hand, regulation of SRC-3 protein stability by posttranslational modifications represents another important mechanism for increasing SRC-3 protein levels in cancer (reviewed in preceding sections). Further investigations on the molecular mechanisms responsible for the miss-expression of SRC-3 and other SRC family members may provide approaches to reprogram their expression levels for cancer therapy. Second, although some genes important for carcinogenesis and metastasis have been identified as SRC-regulated genes, a complete catalog of the direct targets of SRCs in cancer cells is still unavailable. Characterization of all SRC target genes and a proteomic profile of the transcription factors that work with SRCs will provide important insights into the gene networks and pathways used by SRCs to promote carcinogenesis. Third, most in vivo experiments to date have been carried out in knockout mice where certain systemic effects, such as changes in IGF-1 activity, exist. It will be important to further assess and validate the roles of SRCs in carcinogenesis by greater use of conditional knockout mice 137 , 138 with cell type-specific Src ablations. In addition, development of stage-specific inactivation (or overexpression) of SRCs in breast and prostate tumors in mice will allow us to determine if SRCs are stage-dependent therapeutic targets. Finally, the most challenging of all tasks will be to translate the knowledge obtained from basic research to clinical applications and to develop clinically deliverable reagents that can counteract the excessive SRC activities in SRC-promoted cancers. Online 'at-a-glance' summary SRC-1 was the first cloned steroid receptor coactivator that interacts with steroid hormone receptors to promote transcriptional activation in a hormone-dependent manner. The p160 SRC family contains three homologous members, SRC-1, SRC-2 and SRC-3. These SRCs interact with nuclear receptors and certain other transcription factors and recruit chromatin-remodeling and other transcriptional enzymes to facilitate the assembly of general transcription factors for transcriptional activation. SRCs are targets of multiple signaling pathways for posttranslational modifications. These posttranslational modifications determine or modulate SRC protein stability, subcellular localization, functional specificity, coactivator activity and/or coactivator complex assembly or disassembly. The phenotypes of knockout mice for individual and combinatorial SRC family genes revealed that SRCs are involved in many physiological processes and each SRC has both specific and redundant physiological functions in development and organ function. SRC-1 expression is elevated in a subset of breast cancers and is positively correlated with ERBB2 positivity and poor disease-free survival rate. Knockdown of SRC-1 in breast cancer cells inhibits cell proliferation. Knockout of SRC-1 in MMTV-PyMT mice suppresses metastasis without affecting primary tumor formation. SRC-1 promotes breast cancer metastasis through upregulating ERBB2, CSF-1 and Twist expression. Both gene amplification and overexpression of SRC-3 are present in a subset of breast cancers. SRC-3 overexpression usually correlates with the expression of ERBB2, MMP2, MMP9 and PEA3 and with larger tumor size, higher tumor grade, and/or poor disease-free survival. SRC-3 plays an important role to promote breast tumor cell proliferation, migration, invasion and metastasis through many mechanisms such as enhancing ER? and E2F1 functions, IGF-I signaling pathway, EGF receptor and ERBB2 activation, as well as the expression of MMPs. Knockout of SRC-3 in mice suppresses mammary tumor initiation, growth and metastasis, while overexpression of SRC-3 in mouse mammary epithelial cells is sufficient to induce spontaneous mammary tumorigenesis. SRC-3 expression is elevated during prostate tumorigenesis in mice. Knockout of SRC-3 efficiently arrests prostate tumor progression at a well-differentiated stage.  Figures and Tables Fig. 1 Molecular structure of SRCs and their functional mechanisms in steroid hormone-induced gene expression. The locations of basic structural and functional domains of SRCs are indicated. Upon hormone (H) binding, the hormone nuclear receptors (NR) expose their coactivator-binding motifs in their ligand-binding domains and allow SRCs to be recruited to the enhancer region of the NR target genes. SRCs further interact with CBP, p300, p/CAF, CARM1 and PRMT1 and recruit these common coactivators to the chromatin to build up a steroid receptor-directed transcriptional activation complex. This protein complex uses its protein acetyltransferase and methyltransferase activities to remodel the chromatin structure and to facilitate the assembly of general transcription factors and RNA polymerase II on the promoter for transcriptional activation. Of note, in addition to interactions between NR and the NRID domain of SRCs, interactions between NR and the bHLH/PAS domain of SRCs have been documented and may be important for function (see dotted line with arrowheads). Abbreviations: NRID, NR interaction domain; AD1 and AD2, activation domains 1 and 2; bHLH/PAS, the basis helix-loop-helix/Per-Ah receptor nuclear translocator-Sim domain; S/T, the serine and threonine-rich domain; L, L and L, the three LXXLL motifs responsible for interaction with nuclear receptors; Q, the glutamine-rich region; HAT, the histone acetyltransferase domain; CBP, the CREB ( c AMP response element-binding protein) binding protein; p300, the 300 kDa protein homologous to CBP; p/CAF, the p300 and CBP-associated factor; CARM1, the coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1; PRMT1, the protein arginine methyltransferase 1; TBP, the TATA binding protein; TAFIIs, TBP-associated general transcription factors (GTFs); Pol II, RNA polymerase II. Fig. 2 Posttranslational modifications of SRCs In general, phosphorylation results in activation of SRCs. In the case of SRC-3, phosphorylation determines the selectivity of SRC-3 for different transcription factors, promotes sequential ubiquitination of SRC-3 from mono-ubiquitination (activation) to poly-ubiquitination (degradation), and controls the duration of transcriptional activation by SRC-3. Conversely, de-phosphorylation by phosphatase (PPase) promotes SRC-3 sumoylation, stabilizes SRC-3 protein, and inhibits SRC-3 activity. Depending on specific kinases and phosphorylation sites, phosphorylation could either increase or decrease SRC-3 stability and cellular levels. Sumoylation enhances SRC-1 and SRC-2 activities (the “?” indicates that the conclusion is based on a limited amount of data), but it inhibits SRC-3 activity. SRC-3 acetylation and methylation cause a disassembly of the transcription complex and promote transcriptional termination. Fig. 3 SRCs promote carcinogenesis through multiple pathways Extracellular signals and their signaling pathways cause posttranslational modifications of SRCs, which regulate the cellular concentrations, activities and specificities of SRCs. In general, SRCs enhance steroid receptor functions and facilitate hormonal promotion of breast, prostate and ovarian cancers. Specifically, SRC-1 enhances Ets-2-mediated HER2 expression and PEA3-mediated Twist expression and upregulates CSF-1 expression to promote breast tumor cell migration, invasion and metastasis. MOZ and SRC-2 fusion gene causes AML (acute myeloid leukemia). SRC-3 upregulates its own expression through serving as a coactivator for E2F1 and SP1. The overexpressed SRC-3 enhances PEA3 and AP-1 mediated MMP expression to promote breast and prostate tumor cell metastasis. SRC-3 also enhances E2F1-mediated cell cycle progression and Gab2 expression that activates Akt. In addition, SRC-3 upregulates IGF-I, IRS-1 and IRS-2 to promote the IGF-I signaling pathway and to activate EGFR and ERBB2 to enhance Akt and MAPK activities, resulting in hyperactivation of Akt and MAPK which contribute to cancer cell proliferation, growth, survival, migration, invasion and metastasis. Table 1 List of proteins that interact with SRCs Categories Functional consequence Method of detection References Transcription factors Nuclear receptors activation Co-IP, in vitro 150 , 151 AhR/ARNT activation Co-IP, in vitro 152 – 154 AP-1 activation Yeast 2-hybrid, in vitro 155 Brn-3 activation Co-IP 156 ?-catenin activation Mammalian 2-hybrid, in vitro 157 c-Ets activation Co-IP 158 E2F1 activation Co-IP, in vitro 135 HNF4 activation Yeast 2-hybrid 159 , 160 IRF3 activation Yeast 2-hybrid 161 MEF-2C activation Mammalian 2-hybrid, Co-IP, in vitro 18 NF-?B activation Co-IP 162 Smad3 activation Co-IP, mammalian 1-hybrid 163 Tat activation Co-IP, in vitro 164 TEF-4 activation Yeast 2-hybrid, in vitro 17 TTF1 activation in vitro 165 Oncogene/Tumor suppressor HPV E7 suppression Co-IP, in vitro 166 p53 activation in vitro 167 Rb activation Co-IP, in vitro 168 Kinase/Phosphatase aPKC phosphorylation, stabilization Co-IP 56 c-Abl phosphoryaltion, activation Co-IP 50 GSK3 phosphorylation, activation, degradation enzyme-substrate interaction 54 IKK phosphorylation, activation Co-IP 61 MAPK phosphorylation, activation enzyme-substrate interaction 42 , 69 PDXP dephosphorylation, suppression enzyme-substrate interaction 55 PKA phosphorylation, activation enzyme-substrate interaction 43 , 169 PP1 dephosphorylation, stabilization enzyme-substrate interaction 55 PP2A dephosphorylation, suppression enzyme-substrate interaction 55 Ub/Sumo enzymes ARIP3/PIASx? sumoylation, activation in vitro 74 E6AP ubiquitination, degradation Co-IP, in vitro 170 Fbw7 ubiquitination, activation, degradation Co-IP 54 UBCH7 activation Co-IP, in vitro 171 Coregulators ANCOS suppression Yeast 2-hybrid, Co-IP, in vitro 172 ASC activation Yeast 2-hybrid, in vitro 173 CARM1 activation, methylation, suppression Yeast 2-hybrid, Co-IP 174 CoCoA activation Co-IP, in vitro 15 GAC63 activation Co-IP, in vitro 14 GCN5 activation Co-IP, yeast 2-hybrid 23 MMS19 activation Yeast 2-hybrid, in vitro 175 p300/CBP activation, acetylation, suppression Co-IP, in vitro 35 PGC1 activation in vitro 142 Others Cyclin T1 activation in vitro 164 FLASH activation, suppression Yeast 2-hybrid, in vitro 176 , 177 GAS activation in vitro 178 JAB1 activation Yeast 2-hybrid, in vitro 179 Pin1 activation, degradation in vitro 180 REG? degradation Co-IP 77 SRA activation IP 181 TIA, TIAR translational inhibition Co-IP, in vitro 63 This is an incomplete list of SRC interactive proteins representing distinct categories. Co-IP, coimmunoprecipitation; IP, immunoprecipitation; in vitro, in vitro protein-protein interaction assay; AhR/ARNT, aryl hydrocarbon receptor/aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator; AP-1, activator protein 1; Brn-3, POU domain, class 4, transcription factor 1; c-Ets, mammalian protooncogene homologue of the avian v-ets; E2F1, E2F transcription factor 1; HNF4, hepatic nuclear factor 4; IRF3, interferon regulatory factor 3; MEF-2C, myelin basic protein expression factor 2; NF-?B, nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells 1; Smad3, MAD homolog 3; Tat, Human immunodeficiency virus transactivator protein; TEF-4, transcriptional enhancer factor family of transcription factors; TTF1, thyroid transcription factor 1; p53, transformation related protein 53; Rb, retinoblastoma 1; APKC, atypical protein kinase C; c-Abl, c-abl oncogene 1, receptor tyrosine kinase; GSK3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; IKK, inhibitor of kappaB kinase; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; PDXP, pyridoxal (pyridoxine, vitamin B6) phosphatase; PKA, protein kinase A; PP1, protein phosphatase 1; PP2A, protein phosphatase 2; ARIP3/PIASx?, protein inhibitor of activated STAT 2; E6AP, ubiquitin protein ligase E3A; Fbw7, F-box and WD-40 domain protein 7; UBCH7, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2L 3; ANCOS, ankyrin repeats containing cofactors; ASC, Activating signal cointegrator 1; CARM1, coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1; CoCoA, calcium binding and coiled coil domain 1; GAC63, solute carrier family 30 (zinc transporter), member 9; GCN5, lysine acetyltransferase 2A; MMS19, MET18 S. cerevisiae; p300/CBP, E1A binding protein p300/CREB binding protein; PGC1, peroxisome proliferative activated receptor, gamma, coactivator 1; FLASH, caspase 8 associated protein 2; GAS, glutamate-rich coactivator interacting with SRC1; JAB1, JUN activation binding protein 1; Pin1, protein (peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase) NIMA-interacting 1; REG?, proteaseome (prosome, macropain) 28 subunit, 3; SRA, steroid receptor RNA activator; TIA, TIAR, T-cell intracellular antigen 1 and related protein. Table 2a Gene Amplification and Expression of SRC1 in Human Tumors Measurements Methods Amp. or Exp. Changes (n) Molecular Association Pathology Association Refs Breast cancer mRNA E RT-PCR lower in tumor (21) ND better tamoxifen response with high SRC-1 182 Protein O IHC high in 28% tumors (25) ER?+, SRC-2+ ND 86 Protein E IHC high in 29% tumors (52) ND LN+, recurrence tamoxifen resistance 83 Protein E IHC high in 25.7% tumors (70) HER2+, PEA3+ recurrence, poor DFS 84 Protein E IHC high in 19% tumors (150) ER?-HER2+ recurrence, poor DFS 85 Endometrial Carcinoma Protein E IHC decrease in tumor (58) ND ND 121 mRNA E qRT-PCR increase in tumor (30) ND ND 120 Meningioma Protein E WB, IHC high in 81% tumors (21) PR+ ND 183 Ovarian cancer mRNA E RT-PCR no change in tumors (17) ND ND 184 Prostate cancer Protein E IHC, WB high in recurrent PCa (8) ND high tumor grade 110 mRNA E RT-PCR high in high grade cancer (20) ND high tumor grade 111 Protein E IHC high in high grade tumors (500) ND high Gleason score 109 Mutation sequencing mutated in 1% tumors (81) Val156Ile ND 108 Gene A FISH in 2.8% tumors (70) ND ND 108 Protein E IHC high in 48% tumors (254) more nuclear SRC-1 androgen resistance 108 mRNA E qRT-PCR ND (148) ND no significant correlation 112 Amp. or A, amplification; O, overexpression; Exp. Or E, expression; DFS, disease-free survival; n, number of samples; refs, references; LN+, lymph node positive metastasis; ISH, in situ hybridization; NB, Northern blot; SB, Southern blot; IHC, immunohistochemistry; WB, Western blot; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; ND, not determined. Table 2b Gene Amplification and Expression of SRC2 in Human Tumors Measurements Methods Amp. or Exp. Changes (n) Molecular Association Pathology Association Refs Breast cancer Protein E IHC no change (25) SRC-1+ LN+ 86 mRNA E qRT-PCR ND (99, ER+) PR+, high cyclin D1 ND 96 Endometrial Carcinoma mRNA E qRT-PCR increase in carcinomas (30) ND ND 120 Meningioma Protein E WB, IHC high in76% samples (21) PR+ ND 183 Ovarian cancer mRNA E RT-PCR no change (17) ND ND 184 Prostate cancer Protein E IHC, WB high in high grade tumors (16) ND high tumor grade 110 Protein E IHC variable (518) ND recurrence & proliferation 114 mRNA E qRT-PCR ND (148) ND no significant correlation 112 Amp. or A, amplification; O, overexpression; Exp. Or E, expression; DFS, disease-free survival; n, number of samples; refs, references; LN+, lymph node positive metastasis; ISH, in situ hybridization; NB, Northern blot; SB, Southern blot; IHC, immunohistochemistry; WB, Western blot; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; ND, not determined. Table 2c Gene Amplification and Expression of SRC3 in Human Tumors Measurements Methods Amp. or Exp. Changes (n) Molecular Association Pathology Association Refs Breast cancer Gene A FISH in 9.5% tumors (105) ND ND 11 mRNA O ISH high in 64% tumors (75) ND big tumor size 11 Gene A SB in 4.8% tumors (1157) ER+, PR+, MDM2 & FGFR1 A big tumor size 97 mRNA O ISH high in 31% tumors (83) ER?, PR?, p53+, HER2+ high tumor grade 51 Gene A PCR no change (127) ND ND 99 mRNA O RT-PCR high in 13% tumors (23) ND ND 99 Protein O IHC high in 9.8% tumors (41) ND ND 87 Protein E WB high in 25% tumors (316 mix) HER2+, PR+ high proliferation high in 25% (119 no treat) ND better DFS high in 25% (187 Tam treat) HER2+ worse DFS, Tam resistance 52 Protein O IHC high in 20% tumors (25) CBP/p300 high tumor grade 86 mRNA qRT-PCR high in 31.6% tumors (38) ND poor DFS 98 mRNA E qRT-PCR ND (99 ER+) HER2+ ND 96 Protein E IHC high in 73.8% tumors (560) MMP2/9+, PEA3+ ND 88 Colorectal Cancer Gene A FISH in 10% samples (85) ND ND 119 Protein O IHC high in 35% samples (85) p53+, DNA aneuploidy higher tumor grade 119 Gene A CGH in 32% samples (22) ND ND 185 Endometrial Carcinoma Gene A PCR no change (30) ND ND 99 mRNA O RT-PCR high in 17% samples (30) ND ND 99 mRNA E qRT-PCR increase in carcinomas (30) ND ND 120 Protein E IHC increase in 97% samples (84) nuclear ER+, PRB+ poor prognosis 122 Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma Gene A SB, FISH in 4.9% carcinomas (41) 20q A metastasis, poor prognosis 186 Gene A FISH in 13% carcinomas (221) ND ND 123 Protein O IHC high in 46% carcinomas (221) ND high proliferation 123 Gastric cancer Gene A SB, FISH in 7% cancer (72) ND ND 124 mRNA O NB, RT-PCR high in 40% cancer (72) ND metastasis, poor prognosis 124 Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) Gene A FISH in 23% primary HCC (35) ND ND in 41% metastatic HCC (33) ND ND in 60% recurrent HCC (17) ND poor prognosis 187 Meningioma Protein E WB, IHC high in 76% samples (21) ND ND 183 Oral squamous cell carcinoma Gene A CGH ND (13) ND LN+ 188 Ovarian cancer Gene A SB in 7.4% samples (122) ND ND 97 Gene A CGH, FISH in 25% samples (24) ER+ poor prognosis 189 mRNA E RT-PCR no change (17) ND ND 184 Protein O IHC in 64% high grade cancer (83) ND high tumor grade 125 Pancreatic cancer Gene A FISH in 37% samples (46) ND ND 126 mRNA, Protein O ISH, IHC high in 65% samples (78) ND cancer progression 126 Prostate cancer mRNA, protein O ISH, IHC high in 38% samples (37) ND high tumor grade, poor DFS 115 Protein O IHC high in advanced cancer (480) PSA recurrence, high pAKT high proliferation 116 Amp. or A, amplification; O, overexpression; Exp. Or E, expression; DFS, disease-free survival; n, number of samples; refs, references; LN+, lymph node positive metastasis; ISH, in situ hybridization; NB, Northern blot; SB, Southern blot; IHC, immunohistochemistry; WB, Western blot; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; ND, not determined. 