Activatable Molecular Systems Using Homologous Near-Infrared Fluorescent Probes for Monitoring Enzyme Activities In Vitro , In Cellulo , and In Vivo We have developed a generic approach to determine enzyme activities in vitro and monitor their functional status in vivo . Specifically, a method to generate donor (CbOH)-acceptor (Me2NCp) near infrared (NIR) fluorescent dye pairs for preparing enzyme activatable molecular systems were developed based on the structural template of heptamethine cyanine dyes. Using caspase-3 as a model enzyme, we prepared two new caspase-3 sensitive compounds with high fluorescence quenching efficiency: Me2NCp-DEVD-K(CbOH)-OH ( 4 ) and AcGK(Me2NCp)-DEVD-APK(CbOH)-NH2 ( 5 ). The mechanism of quenching was based on combined effects of direct (classical) and reverse fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). Caspase-3 cleavage of the scissile DEVD amide bond regenerated the NIR fluorescence of both donor and acceptor dyes. While both compounds were cleaved by caspase-3, substrate 5 was cleaved more readily than 4 , yielding kcat and KM, values of 1.02 ± 0.06 s?1 and 15 ± 3 ?M, respectively. Treatment of A549 tumor cells with paclitaxel resulted in >2-fold increase in the fluorescence intensity by NIR confocal microscopy, suggesting the activation of pro-caspase-3 to caspase-3. A similar trend was observed in a mouse model, where the fluorescence intensity was nearly twice the value in caspase-3-rich tissue relative to the control. These results demonstrate the use of the same NIR activatable molecular systems for monitoring the activities of enzymes across a wide spatial scale ranging from in vitro kinetics measurements to in cellulo and in vivo localization of caspase-3 activation. The NIR activatable molecular probes provide an effective strategy to screen new drugs in vitro and monitor treatment response in living organisms.  Results and Discussion Choice of NIR fluorescent dye pair Designing a cleavable NIR fluorescent molecular systems required careful selection of the two dyes. The majority of NIR fluorescent dyes used in optical imaging studies are polymethine carbocyanine dyes because of their excellent spectral properties and biocompatibility. 7 , 14 , 23 Naturally, we employed polymethine dyes to construct the activatable probe. To be successful, a high level of the energy transfer (e.g. FRET) between the two dyes on the probe had to be achieved and required the selection of two carbocyanine dyes with different but overlapping spectra. We envisioned that one of the most critical requirements in the probe design would be the absence of fluorescence prior to activation and high fluorescence upon activation. For in vivo imaging, quenching the emission from both a donor and an acceptor dye would provide high signal-to-noise ratio after enzymatic cleavage by capturing light emanating from the donor, acceptor, or both. Traditional donor-acceptor FRET probes, where the donor is quenched and acceptor is not, will not fully satisfy this criterion because fluorescence from the acceptor produces significant amount of emission prior to activation, substantially increasing a background signal. This is particularly significant in non-polymeric NIR fluorescence-quenched molecular systems where the broad absorption spectrum of the polymethine dyes preclude selective excitation of the donor dye without exciting the acceptor dye. Complete fluorescence quenching of the donor-acceptor dyes would require a dye pair with double energy transfer involving a direct (donor’s emission and acceptor’s absorption) and a reverse (acceptor’s emission and donor’s absorption) spectral overlap. The inherent narrow broad absorption and emission spectra as well as the small Stokes shift of polymethine dyes makes them suitable for this application. Polymethine carbocyanine consist of two heterocyclic groups (indolium or benzoindolium) linked by a heptamethine bridge ( Figure 1 ). Altering the length of a methine chain is an established method to shift absorption and fluorescence spectra in relatively large 100 nm steps. In addition, modification of their heterocyclic rings is a known method to generate smaller spectral shifts (1–50 nm), 16 thus allowing fine tuning of dye’s optical properties. To utilize this approach in the probe design, the absorption of the short-wavelength dye should fall within 40 nm of the long-wavelength dye. It is obvious that a change in the number of methine groups is less favorable for these molecules because the 100 nm shift in the absorption spectrum will minimize spectral overlap between the donor and acceptor dyes, preventing the reverse energy transfer and rendering ineffective the direct mechanism. This lack of spectral overlap will, therefore, produce significant background fluorescence from the donor dye and residual fluorescence from the acceptor dye. Therefore, modifying the heterocyclic rings would produce smaller spectral shift, which falls within the desired range. Consequently, we focused on modifying the heterocyclic ring system as a general method to develop NIR fluorescent donor-acceptor dye pairs for this application. Structure-spectral properties analysis led us to prepare a new NIR fluorescent indolium heptamethine dye called cybate ( 1 ) as a low wavelength donor dye for the acceptor benzoindolium analogue, cypate, 2 ( Figure 1 ). Chemically, 1 and 2 possess two carboxyl groups that could equally react with an amine. To minimize side reactions during peptide conjugation, one of the carboxyl groups of cypate was converted to the N,N -dimethyl amide derivative (Me2N-CpOH, 3 ). This modification allowed us to first conjugate 3 , followed by 1 to the desired enzyme peptide substrate. Design and synthesis of cleavable NIR caspase-3 enzyme substrates To demonstrate the feasibility of using 1 and 3 in the dual fluorescence quenching mechanism, we used the basic peptide sequence recognizable by caspase-3 (see below), Asp-Glu-Val-Asp (DEVD, representing the single letter amino acid code) for the study. Cleavage of the peptide substrate occurs at the C-terminal aspartic acid of the peptide. Consequently, we conjugated 1 and 3 at the N- and C-terminal of the peptide substrate, respectively, to quench fluorescence emission, which can be restored upon site-specific cleavage by caspase-3. Two NIR FRET systems, Me2NCp-DEVDK(CbOH)-OH ( 4 ) and Ac-GK(Me2NCyp)-DEVDAPK(CbOH)-NH2 ( 5 ) were designed to assess the effect of placing the dyes proximal or distal to caspase-3 recognition site of the tetrapeptide DEVD. We previously reported the use of 2 for a variety of optical imaging studies. 7 , 24 – 27 Compound 1 was prepared by a similar method reported for 2 . 17 The synthesis of a representative caspase-3 activatable system 5 is summarized in Scheme 1 . The peptide was assembled on solid support by standard solid phase peptide synthesis. To incorporate the two dyes to the same peptide, we included orthogonally protected lysine residues in the peptide sequence. We first removed the Dde protecting group with hydrazine to add 3 before deprotecting the second lysine (Mtt) residue with dilute TFA to conjugate cybate. Removal of the side-chain protecting groups and cleavage of the dual dye-labeled peptide from solid support was accomplished with a TFA cleavage mixture to afford the expected product. The compound was isolated by HPLC purification and characterized by NMR, LC-MS, and spectroscopic methods. Spectral properties of NIR caspase-3 probe The absorption and fluorescence spectra of compounds 1 – 5 were evaluated in 20% DMSO in water. This solvent system solubilizes all the dyes and their peptide conjugates and it has been used previously for administering optical molecular probes in animals. 18 At sub-?M concentration, the indolium dye 1 showed a maximum absorption at 748 nm, 35 nm less than that of the benzoindolium dye 2 ( Table 1 ). Similarly, the maximum emission of 1 at 768 nm is 44 nm less than that of 2 . Both dyes have high molar absorptivity (105 M?1 cm?1) comparable to indocyanine green (ICG) under similar conditions. The results of absorption and fluorescent studies are summarized in Table 1 . Considering that modification of 2 to the monodimethyl amide 3 could alter its spectral properties, we compared the absorption and emission spectra of 2 and 3 . Our results showed that the spectral characteristics for these compounds are similar ( Figure 3 and Table 1 ). The emission band of the donor dye 1 significantly overlaps the absorption band of the acceptor dye 3 ( Figure 4 ) and at the same time the absorption band of dye 1 still substantially overlaps with emission band of 3. The spectra of a physical mixture of the two dyes 1 and 3 were largely the product of individual components (not shown), which is in a good agreement with additivity rule. 28 In contrast to physical mixing, we found that covalent binding of the two dyes to the same molecule as in 4 and 5 resulted in a similar absorption profile but, as expected, almost complete suppression of the fluorescence signal above 700 nm as well as concomitant decrease in the calculated fluorescence quantum yield to virtually zero ( Figure 5 ). We attributed the strong quenching of fluorescence to the effect of the non-radiative resonance energy transfer (FRET) and possibly ?- ? interaction between the two dyes. Specifically, most of the quenching was caused by Förster resonance energy transfer mechanism since spectral properties of participating dyes 1 and 3 and caspase-3 probes 4 and 5 demonstrated a number of features common to FRET systems. These include significant spectral overlap, decrease in fluorescence lifetime, and typical FRET distances between the dyes on the molecular constructs. Sandwich-type aggregation (H-aggregation) might also contribute to the quenching. This mechanism is facilitated by the hydrophobic nature of the dyes and ? - ? interaction between the fluorophores. We recently demonstrated this quenching mechanism with conjugating multiple cypate molecules to a nanoparticle 29 Analysis of the absorption and emission spectra of 1 and 3 ( Figure 4 ) reveals that not only does the emission spectrum of the donor 1 significantly overlap with the absorption spectra of the acceptor 3 that is required for FRET to occur, but also part of the emission spectrum of the acceptor 3 overlaps with the absorption spectrum of the donor 1 . The double overlap traps the resonance energy between the two fluorophores and results in significant quenching of the fluorescence emission of both dyes. Indeed, spectral overlap analysis showed two channels for the direct and reverse energy transfer: Förster distance for the direct FRET between dyes 1 and 3 in compound 5 was found to be 61.28 Å, whilereverse Förster distance for the same pair was determined to be 46.07 Å. Using molecular modeling, we determined that the maximum allowable distance between 1 and 3 in compound 5 was 42.5 Å, which corresponds to 90% energy transfer from 1 to 3 and 61% energy transfer in the reverse direction. The energy transfers were calculated for the most stretched conformation of 5 (the actual energy transfers) and therefore, quenching of the caspase-3 probe may be even higher than the calculated value because the average distance between two fluorophores is expected to be much shorter in solution. Caspase-3 enzyme kinetics in vitro We used the caspase-3 enzyme substrates prepared to demonstrate the feasibility of using this new activatable probe to monitor enzyme activities because of the importance of this enzyme in programmed cell death known as apoptosis. 13 Apoptosis is a normal physiological process that counters cell proliferation. The discovery of a link between apoptosis and cancer have led to the development of new cancer drugs that can induce cell death by a variety of activation mechanisms. 30 – 34 Recent advances in molecular biology have unraveled the roles of caspases, a family of cysteinyl aspartate-specific proteases in apoptosis. Thus, interest in imaging the expression of caspases has increased recently. Particularly, the role of caspase-3 in apoptosis induction 13 makes it attractive as a biomarker of early treatment response. Unlike previous studies, 35 the fluorescence of our new molecular system ( Scheme 2 ) is doubly quenched by a new mechanism and the probe consists of dye pairs with both excitation and emission wavelengths >700 nm to minimize tissue autofluorescence, enhance detection sensitivity, and improve light penetration in tissue. 36 While compounds 4 and 5 were hydrolyzed by caspase-3, the cleavage rate of 4 was very slow, preventing a full kinetic characterization. Most likely, conjugation of the NIR dyes in close proximity to the cleavage site of 4 resulted in an apparent loss of a catalytic efficiency. In contrast, 5 was readily cleaved by caspase-3. The substrate displayed classic Michaelis -Menten kinetics ( Figure 6 ) with enzyme kinetic parameters kcat and KM of 1.02 ± 0.06 s?1 and 15 ± 3 ?M, respectively. The observed KM for 5 compares favorably with standard substrates Ac-DEVD-AMC (KM = 9.7 ?M) and Ac-DEVD-pNA (KM = 11 ?M). 37 , 38 We also observed a similar catalytic turnover of caspase-3 by 5 (kcat = 1.02 ± 0.06 s?1) to those of the standard substrates Ac-DEVD-AMC (kcat = 0.75 s?1) and Ac-DEVD-pNA (kcat = 2.4 s?1). 37 , 38 Compound 5 was efficiently cleaved by caspase-3 (kcat/KM = 6.8 × 104 M?1 s?1), which is comparable to those for the aforementioned acylated standard substrates. Therefore, the relatively bulky NIR dyes flanking the hydrolysis site do not significantly alter the catalytic efficiency of caspase-3. The computed kcat/KM values of a substrate are important criteria in the evaluation of quenched substrate for molecular imaging because it provides a benchmark in the evaluation of an enzyme substrate with quenched fluorophores for molecular imaging. Substrates with the highest kcat/KM values are expected to be the most rapidly hydrolyzed before wash-out from the target site, resulting in greater signal to noise ratio. The absorption spectra after the cleavage became more structured compared to the un-cleaved substrate 5 , revealing characteristic features of free (not conjugated to each other) dyes 1 and 3 ( Figure 7 ). The emission spectra after the cleavage 5 was also structured and consisted of the large band centered at 760 nm and a small band at 810 nm. The deconvolution of the emission spectrum into two components is shown in Figure 8, A and the individual spectra clearly resemble the emission profiles of 1 and 2. (The validation of the deconvolution is given in Figure 8, B , where the arithmetical summation of absorption values of hypothetical mixture of cybate and cypate fits closely to the experimentally derived emission of hydrolyzed substrate 5 ). The differences in intensities between 760 nm and 810 nm in the emission of 5 after the cleavage (ratio F 760/F 810 = 7.16) were similar to the differences in the quantum yield of cybate and Me2N-cypate (the ratio ? 1/? 3 =0.170/0.025=6.8, see Table 1 ) indicating the absence of any post hydrolysis quenching. Imaging of caspase-3 activation in cells Although many FRET-mediated approaches to monitor caspase-3 activation in cells have been reported, 39 – 44 we set out to explore the feasibility of using the newly developed NIR fluorescent compound 5 to image the activation of caspase-3 in response to drug treatment. A previous study has shown that paclitaxel effectively induced caspase-3 mediated apoptosis in the human lung carcinoma A549 cells after 24 h of treatment. 45 Consequently, we first transiently transfected A549 cells with 5 , which possesses enzyme kinetics parameters similar to standard substrates for caspase-3 (see above). Subsequent treatment of the A549 cells with 5 ?M paclitaxel for 2 h was sufficient to activate caspase-3 in the cells. Before activation of caspase-3, the fluorescence of compound 5 (10 ?M) transfected A549 cells was essentially quenched at both the 700 nm and 785 nm excitation channels. However, a significant increase in the fluorescence intensity was observed after paclitaxel treatment relative to the untreated controls ( Figure 9 , top panel). Quantitative analysis of the fluorescence intensity of treated compared to untreated A549 cells show about a 3-fold increase in fluorescence after activation of caspase-3 with paclitaxel ( Figure 9 , bottom panel). Optimization of the caspase-3 substrate may be needed to further enhance signal amplification in cells. This could be accomplished by the use of a hydrophilic donor or acceptor dye that could be removed rapidly from cells after cleavage to prevent concentration-dependent fluorescence quenching if both dyes remain in the same cellular compartment after cleavage. However, this result demonstrates the potential of monitoring apoptosis induction in caspase-3 positive cells by using our new NIR fluorescence quenching mechanism and caspase-3 probes. Activation of Caspase-3 NIR fluorescent substrate in mice To assess the possibility of imaging activated caspase-3 in living organisms, we developed a simple mouse model of caspase-3 expression. Compound 5 was first administered by tail vein injection. Whole-body imaging exhibited significant fluorescence relative to tissue autofluorescence (not shown) immediately after the intravenous injection of 5 . This fluorescence was probably due to nonspecific activation of 5. It could also be attributed to the disruption of aggregation upon binding of 5 to blood proteins. 46 Irrespective of the activation mechanism, we used the nonspecific fluorescence enhancement as background fluorescence for imaging purposes. After optimizing the imagin position, caspase-3 protein was injected intradermally into the central region of the left ear and an equal volume of saline was administered in the right ear to serve as control. The administration of saline showed visible bruising in the injection area but none was observed after the caspase-3 injection. After the injection of saline or caspase-3, higher fluorescence was observed in the caspase-3-injected ear ( Figure 10 ). The site of saline injection also showed higher fluorescence intensity than surrounding ear tissue, likely due to proteolysis by enzymes released in response to tissue injury. The fluorescence intensity change observed proximal to the injection site probably resulted from the diffusion and lymphatic drainage of the enzyme shortly after injection. The fluorescence intensity increased with time in the ear injected with caspase-3 and reached a plateau within 20 minutes after injection. We attribute this plateau to enzyme saturation, inactivation, and/or diffusion of the probe from the tissue. While this model does not reflect natural caspase activity, it shows the feasibility of our probe for in vivo enzyme activity through fluorescence dequenching. In vivo protease imaging is in its nascent stage but the feasibility of these studies in small animals has been reported. For example, MMP-2 activity in mouse models was visualized with a poly-lysine-PEG co-polymer of relatively high molecular weight (450 kDa), when conjugated to a peptide that is a substrate for MMP-2. This peptide itself was a substrate for MMP-2 (kcat = 4.1 sec?1 and KM = 290 ?M, kcat/KM = 1.4 × 104 M?1s?1). 11 , 12 Presumably, conjugation to the polymer did not change these kinetic parameters. In another study, a fluorescein-linear peptide bearing a MMP-7 hydrolysis site and tetramethylrhodamine (TMR) were conjugated to a polyamido-amino dendrimeric polymer (14 kDa). 47 Fluorescein was the donor and TMR the acceptor. The dendrimeric peptide was efficiently (kcat/KM = 1.9 × 105 M?1 s?1) and selectively (MMP-2 kcat/KM = 3.4 × 103 M?1 s?1, MMP-3 kcat/KM = 1.5 × 104 M?1 s?1) cleaved by the target, MMP-7. While the endogenous fluorescence was competing with fluorescein fluorescence, a subcutaneous tumor (MMP-7 positive) was visualized relative to a control (MMP-7 negative). An additional example of in vivo tumor imaging with a polymeric quenched-fluorescent probe relies on the activation by cathepsin D. 14 The peptide substrate bearing the Cy5.5 quenched probes had a relatively high efficiency for cathepsin D mediated hydrolysis (kcat/KM= 7 × 106 M?1 s?1). While the xenografted tumor expressed the target cathepsin D (zymography), the cathepsin D levels were not quantified. Together, these examples suggest that there is a range of kcat/KM values of ~1 × 104 to 7 × 106 M?1 s?1 for proteolytic substrates that successfully imaged in vivo proteolytic activity. 11 , 12 , 14 The value for compound 5 (kcat/KM = 6.8 × 10?4 M?1 s?1) is well within that range and supports the use of the new molecular probes for in cellulo and in vivo imaging studies.  Choice of NIR fluorescent dye pair Designing a cleavable NIR fluorescent molecular systems required careful selection of the two dyes. The majority of NIR fluorescent dyes used in optical imaging studies are polymethine carbocyanine dyes because of their excellent spectral properties and biocompatibility. 7 , 14 , 23 Naturally, we employed polymethine dyes to construct the activatable probe. To be successful, a high level of the energy transfer (e.g. FRET) between the two dyes on the probe had to be achieved and required the selection of two carbocyanine dyes with different but overlapping spectra. We envisioned that one of the most critical requirements in the probe design would be the absence of fluorescence prior to activation and high fluorescence upon activation. For in vivo imaging, quenching the emission from both a donor and an acceptor dye would provide high signal-to-noise ratio after enzymatic cleavage by capturing light emanating from the donor, acceptor, or both. Traditional donor-acceptor FRET probes, where the donor is quenched and acceptor is not, will not fully satisfy this criterion because fluorescence from the acceptor produces significant amount of emission prior to activation, substantially increasing a background signal. This is particularly significant in non-polymeric NIR fluorescence-quenched molecular systems where the broad absorption spectrum of the polymethine dyes preclude selective excitation of the donor dye without exciting the acceptor dye. Complete fluorescence quenching of the donor-acceptor dyes would require a dye pair with double energy transfer involving a direct (donor’s emission and acceptor’s absorption) and a reverse (acceptor’s emission and donor’s absorption) spectral overlap. The inherent narrow broad absorption and emission spectra as well as the small Stokes shift of polymethine dyes makes them suitable for this application. Polymethine carbocyanine consist of two heterocyclic groups (indolium or benzoindolium) linked by a heptamethine bridge ( Figure 1 ). Altering the length of a methine chain is an established method to shift absorption and fluorescence spectra in relatively large 100 nm steps. In addition, modification of their heterocyclic rings is a known method to generate smaller spectral shifts (1–50 nm), 16 thus allowing fine tuning of dye’s optical properties. To utilize this approach in the probe design, the absorption of the short-wavelength dye should fall within 40 nm of the long-wavelength dye. It is obvious that a change in the number of methine groups is less favorable for these molecules because the 100 nm shift in the absorption spectrum will minimize spectral overlap between the donor and acceptor dyes, preventing the reverse energy transfer and rendering ineffective the direct mechanism. This lack of spectral overlap will, therefore, produce significant background fluorescence from the donor dye and residual fluorescence from the acceptor dye. Therefore, modifying the heterocyclic rings would produce smaller spectral shift, which falls within the desired range. Consequently, we focused on modifying the heterocyclic ring system as a general method to develop NIR fluorescent donor-acceptor dye pairs for this application. Structure-spectral properties analysis led us to prepare a new NIR fluorescent indolium heptamethine dye called cybate ( 1 ) as a low wavelength donor dye for the acceptor benzoindolium analogue, cypate, 2 ( Figure 1 ). Chemically, 1 and 2 possess two carboxyl groups that could equally react with an amine. To minimize side reactions during peptide conjugation, one of the carboxyl groups of cypate was converted to the N,N -dimethyl amide derivative (Me2N-CpOH, 3 ). This modification allowed us to first conjugate 3 , followed by 1 to the desired enzyme peptide substrate.  Design and synthesis of cleavable NIR caspase-3 enzyme substrates To demonstrate the feasibility of using 1 and 3 in the dual fluorescence quenching mechanism, we used the basic peptide sequence recognizable by caspase-3 (see below), Asp-Glu-Val-Asp (DEVD, representing the single letter amino acid code) for the study. Cleavage of the peptide substrate occurs at the C-terminal aspartic acid of the peptide. Consequently, we conjugated 1 and 3 at the N- and C-terminal of the peptide substrate, respectively, to quench fluorescence emission, which can be restored upon site-specific cleavage by caspase-3. Two NIR FRET systems, Me2NCp-DEVDK(CbOH)-OH ( 4 ) and Ac-GK(Me2NCyp)-DEVDAPK(CbOH)-NH2 ( 5 ) were designed to assess the effect of placing the dyes proximal or distal to caspase-3 recognition site of the tetrapeptide DEVD. We previously reported the use of 2 for a variety of optical imaging studies. 7 , 24 – 27 Compound 1 was prepared by a similar method reported for 2 . 17 The synthesis of a representative caspase-3 activatable system 5 is summarized in Scheme 1 . The peptide was assembled on solid support by standard solid phase peptide synthesis. To incorporate the two dyes to the same peptide, we included orthogonally protected lysine residues in the peptide sequence. We first removed the Dde protecting group with hydrazine to add 3 before deprotecting the second lysine (Mtt) residue with dilute TFA to conjugate cybate. Removal of the side-chain protecting groups and cleavage of the dual dye-labeled peptide from solid support was accomplished with a TFA cleavage mixture to afford the expected product. The compound was isolated by HPLC purification and characterized by NMR, LC-MS, and spectroscopic methods.  Spectral properties of NIR caspase-3 probe The absorption and fluorescence spectra of compounds 1 – 5 were evaluated in 20% DMSO in water. This solvent system solubilizes all the dyes and their peptide conjugates and it has been used previously for administering optical molecular probes in animals. 18 At sub-?M concentration, the indolium dye 1 showed a maximum absorption at 748 nm, 35 nm less than that of the benzoindolium dye 2 ( Table 1 ). Similarly, the maximum emission of 1 at 768 nm is 44 nm less than that of 2 . Both dyes have high molar absorptivity (105 M?1 cm?1) comparable to indocyanine green (ICG) under similar conditions. The results of absorption and fluorescent studies are summarized in Table 1 . Considering that modification of 2 to the monodimethyl amide 3 could alter its spectral properties, we compared the absorption and emission spectra of 2 and 3 . Our results showed that the spectral characteristics for these compounds are similar ( Figure 3 and Table 1 ). The emission band of the donor dye 1 significantly overlaps the absorption band of the acceptor dye 3 ( Figure 4 ) and at the same time the absorption band of dye 1 still substantially overlaps with emission band of 3. The spectra of a physical mixture of the two dyes 1 and 3 were largely the product of individual components (not shown), which is in a good agreement with additivity rule. 28 In contrast to physical mixing, we found that covalent binding of the two dyes to the same molecule as in 4 and 5 resulted in a similar absorption profile but, as expected, almost complete suppression of the fluorescence signal above 700 nm as well as concomitant decrease in the calculated fluorescence quantum yield to virtually zero ( Figure 5 ). We attributed the strong quenching of fluorescence to the effect of the non-radiative resonance energy transfer (FRET) and possibly ?- ? interaction between the two dyes. Specifically, most of the quenching was caused by Förster resonance energy transfer mechanism since spectral properties of participating dyes 1 and 3 and caspase-3 probes 4 and 5 demonstrated a number of features common to FRET systems. These include significant spectral overlap, decrease in fluorescence lifetime, and typical FRET distances between the dyes on the molecular constructs. Sandwich-type aggregation (H-aggregation) might also contribute to the quenching. This mechanism is facilitated by the hydrophobic nature of the dyes and ? - ? interaction between the fluorophores. We recently demonstrated this quenching mechanism with conjugating multiple cypate molecules to a nanoparticle 29 Analysis of the absorption and emission spectra of 1 and 3 ( Figure 4 ) reveals that not only does the emission spectrum of the donor 1 significantly overlap with the absorption spectra of the acceptor 3 that is required for FRET to occur, but also part of the emission spectrum of the acceptor 3 overlaps with the absorption spectrum of the donor 1 . The double overlap traps the resonance energy between the two fluorophores and results in significant quenching of the fluorescence emission of both dyes. Indeed, spectral overlap analysis showed two channels for the direct and reverse energy transfer: Förster distance for the direct FRET between dyes 1 and 3 in compound 5 was found to be 61.28 Å, whilereverse Förster distance for the same pair was determined to be 46.07 Å. Using molecular modeling, we determined that the maximum allowable distance between 1 and 3 in compound 5 was 42.5 Å, which corresponds to 90% energy transfer from 1 to 3 and 61% energy transfer in the reverse direction. The energy transfers were calculated for the most stretched conformation of 5 (the actual energy transfers) and therefore, quenching of the caspase-3 probe may be even higher than the calculated value because the average distance between two fluorophores is expected to be much shorter in solution.  Caspase-3 enzyme kinetics in vitro We used the caspase-3 enzyme substrates prepared to demonstrate the feasibility of using this new activatable probe to monitor enzyme activities because of the importance of this enzyme in programmed cell death known as apoptosis. 13 Apoptosis is a normal physiological process that counters cell proliferation. The discovery of a link between apoptosis and cancer have led to the development of new cancer drugs that can induce cell death by a variety of activation mechanisms. 30 – 34 Recent advances in molecular biology have unraveled the roles of caspases, a family of cysteinyl aspartate-specific proteases in apoptosis. Thus, interest in imaging the expression of caspases has increased recently. Particularly, the role of caspase-3 in apoptosis induction 13 makes it attractive as a biomarker of early treatment response. Unlike previous studies, 35 the fluorescence of our new molecular system ( Scheme 2 ) is doubly quenched by a new mechanism and the probe consists of dye pairs with both excitation and emission wavelengths >700 nm to minimize tissue autofluorescence, enhance detection sensitivity, and improve light penetration in tissue. 36 While compounds 4 and 5 were hydrolyzed by caspase-3, the cleavage rate of 4 was very slow, preventing a full kinetic characterization. Most likely, conjugation of the NIR dyes in close proximity to the cleavage site of 4 resulted in an apparent loss of a catalytic efficiency. In contrast, 5 was readily cleaved by caspase-3. The substrate displayed classic Michaelis -Menten kinetics ( Figure 6 ) with enzyme kinetic parameters kcat and KM of 1.02 ± 0.06 s?1 and 15 ± 3 ?M, respectively. The observed KM for 5 compares favorably with standard substrates Ac-DEVD-AMC (KM = 9.7 ?M) and Ac-DEVD-pNA (KM = 11 ?M). 37 , 38 We also observed a similar catalytic turnover of caspase-3 by 5 (kcat = 1.02 ± 0.06 s?1) to those of the standard substrates Ac-DEVD-AMC (kcat = 0.75 s?1) and Ac-DEVD-pNA (kcat = 2.4 s?1). 37 , 38 Compound 5 was efficiently cleaved by caspase-3 (kcat/KM = 6.8 × 104 M?1 s?1), which is comparable to those for the aforementioned acylated standard substrates. Therefore, the relatively bulky NIR dyes flanking the hydrolysis site do not significantly alter the catalytic efficiency of caspase-3. The computed kcat/KM values of a substrate are important criteria in the evaluation of quenched substrate for molecular imaging because it provides a benchmark in the evaluation of an enzyme substrate with quenched fluorophores for molecular imaging. Substrates with the highest kcat/KM values are expected to be the most rapidly hydrolyzed before wash-out from the target site, resulting in greater signal to noise ratio. The absorption spectra after the cleavage became more structured compared to the un-cleaved substrate 5 , revealing characteristic features of free (not conjugated to each other) dyes 1 and 3 ( Figure 7 ). The emission spectra after the cleavage 5 was also structured and consisted of the large band centered at 760 nm and a small band at 810 nm. The deconvolution of the emission spectrum into two components is shown in Figure 8, A and the individual spectra clearly resemble the emission profiles of 1 and 2. (The validation of the deconvolution is given in Figure 8, B , where the arithmetical summation of absorption values of hypothetical mixture of cybate and cypate fits closely to the experimentally derived emission of hydrolyzed substrate 5 ). The differences in intensities between 760 nm and 810 nm in the emission of 5 after the cleavage (ratio F 760/F 810 = 7.16) were similar to the differences in the quantum yield of cybate and Me2N-cypate (the ratio ? 1/? 3 =0.170/0.025=6.8, see Table 1 ) indicating the absence of any post hydrolysis quenching.  Imaging of caspase-3 activation in cells Although many FRET-mediated approaches to monitor caspase-3 activation in cells have been reported, 39 – 44 we set out to explore the feasibility of using the newly developed NIR fluorescent compound 5 to image the activation of caspase-3 in response to drug treatment. A previous study has shown that paclitaxel effectively induced caspase-3 mediated apoptosis in the human lung carcinoma A549 cells after 24 h of treatment. 45 Consequently, we first transiently transfected A549 cells with 5 , which possesses enzyme kinetics parameters similar to standard substrates for caspase-3 (see above). Subsequent treatment of the A549 cells with 5 ?M paclitaxel for 2 h was sufficient to activate caspase-3 in the cells. Before activation of caspase-3, the fluorescence of compound 5 (10 ?M) transfected A549 cells was essentially quenched at both the 700 nm and 785 nm excitation channels. However, a significant increase in the fluorescence intensity was observed after paclitaxel treatment relative to the untreated controls ( Figure 9 , top panel). Quantitative analysis of the fluorescence intensity of treated compared to untreated A549 cells show about a 3-fold increase in fluorescence after activation of caspase-3 with paclitaxel ( Figure 9 , bottom panel). Optimization of the caspase-3 substrate may be needed to further enhance signal amplification in cells. This could be accomplished by the use of a hydrophilic donor or acceptor dye that could be removed rapidly from cells after cleavage to prevent concentration-dependent fluorescence quenching if both dyes remain in the same cellular compartment after cleavage. However, this result demonstrates the potential of monitoring apoptosis induction in caspase-3 positive cells by using our new NIR fluorescence quenching mechanism and caspase-3 probes.  Activation of Caspase-3 NIR fluorescent substrate in mice To assess the possibility of imaging activated caspase-3 in living organisms, we developed a simple mouse model of caspase-3 expression. Compound 5 was first administered by tail vein injection. Whole-body imaging exhibited significant fluorescence relative to tissue autofluorescence (not shown) immediately after the intravenous injection of 5 . This fluorescence was probably due to nonspecific activation of 5. It could also be attributed to the disruption of aggregation upon binding of 5 to blood proteins. 46 Irrespective of the activation mechanism, we used the nonspecific fluorescence enhancement as background fluorescence for imaging purposes. After optimizing the imagin position, caspase-3 protein was injected intradermally into the central region of the left ear and an equal volume of saline was administered in the right ear to serve as control. The administration of saline showed visible bruising in the injection area but none was observed after the caspase-3 injection. After the injection of saline or caspase-3, higher fluorescence was observed in the caspase-3-injected ear ( Figure 10 ). The site of saline injection also showed higher fluorescence intensity than surrounding ear tissue, likely due to proteolysis by enzymes released in response to tissue injury. The fluorescence intensity change observed proximal to the injection site probably resulted from the diffusion and lymphatic drainage of the enzyme shortly after injection. The fluorescence intensity increased with time in the ear injected with caspase-3 and reached a plateau within 20 minutes after injection. We attribute this plateau to enzyme saturation, inactivation, and/or diffusion of the probe from the tissue. While this model does not reflect natural caspase activity, it shows the feasibility of our probe for in vivo enzyme activity through fluorescence dequenching. In vivo protease imaging is in its nascent stage but the feasibility of these studies in small animals has been reported. For example, MMP-2 activity in mouse models was visualized with a poly-lysine-PEG co-polymer of relatively high molecular weight (450 kDa), when conjugated to a peptide that is a substrate for MMP-2. This peptide itself was a substrate for MMP-2 (kcat = 4.1 sec?1 and KM = 290 ?M, kcat/KM = 1.4 × 104 M?1s?1). 11 , 12 Presumably, conjugation to the polymer did not change these kinetic parameters. In another study, a fluorescein-linear peptide bearing a MMP-7 hydrolysis site and tetramethylrhodamine (TMR) were conjugated to a polyamido-amino dendrimeric polymer (14 kDa). 47 Fluorescein was the donor and TMR the acceptor. The dendrimeric peptide was efficiently (kcat/KM = 1.9 × 105 M?1 s?1) and selectively (MMP-2 kcat/KM = 3.4 × 103 M?1 s?1, MMP-3 kcat/KM = 1.5 × 104 M?1 s?1) cleaved by the target, MMP-7. While the endogenous fluorescence was competing with fluorescein fluorescence, a subcutaneous tumor (MMP-7 positive) was visualized relative to a control (MMP-7 negative). An additional example of in vivo tumor imaging with a polymeric quenched-fluorescent probe relies on the activation by cathepsin D. 14 The peptide substrate bearing the Cy5.5 quenched probes had a relatively high efficiency for cathepsin D mediated hydrolysis (kcat/KM= 7 × 106 M?1 s?1). While the xenografted tumor expressed the target cathepsin D (zymography), the cathepsin D levels were not quantified. Together, these examples suggest that there is a range of kcat/KM values of ~1 × 104 to 7 × 106 M?1 s?1 for proteolytic substrates that successfully imaged in vivo proteolytic activity. 11 , 12 , 14 The value for compound 5 (kcat/KM = 6.8 × 10?4 M?1 s?1) is well within that range and supports the use of the new molecular probes for in cellulo and in vivo imaging studies.  Conclusions We have developed new donor-acceptor NIR fluorescent dye systems with both excitation and emission wavelengths above 700 nm. Strong spectral overlaps between absorption and emission spectra of 1 and 3 were responsible for quenching not only of the emission from the donor but also the emission from the acceptor. Fluorescence quenching of dye 1 in the presence of 3 resulted from a direct FRET mechanism (at least 90% energy transfer) but quenching of 3 in the same molecular construct was attributed to a reverse FRET (at least 61 % energy transfer). The dual quenching strategies provided low background fluorescence for enzyme assays and biological imaging. Nonspecific fluorescence dequenching of the caspase-3 probes allowed us to image the distribution of the substrate in the body and the specific activation of fluorescence by caspase-3 was used to report the enzyme activity in cells and tissue. Using a peptide substrate recognized by caspase-3, we demonstrated the feasibility of imaging caspase-3 activation in cells and small animals. The approach described opens up the possibility of diverse structural modification and optimization of non-polymer based NIR fluorescence activatable probes for imaging a variety of molecular processes. In particular, the results demonstrate the use of the same molecular probe for monitoring the activities of enzymes across a broad range of spatial scales, spanning from in vitro kinetics measurements to in cellulo and in vivo localization of caspase-3 activation. 