Gastrointestinal microflora, food components and colon cancer prevention Evidence is emerging that the intestinal microbiota is intrinsically linked with overall health, including cancer risk. Moreover, its composition is not fixed, but can be influenced by several dietary components. Dietary modifiers, including the consumption of live bacteria (probiotics), nondigestible or limited digestible food constituents such as oligosaccharides (prebiotics) and polyphenols, or both (synbiotics), are recognized modifiers of the numbers and types of microbes and have been reported to reduce colon cancer risk experimentally. Microorganisms also have the ability to generate bioactive compounds from food components. Examples include equol from isoflavones, enterodiol and enterolactone from lignans, and urolithins from ellagic acid, which have also been demonstrated to retard experimentally induced cancers. The gastrointestinal microbiota can also influence both sides of the energy balance equation; namely, as a factor influencing energy utilization from the diet and as a factor that influences host genes that regulate energy expenditure and storage. Because of the link between obesity and cancer incidence and mortality, this complex relationship deserves greater attention. Thus, a complex interrelationship exists between the intestinal microbiota and colon cancer risk which can be modified by dietary components and eating behaviors.  Conclusion A complex interrelationship exists between the intestinal microbiota and colon cancer risk which can be modified by dietary behavior. Not only can eating behaviors modify the numbers and types of microoganisms, but microorganisms can also generate new compounds from food components some of which can be beneficial while others may be harmful. Many of the specific bacteria, as well as microbially generated metabolites, may have a role in cancer risk or development. More in depth studies investigating the interrelationships among intestinal bacteria, diet and cancer risk are desperately needed. Many unanswered issues remain including: a better understanding of how an individual’s genetic background influences their microflora; who might benefit from dietary interventions to alter their indigenous microflora; what are the microbially generated metabolites of bioactive food components; how can these be utilized to better understand their molecular targets/mechanisms for cancer prevention; and, can we identify inter-individual variability in the production of these metabolites? Once answers to these fundamental questions are available, it should be possible to develop specific dietary recommendations for cancer prevention based on modification of the composition or activities of the colon’s commensal microflora.  Figure and Table Figure 1 A dynamic relationship exits among the gastrointestinal microbiota, the intake and metabolism of dietary bioactive food components and energy, and the intestinal mucosal cells. Both the numbers and types of microbes and dietary factors can influence colon cancer risk and tumor behavior. Genomics within the microbes and the mucosal cells can influence the direction and/or magnitude of this relationship. Table 1 Bacterial metabolites from dietary components with cancer preventive properties Dietary Component Food Sources Bacterial Metabolite References Fiber Grains/grain products Butyrate 54 – 63 Linoleic acid Vegetable oils Conjugated linoleic acid 64 – 68 Daidzein Soy Equol 69 – 80 Secoisolariciresinol Flaxseed, sesame Enterolactone, Enterodiol 81 – 88 Isoxanthohumol Hops/hop-derived products such as beer 8-Prenylnaringenin 89 – 92 Ellagic acid Strawberries, raspberries, walnuts, pomegranates Urolithins A and B 93 – 95 