Computer-aided detection of brain tumor invasion using multiparametric MRI Purpose To determine the potential of using a computer-aided detection method to intelligently distinguish peritumoral edema alone from peritumor edema consisting of tumor using a combination of high-resolution morphological and physiological magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques available on most clinical MRI scanners. Materials and Methods This retrospective study consisted of patients with two types of primary brain tumors: meningiomas (n=7) and glioblastomas (n=11). Meningiomas are typically benign and have a clear delineation of tumor and edema. Glioblastomas are known to invade outside the contrast-enhancing area. Four classifiers of differing designs were trained using morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted features derived from MRI to discriminate tumor and edema, tested on edematous regions surrounding tumors, and assessed for their ability to detect nonenhancing tumor invasion. Results The four classifiers provided similar measures of accuracy when applied to the training and testing data. Each classifier was able to identify areas of non-enhancing tumor invasion supported with adjunct images or follow-up studies. Conclusion The combination of features derived from morphological and physiological imaging techniques contains the information necessary for computer-aided detection of tumor invasion and allows for the identification of tumor invasion not previously visualized on morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted images and maps. Further validation of this approach requires obtaining spatially co-registered tissue samples in a study with a larger sample size.  Methods This HIPAA-compliant study was approved by local institutional review boards. A retrospective chart and database analysis identified cases appropriate for this study. Patients meeting the criteria for inclusion had an exam date between January 1, 2000 and May 26, 2005; the required set of morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted images; and a primary brain tumor (meningioma or glioblastoma) with histological confirmation. Meningiomas are typically benign and have a clear delineation of tumor and edema. Glioblastomas are known to have invasion outside the contrast-enhancing area. The final patient population (see Table 1 ) consisted of adult patients (18–89 years old), both male and female, with two primary brain tumors: meningiomas ( n =7) and glioblastomas ( n =11). Imaging protocol Image data collected included morphological MR (T2w FLAIR, pre- and post-contrast T1w), MR diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), MR diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and MR dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI). MR studies were performed on a 1.5-T MR scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) with a head coil and typically during the same session. Images for each patient were acquired as detailed below, though some studies may have used slight variations for such things as echo time, repetition time, or field of view (FOV). To account for variations, a standardization routine was employed as described in the post-processing section below. Images of interest to this study were acquired in the axial plane. A T1w series of images was acquired prior to contrast administration using a standard 2D spin echo (SE) sequence (TE=14 ms, TR=650 ms, flip angle=90°, NEX=1, FOV=22–24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip space=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=256 × 192, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). The T2w series of images was also acquired prior to contrast administration using a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence (TE=133 ms, TI=2200 ms, TR=10002 ms, flip angle=90°, NEX=0.5, FOV=22–24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=256 × 192, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). The diffusion-weighted series of images was acquired using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) SE sequence with diffusion gradients applied in 3 orthogonal directions (TE=79.5 ms, TR=10000 ms, b=1000 s/mm2, flip angle=90°, NEX=1, FOV=24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=128 × 128, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). Diffusion tensor series of images were acquired using an EPI SE sequence with diffusion gradients applied in 25 directions (TE=85.9 ms, TR=6000 ms, b=1000 s/mm2, FOV=24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=128 × 128, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). Following administration of the first bolus of contrast agent, the post-contrast T1w (T1w+C) series of images was acquired using the same sequence and parameters as the pre-contrast T1w images described above. DSC PWI was performed as described in ( 19 ) and summarized here. The first bolus of contrast agent was a 0.05–0.10 mmole/kg dose of gadodiamide (Omniscan; Nycomed Amersham, Princeton, NJ) helped to diminish T1 effects that might result from agent extravasation. If the initial tissue T1 is decreased with contrast agent, subsequent changes in T1, which might occur during the first-pass study, are minimized. Five 7-mm thick simultaneous gradient echo (GE) and SE images were acquired every second during the interval 1 minute before and 2 minutes after a second bolus injection (0.15–0.25 mmol/kg dose). The slices were acquired using a single-shot blipped EPI sequence with TE(GE)=30 ms and TE(SE)=109.1 ms, fat suppression, TR=1000 ms, FOV=24 cm, and acquisition matrix=64 × 64. Following DSC, a second series of post-contrast T1w images was acquired in the same five slice locations. Adjunct metabolic images, when available, were also collected and included proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) and/or 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography (18FDG PET). Postprocessing ADC maps were calculated from the original DWI images. Mean diffusivity (MD) and fractional anisotropy (FA) maps were generated from DTI images (GE Advantage Workstation, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) ( 20 ). Relative cerebral blood volume maps were calculated from GE/SE DSC images as described in ( 19 ). Two rCBV maps (i.e., rCBVGE and rCBVSE) and one ratio map (?R2*/?R2), an index of mean vessel diameter, were generated for each slice location using AFNI ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov , NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) and locally developed code. FLAIR, T1w, T1w+C, rCBVGE, and rCBVSE were standardized using a method described in ( 21 , 22 ). The method of intensity standardization was similar to a simple window-level transformation typically used for contrast enhancement, which maps the intensities at or below the bottom of window to black, intensities at or above the top of the window to white, and all intensities between are linearly mapped to a grayscale between black and white. Application to rCBV maps recently described ( 22 ) resulted in an increased separation of mean white and gray matter rCBV values along with increased contrast along the tumor border. For this study, the L4 set of landmarks from ( 21 ) was used, which consists of the percentile points in the set (0, 10, …, 90, 99.8). Images and maps from the set of patients in this study were used to train the standardization scheme to determine where the landmarks should be placed on the standardized scale. The trained parameters were then used to perform a piecewise-linear transformation to transpose original values within the selected percentile ranges to the standardized range. In order to determine areas of contrast uptake, a difference image (?T1w) was generated from standardized T1w+C and T1w images by subtracting the pre-contrast signal from the post-contrast signal within each voxel. Within each patient study, further post-processing for each individual image and feature map included registration and bilinear interpolation to scale all images to the matrix size and resolution equal to the highest resolution image. A 2D registration method with rigid transformation for single slices based on the Procrustes algorithm ( 23 ) was employed to correct in-plane movements. For some cases, when images were acquired over multiple sessions or with non-negligible out-of-plane motion, it was necessary to use a 3D registration method, FLIRT ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/flirt/ ) ( 24 ). Initial segmentation and classification A rough region of interest (ROI) encompassing the hyperintense region and some surrounding normal-appearing tissue was drawn for each selected slice location. Within this ROI, a threshold-based segmentation and classification scheme was used to initially identify voxels as tumor, peritumoral edema, necrosis, or CSF ( Figure 1 ). First, voxels in the ?T1w image above a supervised variable threshold (typically 5% of the maximum difference signal) and within the rough ROI were put into the contrast-enhancing ROI. This ROI corresponds to the contrast-enhancing regions seen on a T1w post-contrast image and assumed to be tumor. Morphological close and fill operations were performed on the contrast-enhancing ROI to generate the contrast-enhancing+necrosis ROI. Voxels in the FLAIR image above a supervised variable threshold (typically 40% of maximum signal) and within the rough ROI were put into the contrast-enhancing/necrosis/peritumoral edema ROI. This ROI corresponds to the hyperintense intracranial, ipsalateral regions seen on a FLAIR image. In order to separate the peritumoral edema voxels from contrast-enhancing tumor and necrosis, the union of the contrast-enhancing/necrosis ROI generated from the ? T1w image and the contrast-enhancing/necrosis/peritumoral edema ROI generated from the FLAIR image was subtracted from the tumor/necrosis/peritumoral edema ROI. Two ROIs resulting from the initial segmentation and classification scheme, one consisting of the contrast-enhancing voxels and assumed to be tumor and another consisting of the peritumoral edematous voxels, were considered for further processing as described below. Training data and final classification In order to identify tumor invasion within the peritumoral edema ROI, training data for potential classification schemes were selected from the first 15 patients collected ( Table 1 , patients A-O). Five of these patients were excluded from the training set due to no visible edema or missing image data, but retained for further testing as described below. The pure edema samples were from the peritumoral edema ROI of meningioma patients ( n =3, patients A, D, and E), since menigiomas have a clear delineation of tumor and edema with no evidence of tumor invasion within the edematous region. The pure tumor samples were from the contrast-enhancing ROI of untreated GBM patients ( n =7, patients F, G, J, K, M, N, and O). A total of n =11597 voxels were identified as pure edema ( i.e ., peri24 tumoral edema voxels of meningioma subjects), and n =11919 voxels as pure tumor ( i.e ., contrast-enhancing voxels for GBM subjects), and n =24043 voxels as edema with possible tumor invasion ( i.e ., peritumoral edema voxels of GBM subjects). A total of four classifiers were trained and tested using subsets of 5000 samples equally divided between pure edema and pure tumor and randomly drawn from the entire set of training data. The inputs to all four classifiers were the same: FLAIR (standardized), T1w (standardized), ADC, MD, FA, rCBVGE, rCBVSE, and ?R2*/?R2. LR_A was a logistic linear regression model. MLPNN_A were multilayer perceptron neural networks ( 25 ) consisting of n feature inputs, two hidden layers, and one output. The hidden layers for MLPNN_A contained 17 and 9 perceptrons. Training was performed for a maximum of 500 epochs. FIS_A was a Sugeno-type fuzzy inference system generated using fuzzy subtractive clustering to minimize the number of rules and membership functions ( 26 ). ANFIS_A was generated by applying a second training step to FIS_A and FIS_B, respectively. The second training step used a neuro-adaptive learning technique to further refine the membership functions and rules ( 27 ). Validation of classifiers To quantify the training of each classifier for differentiating pure edema and pure tumor, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was performed. From ROC curves, generated using the entire training data set, a threshold that resulted in the point closest to perfect accuracy (probability of true positive = 1, probability of false positive = 0) was determined for each continuous classifier output. To further assess each classifier, each was applied to the ROIs consisting of either peritumoral edema of meningiomas or contrast-enhancing tumor of GBMs and meningiomas. The initial segmentation and classification (see Figure 1 ) was considered the gold standard. The overlap index for each ROI was also calculated using ( 28 ): overlap index = | X ? Y | / | Y | where X was the set of voxels correctly identified by a classifier and Y was the set of voxels determined by the initial segmentation and classification. This index is sensitive to errors in size and location, and results over 0.75 correspond to good agreement ( 28 ). Finally, since image-guided biopsy results were not available, adjunct radiological and clinical evidence was used to corroborate predicted areas of tumor invasion on a case by case basis.  Imaging protocol Image data collected included morphological MR (T2w FLAIR, pre- and post-contrast T1w), MR diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), MR diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and MR dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI). MR studies were performed on a 1.5-T MR scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) with a head coil and typically during the same session. Images for each patient were acquired as detailed below, though some studies may have used slight variations for such things as echo time, repetition time, or field of view (FOV). To account for variations, a standardization routine was employed as described in the post-processing section below. Images of interest to this study were acquired in the axial plane. A T1w series of images was acquired prior to contrast administration using a standard 2D spin echo (SE) sequence (TE=14 ms, TR=650 ms, flip angle=90°, NEX=1, FOV=22–24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip space=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=256 × 192, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). The T2w series of images was also acquired prior to contrast administration using a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence (TE=133 ms, TI=2200 ms, TR=10002 ms, flip angle=90°, NEX=0.5, FOV=22–24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=256 × 192, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). The diffusion-weighted series of images was acquired using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) SE sequence with diffusion gradients applied in 3 orthogonal directions (TE=79.5 ms, TR=10000 ms, b=1000 s/mm2, flip angle=90°, NEX=1, FOV=24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=128 × 128, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). Diffusion tensor series of images were acquired using an EPI SE sequence with diffusion gradients applied in 25 directions (TE=85.9 ms, TR=6000 ms, b=1000 s/mm2, FOV=24 cm, slice thickness=5 mm, skip=1.5 mm, acquisition matrix=128 × 128, reconstruction matrix=256 × 256). Following administration of the first bolus of contrast agent, the post-contrast T1w (T1w+C) series of images was acquired using the same sequence and parameters as the pre-contrast T1w images described above. DSC PWI was performed as described in ( 19 ) and summarized here. The first bolus of contrast agent was a 0.05–0.10 mmole/kg dose of gadodiamide (Omniscan; Nycomed Amersham, Princeton, NJ) helped to diminish T1 effects that might result from agent extravasation. If the initial tissue T1 is decreased with contrast agent, subsequent changes in T1, which might occur during the first-pass study, are minimized. Five 7-mm thick simultaneous gradient echo (GE) and SE images were acquired every second during the interval 1 minute before and 2 minutes after a second bolus injection (0.15–0.25 mmol/kg dose). The slices were acquired using a single-shot blipped EPI sequence with TE(GE)=30 ms and TE(SE)=109.1 ms, fat suppression, TR=1000 ms, FOV=24 cm, and acquisition matrix=64 × 64. Following DSC, a second series of post-contrast T1w images was acquired in the same five slice locations. Adjunct metabolic images, when available, were also collected and included proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) and/or 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography (18FDG PET).  Postprocessing ADC maps were calculated from the original DWI images. Mean diffusivity (MD) and fractional anisotropy (FA) maps were generated from DTI images (GE Advantage Workstation, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI) ( 20 ). Relative cerebral blood volume maps were calculated from GE/SE DSC images as described in ( 19 ). Two rCBV maps (i.e., rCBVGE and rCBVSE) and one ratio map (?R2*/?R2), an index of mean vessel diameter, were generated for each slice location using AFNI ( http://afni.nimh.nih.gov , NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA) and locally developed code. FLAIR, T1w, T1w+C, rCBVGE, and rCBVSE were standardized using a method described in ( 21 , 22 ). The method of intensity standardization was similar to a simple window-level transformation typically used for contrast enhancement, which maps the intensities at or below the bottom of window to black, intensities at or above the top of the window to white, and all intensities between are linearly mapped to a grayscale between black and white. Application to rCBV maps recently described ( 22 ) resulted in an increased separation of mean white and gray matter rCBV values along with increased contrast along the tumor border. For this study, the L4 set of landmarks from ( 21 ) was used, which consists of the percentile points in the set (0, 10, …, 90, 99.8). Images and maps from the set of patients in this study were used to train the standardization scheme to determine where the landmarks should be placed on the standardized scale. The trained parameters were then used to perform a piecewise-linear transformation to transpose original values within the selected percentile ranges to the standardized range. In order to determine areas of contrast uptake, a difference image (?T1w) was generated from standardized T1w+C and T1w images by subtracting the pre-contrast signal from the post-contrast signal within each voxel. Within each patient study, further post-processing for each individual image and feature map included registration and bilinear interpolation to scale all images to the matrix size and resolution equal to the highest resolution image. A 2D registration method with rigid transformation for single slices based on the Procrustes algorithm ( 23 ) was employed to correct in-plane movements. For some cases, when images were acquired over multiple sessions or with non-negligible out-of-plane motion, it was necessary to use a 3D registration method, FLIRT ( http://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/flirt/ ) ( 24 ).  Initial segmentation and classification A rough region of interest (ROI) encompassing the hyperintense region and some surrounding normal-appearing tissue was drawn for each selected slice location. Within this ROI, a threshold-based segmentation and classification scheme was used to initially identify voxels as tumor, peritumoral edema, necrosis, or CSF ( Figure 1 ). First, voxels in the ?T1w image above a supervised variable threshold (typically 5% of the maximum difference signal) and within the rough ROI were put into the contrast-enhancing ROI. This ROI corresponds to the contrast-enhancing regions seen on a T1w post-contrast image and assumed to be tumor. Morphological close and fill operations were performed on the contrast-enhancing ROI to generate the contrast-enhancing+necrosis ROI. Voxels in the FLAIR image above a supervised variable threshold (typically 40% of maximum signal) and within the rough ROI were put into the contrast-enhancing/necrosis/peritumoral edema ROI. This ROI corresponds to the hyperintense intracranial, ipsalateral regions seen on a FLAIR image. In order to separate the peritumoral edema voxels from contrast-enhancing tumor and necrosis, the union of the contrast-enhancing/necrosis ROI generated from the ? T1w image and the contrast-enhancing/necrosis/peritumoral edema ROI generated from the FLAIR image was subtracted from the tumor/necrosis/peritumoral edema ROI. Two ROIs resulting from the initial segmentation and classification scheme, one consisting of the contrast-enhancing voxels and assumed to be tumor and another consisting of the peritumoral edematous voxels, were considered for further processing as described below.  Training data and final classification In order to identify tumor invasion within the peritumoral edema ROI, training data for potential classification schemes were selected from the first 15 patients collected ( Table 1 , patients A-O). Five of these patients were excluded from the training set due to no visible edema or missing image data, but retained for further testing as described below. The pure edema samples were from the peritumoral edema ROI of meningioma patients ( n =3, patients A, D, and E), since menigiomas have a clear delineation of tumor and edema with no evidence of tumor invasion within the edematous region. The pure tumor samples were from the contrast-enhancing ROI of untreated GBM patients ( n =7, patients F, G, J, K, M, N, and O). A total of n =11597 voxels were identified as pure edema ( i.e ., peri24 tumoral edema voxels of meningioma subjects), and n =11919 voxels as pure tumor ( i.e ., contrast-enhancing voxels for GBM subjects), and n =24043 voxels as edema with possible tumor invasion ( i.e ., peritumoral edema voxels of GBM subjects). A total of four classifiers were trained and tested using subsets of 5000 samples equally divided between pure edema and pure tumor and randomly drawn from the entire set of training data. The inputs to all four classifiers were the same: FLAIR (standardized), T1w (standardized), ADC, MD, FA, rCBVGE, rCBVSE, and ?R2*/?R2. LR_A was a logistic linear regression model. MLPNN_A were multilayer perceptron neural networks ( 25 ) consisting of n feature inputs, two hidden layers, and one output. The hidden layers for MLPNN_A contained 17 and 9 perceptrons. Training was performed for a maximum of 500 epochs. FIS_A was a Sugeno-type fuzzy inference system generated using fuzzy subtractive clustering to minimize the number of rules and membership functions ( 26 ). ANFIS_A was generated by applying a second training step to FIS_A and FIS_B, respectively. The second training step used a neuro-adaptive learning technique to further refine the membership functions and rules ( 27 ).  Validation of classifiers To quantify the training of each classifier for differentiating pure edema and pure tumor, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was performed. From ROC curves, generated using the entire training data set, a threshold that resulted in the point closest to perfect accuracy (probability of true positive = 1, probability of false positive = 0) was determined for each continuous classifier output. To further assess each classifier, each was applied to the ROIs consisting of either peritumoral edema of meningiomas or contrast-enhancing tumor of GBMs and meningiomas. The initial segmentation and classification (see Figure 1 ) was considered the gold standard. The overlap index for each ROI was also calculated using ( 28 ): overlap index = | X ? Y | / | Y | where X was the set of voxels correctly identified by a classifier and Y was the set of voxels determined by the initial segmentation and classification. This index is sensitive to errors in size and location, and results over 0.75 correspond to good agreement ( 28 ). Finally, since image-guided biopsy results were not available, adjunct radiological and clinical evidence was used to corroborate predicted areas of tumor invasion on a case by case basis.  Results Figure 2 and Table 3 provide the ROC Az values of individual features to discriminate pure edema and pure tumor samples. Standardized rCBVGE had the highest Az, and only perfusion-based measures were better than chance (Az > 0.5). Table 3 shows the ROC Az values of each classifier. All classifiers showed good generalization with only minor differences in ROC Az for training and testing samples. The classifiers also exhibited better discrimination than any single feature alone. Table 4 and Table 5 report the overlap indicies for the classifier output with ROIs consisting of voxels in the training data and not in the training data, respectively. While all classifiers provided good agreement with the training ROIs, only the MLPNN_A and FIS_A classifiers maintained this agreement for the testing ROIs. Figure 3 shows a slice from patient E originally included in the training set, but removed when a portion of the peritumoral edematous region was verified from adjunct imaging as tumor. Initial segmentation and classification only identified edema since there was little to no enhancement after the first bolus of contrast, but final classification by MLPNN_A showed a large area of tumor. This was validated by an enhancing area seen on the T1w+C, post-DSC image after the second bolus of contrast agent ( Figure 3 ). Similar results (not shown) were achieved with the other classifiers. Figure 4 shows a slice location from Patient G (GBM) prior to treatment. Tumor invasion is predicted within the edematous regions anterior and medial to the contrast-enhancing areas. During follow up studies at 5 and 6 months post-treatment, radiological evidence indicative of tumor recurrence included new areas of contrast enhancement, high uptake of 18FDG tracer, increased choline, and decreased N-acetyl- aspartate (NAA). The areas of recurrence corresponded to the same areas of tumor invasion as predicted by the pre-treatment CAD images ( Figure 4 ). Patient H had surgically-confirmed recurrent tumor and radiation necrosis within the same contrast-enhancing lesion. Figure 5 shows pre-operative images prior to the second resection. The classifiers divided the lesion into two areas, one tumor and one non-tumor, in agreement with the surgical results ( Figure 5 ).  Results Figure 2 and Table 3 provide the ROC Az values of individual features to discriminate pure edema and pure tumor samples. Standardized rCBVGE had the highest Az, and only perfusion-based measures were better than chance (Az > 0.5). Table 3 shows the ROC Az values of each classifier. All classifiers showed good generalization with only minor differences in ROC Az for training and testing samples. The classifiers also exhibited better discrimination than any single feature alone. Table 4 and Table 5 report the overlap indicies for the classifier output with ROIs consisting of voxels in the training data and not in the training data, respectively. While all classifiers provided good agreement with the training ROIs, only the MLPNN_A and FIS_A classifiers maintained this agreement for the testing ROIs. Figure 3 shows a slice from patient E originally included in the training set, but removed when a portion of the peritumoral edematous region was verified from adjunct imaging as tumor. Initial segmentation and classification only identified edema since there was little to no enhancement after the first bolus of contrast, but final classification by MLPNN_A showed a large area of tumor. This was validated by an enhancing area seen on the T1w+C, post-DSC image after the second bolus of contrast agent ( Figure 3 ). Similar results (not shown) were achieved with the other classifiers. Figure 4 shows a slice location from Patient G (GBM) prior to treatment. Tumor invasion is predicted within the edematous regions anterior and medial to the contrast-enhancing areas. During follow up studies at 5 and 6 months post-treatment, radiological evidence indicative of tumor recurrence included new areas of contrast enhancement, high uptake of 18FDG tracer, increased choline, and decreased N-acetyl- aspartate (NAA). The areas of recurrence corresponded to the same areas of tumor invasion as predicted by the pre-treatment CAD images ( Figure 4 ). Patient H had surgically-confirmed recurrent tumor and radiation necrosis within the same contrast-enhancing lesion. Figure 5 shows pre-operative images prior to the second resection. The classifiers divided the lesion into two areas, one tumor and one non-tumor, in agreement with the surgical results ( Figure 5 ).  Discussion A number of recent studies have reported detection of brain tumor invasion outside contrast-enhancing areas ( 8 , 29 , 30 ). These studies used one of several molecular imaging techniques ( i.e ., PET, SPECT, or 1H MRS) that have low spatial resolution and long acquisition times, may involve exposure to radiological pharmaceuticals, and/or are limited to specific anatomical sites ( e.g ., 1H MRS must avoid skull and meninges). The methods in this study employed higher spatial resolution techniques available on most clinical MR scanners and were applicable to all intracranial areas. As the results demonstrate, the combination of multiparametric imaging and computational intelligence resulted in the ability to identify tumor invasion not visualized on initial morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted images and maps. Based on a sensitivity analysis (results not shown), the outputs of all classifiers were most sensitive to standardized rCBVGE. A relationship between tumor invasion and rCBV values is supported by other research. The rCBVGE measure has been shown to be sensitive to blood vessels of all sizes while the rCBVSE and ?R2*/?R2 measures are sensitive to small vessels and mean vessel diameter, respectively ( 31 ). A positive correlation between rCBV, VEGF expression, and histologic grade in nonenhancing gliomas has been reported ( 32 ). The maximum normalized rCBV within a tumor was related to histological measures of vascularity index, proliferative activity, and necrosis ( 33 ). The maximum rCBV also correlated with maximum methyl-[11C]-L-methionine uptake as measured by PET, an indirect measurement of microvessel density and angiogenesis ( 34 ). After rCBVGE, FA had the second biggest impact on the outputs of the fuzzy inference systems with perfusion-weighted measures (FIS_A, ANFIS_A) based on the same sensitivity analysis (results not shown). FA values have been reported to correlate positively with cell density measurements and MIB-1 indices from stereotactic biopsies ( 17 , 20 ), but microscopic features such as spindle-shaped neoplastic cells, elongated nuclei, alignment of cells in a preferred direction, or possibly cellular palisading could also impact the degree of anisotropy ( 35 ). It has been suggested FA values should not be used alone for tumor tissue discrimination as anisotropic measurements can be confounding because tumor can both increase anisotropy through compression of white matter and decrease anisotropy by infiltrating white matter tracts ( 36 ). The results demonstrated by this study tend to support the previous suggestion, as FA was shown to be a poor discriminator of pure tumor and pure edema on its own but led to improvements when combined with other features. The classifiers developed for this study performed well for differentiating pure tumor from pure edema based on the ROC Az and overlap indicies. To take it a step farther the spatial pattern of the output values within the peritumoral edema was investigated. For menigiomas included in the training cases, the defuzzified classifier output delineated the tumor border near the edge of contrast enhancement. This was expected since tumor invasion is not typically found within the edematous regions for this tumor type. For one case, the tumor was detected even when little or no enhancement was seen following the initial single dose of contrast agent. For untreated GBMs, areas of tumor invasion predicted by the classifier tended to be adjacent to the borders of contrast enhancement. Unlike the menigiomas, the classifier output values tended to gradually decrease from high to low values from the edge of contrast enhancement to the edge of FLAIR hyperintensity. This pattern of tumor invasion within the peritumoral edema corresponds to typical findings for GBMs reported in the literature. Histological evidence shows the zone of invasion (penumbra) around the core mass may vary in thickness from 1 mm to several centimeters ( 37 ). Invasive cells tend to migrate along myelinated fiber tracts, basement membranes of blood vessels, and within perivascular spaces ( 37 ). Hypoxia indicated by increased expression of HIF-1? was found in tumoral, leading edge, and peritumoral regions of GBMs ( 38 ). VEGFA, an angiogenic factor thought to be important for tumor angiogenesis, was found to be elevated in high-grade astrocytomas in the border of contrast-enhancing tumor and in tumor cells invading adjacent brain outside the contrast-enhancing area ( 39 ). Mathematical models based on longitudinal radiological studies of gliomas with and without treatement suggest the invading tumor cells form a traveling wave and diffuse preferentially towards areas of lower tumor cell concentration and away from the origin of the tumor ( 3 ). The growth can be accurately modeled if the change in tumor cell concentration is modeled with a diffusive and proliferative components, with the diffusion coefficient of tumor cells being higher in white matter than gray matter. This forms a gradient starting from the edge of contrast enhancement and extending into areas surrounding contrast enhancement in agreement with histological evidence. For some cases, adjunct metabolic images and follow up studies were available for comparison. Tumor invasion as detected by the classifier corresponded to areas of high choline and high choline:NAA measured with 1H MRS, high 18FDG uptake measured with PET, and/or areas of recurrence following treatment. Choline:NAA has been proven to be sensitive to tumor invasion ( 40 ). Based on this, the combination of morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted features may be providing similar information as the molecular imaging techniques. Though these results are quite promising regarding the ability to detect invading tumor cells not visible with standard MRI, a histological spatial comparison is needed to further explore and validate the classifier outputs for their potential indication of the degree of angiogenesis and invasion. Consequently a study where spatially-accurate tissue samples, obtained at surgery, are spatially-correlated with imaging findings and CAD outputs is currently underway and will be the subject of future manuscripts. In conclusion, the combination of features derived from morphological, diffusion-weighted and perfusion-weighted MR imaging methods contains information necessary for detection of tumor invasion, as the application of multiparametric imaging and computational intelligence resulted in the ability to identify tumor invasion not previously visualized on morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted images and maps. Further validation of this approach requires obtaining spatially co-registered tissue samples in a study with a larger sample size.  Discussion A number of recent studies have reported detection of brain tumor invasion outside contrast-enhancing areas ( 8 , 29 , 30 ). These studies used one of several molecular imaging techniques ( i.e ., PET, SPECT, or 1H MRS) that have low spatial resolution and long acquisition times, may involve exposure to radiological pharmaceuticals, and/or are limited to specific anatomical sites ( e.g ., 1H MRS must avoid skull and meninges). The methods in this study employed higher spatial resolution techniques available on most clinical MR scanners and were applicable to all intracranial areas. As the results demonstrate, the combination of multiparametric imaging and computational intelligence resulted in the ability to identify tumor invasion not visualized on initial morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted images and maps. Based on a sensitivity analysis (results not shown), the outputs of all classifiers were most sensitive to standardized rCBVGE. A relationship between tumor invasion and rCBV values is supported by other research. The rCBVGE measure has been shown to be sensitive to blood vessels of all sizes while the rCBVSE and ?R2*/?R2 measures are sensitive to small vessels and mean vessel diameter, respectively ( 31 ). A positive correlation between rCBV, VEGF expression, and histologic grade in nonenhancing gliomas has been reported ( 32 ). The maximum normalized rCBV within a tumor was related to histological measures of vascularity index, proliferative activity, and necrosis ( 33 ). The maximum rCBV also correlated with maximum methyl-[11C]-L-methionine uptake as measured by PET, an indirect measurement of microvessel density and angiogenesis ( 34 ). After rCBVGE, FA had the second biggest impact on the outputs of the fuzzy inference systems with perfusion-weighted measures (FIS_A, ANFIS_A) based on the same sensitivity analysis (results not shown). FA values have been reported to correlate positively with cell density measurements and MIB-1 indices from stereotactic biopsies ( 17 , 20 ), but microscopic features such as spindle-shaped neoplastic cells, elongated nuclei, alignment of cells in a preferred direction, or possibly cellular palisading could also impact the degree of anisotropy ( 35 ). It has been suggested FA values should not be used alone for tumor tissue discrimination as anisotropic measurements can be confounding because tumor can both increase anisotropy through compression of white matter and decrease anisotropy by infiltrating white matter tracts ( 36 ). The results demonstrated by this study tend to support the previous suggestion, as FA was shown to be a poor discriminator of pure tumor and pure edema on its own but led to improvements when combined with other features. The classifiers developed for this study performed well for differentiating pure tumor from pure edema based on the ROC Az and overlap indicies. To take it a step farther the spatial pattern of the output values within the peritumoral edema was investigated. For menigiomas included in the training cases, the defuzzified classifier output delineated the tumor border near the edge of contrast enhancement. This was expected since tumor invasion is not typically found within the edematous regions for this tumor type. For one case, the tumor was detected even when little or no enhancement was seen following the initial single dose of contrast agent. For untreated GBMs, areas of tumor invasion predicted by the classifier tended to be adjacent to the borders of contrast enhancement. Unlike the menigiomas, the classifier output values tended to gradually decrease from high to low values from the edge of contrast enhancement to the edge of FLAIR hyperintensity. This pattern of tumor invasion within the peritumoral edema corresponds to typical findings for GBMs reported in the literature. Histological evidence shows the zone of invasion (penumbra) around the core mass may vary in thickness from 1 mm to several centimeters ( 37 ). Invasive cells tend to migrate along myelinated fiber tracts, basement membranes of blood vessels, and within perivascular spaces ( 37 ). Hypoxia indicated by increased expression of HIF-1? was found in tumoral, leading edge, and peritumoral regions of GBMs ( 38 ). VEGFA, an angiogenic factor thought to be important for tumor angiogenesis, was found to be elevated in high-grade astrocytomas in the border of contrast-enhancing tumor and in tumor cells invading adjacent brain outside the contrast-enhancing area ( 39 ). Mathematical models based on longitudinal radiological studies of gliomas with and without treatement suggest the invading tumor cells form a traveling wave and diffuse preferentially towards areas of lower tumor cell concentration and away from the origin of the tumor ( 3 ). The growth can be accurately modeled if the change in tumor cell concentration is modeled with a diffusive and proliferative components, with the diffusion coefficient of tumor cells being higher in white matter than gray matter. This forms a gradient starting from the edge of contrast enhancement and extending into areas surrounding contrast enhancement in agreement with histological evidence. For some cases, adjunct metabolic images and follow up studies were available for comparison. Tumor invasion as detected by the classifier corresponded to areas of high choline and high choline:NAA measured with 1H MRS, high 18FDG uptake measured with PET, and/or areas of recurrence following treatment. Choline:NAA has been proven to be sensitive to tumor invasion ( 40 ). Based on this, the combination of morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted features may be providing similar information as the molecular imaging techniques. Though these results are quite promising regarding the ability to detect invading tumor cells not visible with standard MRI, a histological spatial comparison is needed to further explore and validate the classifier outputs for their potential indication of the degree of angiogenesis and invasion. Consequently a study where spatially-accurate tissue samples, obtained at surgery, are spatially-correlated with imaging findings and CAD outputs is currently underway and will be the subject of future manuscripts. In conclusion, the combination of features derived from morphological, diffusion-weighted and perfusion-weighted MR imaging methods contains information necessary for detection of tumor invasion, as the application of multiparametric imaging and computational intelligence resulted in the ability to identify tumor invasion not previously visualized on morphological, diffusion-weighted, and perfusion-weighted images and maps. Further validation of this approach requires obtaining spatially co-registered tissue samples in a study with a larger sample size. 