Imprinting Disorders and Assisted Reproductive Technology Worldwide use of assisted reproductive technology (ART) accounts for an estimated 1 to 3% of births. Since 2002, a series of reports have suggested an increased risk of imprinting disorders (Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Angelman syndrome) in children conceived by ART. Definitive conclusions are difficult to substantiate due to the rarity of imprinting disorders and the variability in ART protocols. Despite these limitations, there is biological plausibility for alteration in nongenomic inheritance caused by ART. Animal studies have shown that ART procedures can alter normal imprinting, specifically DNA methylation patterns. Collectively, studies suggest an association between ART and loss of maternal methylation. More recent reports examined a possible association between ART and global hypomethylation of DNA. Three other imprinting disorders (Silver-Russell syndrome, maternal hypomethylation syndrome, and retinoblastoma) have also been implicated, but there is insufficient evidence to establish an association of these syndromes with ART. Based on current evidence, the absolute risk of imprinting disorders after ART remains small and does not warrant routine screening. Large prospective studies are needed to better understand the risks associated with imprinting disorders, imprinting defects, and ART.  CONCLUSION Several studies have suggested a possible link between ART and various imprinting disorders including BWS, AS, SRS, maternal hypomethylation syndrome, and retinoblastoma. Concern seems warranted because ART procedures including ovarian stimulation and the manipulation of preimplantation embryos occur during critical developmental periods ( Fig. 1 ) when genomic imprints have been shown to be vulnerable in animal studies. Although evidence is limited, the strongest data in humans suggest that there may be an increased risk of BWS in children conceived by ART. Independent studies have reported an association between ART and BWS. Furthermore, the finding of a greater percentage of BWS cases caused by loss of maternal methylation after ART than in the general BWS population ( Table 1 ) supports the association and is consistent with altered imprinting due to ART. Similarly, an association between ART and AS was suggested by the reports of five cases of AS caused by imprinting defects (e.g., loss of methylation at the SNRPN imprinting control region) on the maternal allele in children conceived by ART. The frequent finding of hypomethylation of maternal alleles leading to imprinting disorders in children conceived by ART lends credence to a link between ART and sporadic global demethylation at multiple loci. This question has not yet been settled, but it highlights the need for careful follow-up of ART-conceived children into adulthood because small epigenetic changes could have consequences, affect long-term morbidity, or have transgenerational effects. Due to the variation in ART protocols worldwide, limitations in sample size, and the inability to control for all the variables and confounders involved, it has been difficult to rigorously relate an association between imprinting disorders and any one specific ART procedure (e.g., IVF, ICSI, embryo culture). This has led some investigators to conclude that the increased risk of imprinting disorders is due to underlying subfertility or ovarian stimulation without subsequent in vitro procedures. However, that association remains unproven. Prospective studies are needed to examine these associations and test for potential long-term effects of ART. In the meantime, routine screening for imprinting disorders is not justified in offspring conceived by ART because the absolute risk of imprinting disorders is small. Nevertheless, parents seeking ART should be counseled about the possible increased risk of imprinting disorders.  Figure and Table Figure 1 Assisted reproductive technology (ART) procedures occur during developmental periods when genomic imprints have been shown to be vulnerable in animal studies. Gametogenesis in both males and females represents a critical stage because genomic imprints are erased and reestablished in developing gametes. The paternal allele (male gamete) imprints are established much earlier during gametogenesis than the maternal allele (female gamete) imprints, making it more likely that ART (especially ovulation induction) would affect maternal allele imprints. Postfertilization, there is a second critical time during which there is global demethylation of nonimprinted sequences with maintenance of imprinted sequences. ART procedures expose the developing embryo to in vitro culture and manipulation during this time of methylation maintenance. Table 1 Molecular Mechanism for Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome after Assisted Reproductive Technology Citation No. of BWS Pts Post-ART No. of BWS Pts Post-ART Tested No. of BWS Pts Post-ART with LOM * Percentage of BWS Pts Post-ART Tested with LOM Percentage of Total BWS Pts Post-ART with LOM DeBaun et al 22 7 6 5 83.3 71.4 Maher et al 26 6 2 2 100.0 33.3 Gicquel et al 27 6 6 6 100.0 100.0 Halliday et al 28 4 3 3 100.0 75.0 Sutcliffe et al 32 11 8 8 100.0 72.7 Bowdin et al 33 1 1 1 100.0 100.0 Lim et al 36 25 25 24 96.0 96.0 Average percentages 97.0 78.3 Estimated percentage of BWS cases caused by LOM in the general BWS population 50–60 * LOM at KvDMR1 . BWS, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome; pts, patients; ART, assisted reproductive technology; LOM, loss of methylation. 