A Comparison of a Spiritually Based And Non-Spiritually Based Educational Intervention for Informed Decision Making for Prostate Cancer Screening Among Church-Attending African-American Men This pilot study examined the efficacy of a spiritually based educational intervention for increasing informed decision making for prostate cancer screening among African-American men. The intervention appeared to be effective for some study outcomes, such as knowledge and self-efficacy for screening informed decision making.  Methods Research Design The study used a pre-post randomized controlled trial in which churches were randomized to receive either the spiritually based or the comparison non-spiritual intervention condition. Baseline and immediate follow-up surveys assessed study outcomes. Setting and Recruitment Two area Baptist churches were recruited by convenience and through community contacts. These churches were in an urban area and were selected based on being comparable in size and structure. The churches were then randomized to the spiritually based or non-spiritual intervention. African-American men ages 45 and older who had not had prostate cancer were recruited through word of mouth, flyers, and announcements in the church bulletins and on church television monitors. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Participants provided written informed consent, were told they could withdraw at any time without penalty, and could refuse to answer any survey question for any reason. Study participants received a gift card of $25.00 at the end of the session. Intervention Description The intervention built on previous work with African-American women wherein a spiritually based approach was used to encourage mammography screening ( Holt, Kyles, Wiehagen, & Casey, 2003 ). Many of the processes of intervention development and pilot testing that were successful in the previous study were applied to the present study. The present intervention covered content areas, including anatomy and physiology, incidence, development, symptoms and treatment of prostate cancer, assessment of one's personal risk factors for prostate cancer (age, race, and family history), screening risks and benefits, and the importance of initial and repeat screening. Because the focus of the intervention was informed decision making, potential risks of screening were also addressed, and each man was encouraged to weigh his own risk profile and make a decision regarding screening with which he was comfortable, given his risk profile. For example, a man with a strong family history of prostate cancer might give more serious consideration to screening than a man with a normal risk profile who may decide that for himself the risks of screening (such as false positive, unnecessary biopsy) are not worth the potential benefit. The intervention consisted of an educational session led by a trained community health advisor (CHA) from each church. The pastor in each church identified a man to serve as the CHA. The study coordinator met with the potential CHA, introduced the project, verified his interest, and set up a time for his training session. CHAs were trained according to their availabilities, each receiving a half-day training on a weekday. CHAs trained separately in the spiritually based and non-spiritual conditions, and each CHA received training on only their assigned condition. They received training in the role of a CHA, the aims of the project, cancer, prostate cancer, informed decision making for screening, ethics in research, and how to deliver the material to the experimental group in a spiritually based manner (see Figure 1 for outline of training curriculum). Before being certified, the CHAs conducted and passed a practice educational session where they were rated by members of the project team and passed a knowledge examination on the material at a score of 80% or higher. Each session was conducted in a “Sunday school” fashion in which the CHA taught the session material (the lesson) to the class at church, using printed materials as a guide as Sunday school teachers use their lesson or the Bible as a guide. Each man who attended received his own copy to follow along and keep. The materials consisted of a professionally designed and produced 16-page full-color booklet with information on the aforementioned topics. The booklet was developed and pilot tested for this project ( Holt et al., In Press ), The materials contained spiritual content along with wellness and prostate information. The print materials were tested for readability using the Simplified Measure of Gobbledygook (SMOG) formula and revised to the 6th grade level (see Figure 2 ). The non-spiritual intervention was identical in all ways as the spiritual except that the content did not include spiritual themes or scripture. The development and pilot testing of the print materials used as the basis for the intervention are described elsewhere ( Holt et al., In Press ). Procedure Educational sessions were held at a time of convenience for participants. All data were collected in a single session. Sessions began with a brief introduction to the project and written informed consent procedure in which study staff summarized the document and ensured that all questions were addressed. Study staff distributed the self-administered baseline survey. The CHAs then conducted their group educational session that generally lasted an hour. CHAs taught either a spiritually based or non-spiritual educational session, based on random assignment by church. Finally, study staff administered an immediate follow-up survey to assess study outcomes. Instruments The impact of the intervention was evaluated through use of pre-test and immediate follow-up post-test self-administered questionnaires assessing the study outcomes. Responses were summed to form a composite score for each scale. Prostate cancer screening history Screening history was assessed by first defining digital rectal examination (DRE) and prostate specific antigen (PSA) tests, and then asking participants if they had ever had the test, and if so, the length of time since the tests were performed (within the past 12 months; more than 12 months ago). Knowledge Three types of knowledge were assessed. A 9-item instrument was used to assess knowledge of prostate cancer and risk factors, based on a previously validated instrument used to assess breast cancer knowledge ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). To examine knowledge specifically about the screening controversy, another 4-item instrument was developed to assess aspects of the screening controversy. Finally, a single item assessed the men's awareness of whether prostate cancer screening would prevent prostate cancer mortality. This item was developed by the investigators. For each of these instruments, correct responses were scored and summed. Possible scores for the Knowledge of Prostate Cancer Scale ranged from 0 to 9; possible scores for the Knowledge of the Screening Controversy Scale from 0 to 4. The single item Addressing Knowledge of the Relationship of Screening and Mortality was scored as either incorrect or correct for a possible score of 0 or 1. Higher scores indicated higher levels of knowledge. Reliability as internal consistency for the Knowledge of Prostate Cancer Scale was assessed by means of Cronbach's alpha and found to be acceptable in the present sample given the varied content domain (Cronbach's alpha = 0.66). Internal consistency for the Knowledge of the Screening Controversy Scale was low in the present sample but reflected the varied content domain (Cronbach's alpha = 0.43). In this way, these instruments function more as indices than as scales ( Helms, Henze, Sass, & Mifsud, 2006 ). Prostate cancer beliefs An existing Prostate Cancer Beliefs Scale was used to assess prostate cancer beliefs ( Cormier, Kwan, Reid, & Litwin, 2002 ). This 5-item instrument was scored by summing the agree/affirmative responses; possible scores range from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating more positive beliefs associated with the benefits of prostate cancer screening. Internal consistency was acceptable in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.75). Self-efficacy Self-efficacy was assessed for three behaviors: screening for prostate cancer, informed decision making regarding screening by means of PSA, and informed decision making regarding screening by means of a DRE. Self-efficacy for screening was assessed using the four-item Prostate Cancer Screening Self-Efficacy Scale used in previous research with this population ( Boehm et al., 1995 ). Participant responses were obtained on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating “not at all sure” and 5 indicating “very sure.” Responses were summed for a composite score operationalizing self-efficacy, with possible scores ranging from 4 to 20; higher scores indicated higher degrees of self-efficacy, The scale had strong internal reliability in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.81). The instrument was also shown to have discriminant validity in previous work ( Boehm et al., 1995 ). Self-efficacy for informed decision making about screening was assessed using a previous item used for PSA ( Gattellari & Ward, 2003 ) and an additional item adapted to assess self-efficacy for informed decision making for DRE. These items are treated as two separate and single items, and they are further independent measures from self-efficacy for prostate cancer screening. Perceived barriers to prostate cancer screening Not having identified an existing instrument in the literature, the authors developed an 8-item instrument to assess common barriers to having a prostate cancer screening based on an instrument from the mammography screening literature ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). Participants were asked to indicate if they agreed (score of 1) or disagreed (score of 0) that the item was a barrier. This instrument was scored by summing the responses, with scores ranging from 0 to 8, with higher scores indicating that the participant perceived a larger number of barriers to screening. Internal consistency was modest (Cronbach's alpha = 0.50) but sufficient given the variety of concepts assessed (cost, time, embarrassment) and comparable to previous work ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). Preparation for decision making The Preparation for Decision Scale assessed participants' evaluation of the intervention's impact upon their preparation for making a screening decision ( Graham & O'Conner, 2005 ). This instrument consisted of 10 items to which the participant could respond on a 1 to 5 Likert scale wherein 1 indicated “not at all” and 5 indicated “a great deal.” The responses were summed for a composite score; possible scores ranged from 10 to 50, with higher scores indicating a higher preparation for making a screening decision. Internal consistency was strong in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.99). Acceptability/appropriateness Immediately after the session, the men were asked if they believed the intervention was both acceptable and appropriate by assessing these variables in closed-ended fashion. They were also asked how much they liked the session. Participants were asked to write open-ended comments, such as what they learned from the session and if they found the session to be different from information typically received in a physician's office.  Research Design The study used a pre-post randomized controlled trial in which churches were randomized to receive either the spiritually based or the comparison non-spiritual intervention condition. Baseline and immediate follow-up surveys assessed study outcomes.  Setting and Recruitment Two area Baptist churches were recruited by convenience and through community contacts. These churches were in an urban area and were selected based on being comparable in size and structure. The churches were then randomized to the spiritually based or non-spiritual intervention. African-American men ages 45 and older who had not had prostate cancer were recruited through word of mouth, flyers, and announcements in the church bulletins and on church television monitors. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Participants provided written informed consent, were told they could withdraw at any time without penalty, and could refuse to answer any survey question for any reason. Study participants received a gift card of $25.00 at the end of the session.  Intervention Description The intervention built on previous work with African-American women wherein a spiritually based approach was used to encourage mammography screening ( Holt, Kyles, Wiehagen, & Casey, 2003 ). Many of the processes of intervention development and pilot testing that were successful in the previous study were applied to the present study. The present intervention covered content areas, including anatomy and physiology, incidence, development, symptoms and treatment of prostate cancer, assessment of one's personal risk factors for prostate cancer (age, race, and family history), screening risks and benefits, and the importance of initial and repeat screening. Because the focus of the intervention was informed decision making, potential risks of screening were also addressed, and each man was encouraged to weigh his own risk profile and make a decision regarding screening with which he was comfortable, given his risk profile. For example, a man with a strong family history of prostate cancer might give more serious consideration to screening than a man with a normal risk profile who may decide that for himself the risks of screening (such as false positive, unnecessary biopsy) are not worth the potential benefit. The intervention consisted of an educational session led by a trained community health advisor (CHA) from each church. The pastor in each church identified a man to serve as the CHA. The study coordinator met with the potential CHA, introduced the project, verified his interest, and set up a time for his training session. CHAs were trained according to their availabilities, each receiving a half-day training on a weekday. CHAs trained separately in the spiritually based and non-spiritual conditions, and each CHA received training on only their assigned condition. They received training in the role of a CHA, the aims of the project, cancer, prostate cancer, informed decision making for screening, ethics in research, and how to deliver the material to the experimental group in a spiritually based manner (see Figure 1 for outline of training curriculum). Before being certified, the CHAs conducted and passed a practice educational session where they were rated by members of the project team and passed a knowledge examination on the material at a score of 80% or higher. Each session was conducted in a “Sunday school” fashion in which the CHA taught the session material (the lesson) to the class at church, using printed materials as a guide as Sunday school teachers use their lesson or the Bible as a guide. Each man who attended received his own copy to follow along and keep. The materials consisted of a professionally designed and produced 16-page full-color booklet with information on the aforementioned topics. The booklet was developed and pilot tested for this project ( Holt et al., In Press ), The materials contained spiritual content along with wellness and prostate information. The print materials were tested for readability using the Simplified Measure of Gobbledygook (SMOG) formula and revised to the 6th grade level (see Figure 2 ). The non-spiritual intervention was identical in all ways as the spiritual except that the content did not include spiritual themes or scripture. The development and pilot testing of the print materials used as the basis for the intervention are described elsewhere ( Holt et al., In Press ).  Procedure Educational sessions were held at a time of convenience for participants. All data were collected in a single session. Sessions began with a brief introduction to the project and written informed consent procedure in which study staff summarized the document and ensured that all questions were addressed. Study staff distributed the self-administered baseline survey. The CHAs then conducted their group educational session that generally lasted an hour. CHAs taught either a spiritually based or non-spiritual educational session, based on random assignment by church. Finally, study staff administered an immediate follow-up survey to assess study outcomes.  Instruments The impact of the intervention was evaluated through use of pre-test and immediate follow-up post-test self-administered questionnaires assessing the study outcomes. Responses were summed to form a composite score for each scale. Prostate cancer screening history Screening history was assessed by first defining digital rectal examination (DRE) and prostate specific antigen (PSA) tests, and then asking participants if they had ever had the test, and if so, the length of time since the tests were performed (within the past 12 months; more than 12 months ago). Knowledge Three types of knowledge were assessed. A 9-item instrument was used to assess knowledge of prostate cancer and risk factors, based on a previously validated instrument used to assess breast cancer knowledge ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). To examine knowledge specifically about the screening controversy, another 4-item instrument was developed to assess aspects of the screening controversy. Finally, a single item assessed the men's awareness of whether prostate cancer screening would prevent prostate cancer mortality. This item was developed by the investigators. For each of these instruments, correct responses were scored and summed. Possible scores for the Knowledge of Prostate Cancer Scale ranged from 0 to 9; possible scores for the Knowledge of the Screening Controversy Scale from 0 to 4. The single item Addressing Knowledge of the Relationship of Screening and Mortality was scored as either incorrect or correct for a possible score of 0 or 1. Higher scores indicated higher levels of knowledge. Reliability as internal consistency for the Knowledge of Prostate Cancer Scale was assessed by means of Cronbach's alpha and found to be acceptable in the present sample given the varied content domain (Cronbach's alpha = 0.66). Internal consistency for the Knowledge of the Screening Controversy Scale was low in the present sample but reflected the varied content domain (Cronbach's alpha = 0.43). In this way, these instruments function more as indices than as scales ( Helms, Henze, Sass, & Mifsud, 2006 ). Prostate cancer beliefs An existing Prostate Cancer Beliefs Scale was used to assess prostate cancer beliefs ( Cormier, Kwan, Reid, & Litwin, 2002 ). This 5-item instrument was scored by summing the agree/affirmative responses; possible scores range from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating more positive beliefs associated with the benefits of prostate cancer screening. Internal consistency was acceptable in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.75). Self-efficacy Self-efficacy was assessed for three behaviors: screening for prostate cancer, informed decision making regarding screening by means of PSA, and informed decision making regarding screening by means of a DRE. Self-efficacy for screening was assessed using the four-item Prostate Cancer Screening Self-Efficacy Scale used in previous research with this population ( Boehm et al., 1995 ). Participant responses were obtained on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating “not at all sure” and 5 indicating “very sure.” Responses were summed for a composite score operationalizing self-efficacy, with possible scores ranging from 4 to 20; higher scores indicated higher degrees of self-efficacy, The scale had strong internal reliability in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.81). The instrument was also shown to have discriminant validity in previous work ( Boehm et al., 1995 ). Self-efficacy for informed decision making about screening was assessed using a previous item used for PSA ( Gattellari & Ward, 2003 ) and an additional item adapted to assess self-efficacy for informed decision making for DRE. These items are treated as two separate and single items, and they are further independent measures from self-efficacy for prostate cancer screening. Perceived barriers to prostate cancer screening Not having identified an existing instrument in the literature, the authors developed an 8-item instrument to assess common barriers to having a prostate cancer screening based on an instrument from the mammography screening literature ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). Participants were asked to indicate if they agreed (score of 1) or disagreed (score of 0) that the item was a barrier. This instrument was scored by summing the responses, with scores ranging from 0 to 8, with higher scores indicating that the participant perceived a larger number of barriers to screening. Internal consistency was modest (Cronbach's alpha = 0.50) but sufficient given the variety of concepts assessed (cost, time, embarrassment) and comparable to previous work ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). Preparation for decision making The Preparation for Decision Scale assessed participants' evaluation of the intervention's impact upon their preparation for making a screening decision ( Graham & O'Conner, 2005 ). This instrument consisted of 10 items to which the participant could respond on a 1 to 5 Likert scale wherein 1 indicated “not at all” and 5 indicated “a great deal.” The responses were summed for a composite score; possible scores ranged from 10 to 50, with higher scores indicating a higher preparation for making a screening decision. Internal consistency was strong in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.99). Acceptability/appropriateness Immediately after the session, the men were asked if they believed the intervention was both acceptable and appropriate by assessing these variables in closed-ended fashion. They were also asked how much they liked the session. Participants were asked to write open-ended comments, such as what they learned from the session and if they found the session to be different from information typically received in a physician's office.  Prostate cancer screening history Screening history was assessed by first defining digital rectal examination (DRE) and prostate specific antigen (PSA) tests, and then asking participants if they had ever had the test, and if so, the length of time since the tests were performed (within the past 12 months; more than 12 months ago).  Knowledge Three types of knowledge were assessed. A 9-item instrument was used to assess knowledge of prostate cancer and risk factors, based on a previously validated instrument used to assess breast cancer knowledge ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). To examine knowledge specifically about the screening controversy, another 4-item instrument was developed to assess aspects of the screening controversy. Finally, a single item assessed the men's awareness of whether prostate cancer screening would prevent prostate cancer mortality. This item was developed by the investigators. For each of these instruments, correct responses were scored and summed. Possible scores for the Knowledge of Prostate Cancer Scale ranged from 0 to 9; possible scores for the Knowledge of the Screening Controversy Scale from 0 to 4. The single item Addressing Knowledge of the Relationship of Screening and Mortality was scored as either incorrect or correct for a possible score of 0 or 1. Higher scores indicated higher levels of knowledge. Reliability as internal consistency for the Knowledge of Prostate Cancer Scale was assessed by means of Cronbach's alpha and found to be acceptable in the present sample given the varied content domain (Cronbach's alpha = 0.66). Internal consistency for the Knowledge of the Screening Controversy Scale was low in the present sample but reflected the varied content domain (Cronbach's alpha = 0.43). In this way, these instruments function more as indices than as scales ( Helms, Henze, Sass, & Mifsud, 2006 ).  Prostate cancer beliefs An existing Prostate Cancer Beliefs Scale was used to assess prostate cancer beliefs ( Cormier, Kwan, Reid, & Litwin, 2002 ). This 5-item instrument was scored by summing the agree/affirmative responses; possible scores range from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating more positive beliefs associated with the benefits of prostate cancer screening. Internal consistency was acceptable in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.75).  Self-efficacy Self-efficacy was assessed for three behaviors: screening for prostate cancer, informed decision making regarding screening by means of PSA, and informed decision making regarding screening by means of a DRE. Self-efficacy for screening was assessed using the four-item Prostate Cancer Screening Self-Efficacy Scale used in previous research with this population ( Boehm et al., 1995 ). Participant responses were obtained on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating “not at all sure” and 5 indicating “very sure.” Responses were summed for a composite score operationalizing self-efficacy, with possible scores ranging from 4 to 20; higher scores indicated higher degrees of self-efficacy, The scale had strong internal reliability in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.81). The instrument was also shown to have discriminant validity in previous work ( Boehm et al., 1995 ). Self-efficacy for informed decision making about screening was assessed using a previous item used for PSA ( Gattellari & Ward, 2003 ) and an additional item adapted to assess self-efficacy for informed decision making for DRE. These items are treated as two separate and single items, and they are further independent measures from self-efficacy for prostate cancer screening.  Perceived barriers to prostate cancer screening Not having identified an existing instrument in the literature, the authors developed an 8-item instrument to assess common barriers to having a prostate cancer screening based on an instrument from the mammography screening literature ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ). Participants were asked to indicate if they agreed (score of 1) or disagreed (score of 0) that the item was a barrier. This instrument was scored by summing the responses, with scores ranging from 0 to 8, with higher scores indicating that the participant perceived a larger number of barriers to screening. Internal consistency was modest (Cronbach's alpha = 0.50) but sufficient given the variety of concepts assessed (cost, time, embarrassment) and comparable to previous work ( Lukwago et al., 2003 ).  Preparation for decision making The Preparation for Decision Scale assessed participants' evaluation of the intervention's impact upon their preparation for making a screening decision ( Graham & O'Conner, 2005 ). This instrument consisted of 10 items to which the participant could respond on a 1 to 5 Likert scale wherein 1 indicated “not at all” and 5 indicated “a great deal.” The responses were summed for a composite score; possible scores ranged from 10 to 50, with higher scores indicating a higher preparation for making a screening decision. Internal consistency was strong in the present sample (Cronbach's alpha = 0.99).  Acceptability/appropriateness Immediately after the session, the men were asked if they believed the intervention was both acceptable and appropriate by assessing these variables in closed-ended fashion. They were also asked how much they liked the session. Participants were asked to write open-ended comments, such as what they learned from the session and if they found the session to be different from information typically received in a physician's office.  Results Initial examination of the data was conducted to evaluate the sample distributions and identify potential entry errors. Participant mean age, education, and income were compared between the study groups by t -tests. Baseline screening rates for PSA and DRE were compared using the chi-square test. Pre-test and post-test scores were calculated for the scales. The scores were approximately normally distributed, and group means for these measures were compared using t -tests. Items that were observed only at a single time point showed skewed distributions, and comparisons were conducted using Mann-Whitney U tests. For frequency-data, chi-square tests were conducted (except with low expected frequencies when Fisher's exact test was used). Sample A total of 49 men ages 45 to 90 ( M = 56,08, SD = 9.46) participated. The median household income before taxes was in the $50,000 to $60,000 bracket, and ranged from less than $5,000 to more than $70,000. Six (12.2%) reported having a family history of prostate cancer. About half (51%) indicated that they had ever had a PSA test, and of those, 28.6% indicated that they had a PSA test in the past 12 months. More than half (69%) indicated that they had ever had a DRE, and of those, 38.8% indicated that they had a DRE within the past 12 months. Participant characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Hypothesis Testing Table 2 provides the means and the standard deviations of the pre- and post-measures of informed decision making for the non-spiritual and the spiritual groups. Table 3 summarizes the comparisons of pre-post differences and post-only outcomes between the study groups. Table 4 presents the comparisons of the categorical outcomes between the study groups. Study group differences were not significant for any of the study outcomes. Knowledge Scores for the subscales for knowledge for both groups increased significantly from pre- to post-test except for the non-spiritual group, whose scores for knowledge of the screening controversy did not increase from pre- to post-assessment. The spiritual group's scores did increase significantly. Beliefs Prostate cancer beliefs did not increase from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group, and they increased only marginally in the spiritual group. Self-efficacy Scores on the screening self-efficacy scale increased significantly from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group only. Self-efficacy for informed decision making (for both PSA and DRE) increased significantly from pre- to post-test only in the spiritually based group. Perceived barriers to screening Perceived barriers were low in both groups at the pre-test measure and did not decrease significantly from pre- to post-test. Stage of decision making With regard to the stage of decision making, most ( n = 13, 26.5%) reported at baseline that they had already made a screening decision and were unlikely to change their mind, and this was also the case after the session ( n = 18, 36.7%). Most did not change their stage of decision making from pre- to post-test (see Table 4 ). Acceptability Both groups liked the intervention and found it to be acceptable and appropriate (non-spiritual, M = 4.89, SD = 0.32, spiritual, M = 4.97, SD = 0.18). Both groups felt that the intervention helped them prepare to make an informed decision about prostate cancer screening (non-spiritual, M = 47.15, SD = 7.03; spiritual, M = 46.15, SD = 10.03). Those in the spiritually based group reported reading significantly more of their print materials during the session, with 80.6% reporting that they had read the entire booklet compared to 44.4% in the non-spiritual group ( p < 0.01). Participant Reactions to the Intervention In addition to the closed-ended survey items, participants were asked a number of open-ended questions regarding the program. When asked how the educational session was different from information they would usually find in a doctor's office, participants indicated: “had time to ask more questions,” “up close with people I know,” and “someone you know you can now talk to about it.” When asked what they learned from the session, participants indicated: “that I need to be checked even if there are no symptoms,” “Black men are at high risk,” and “talking about it helps.”  Results Initial examination of the data was conducted to evaluate the sample distributions and identify potential entry errors. Participant mean age, education, and income were compared between the study groups by t -tests. Baseline screening rates for PSA and DRE were compared using the chi-square test. Pre-test and post-test scores were calculated for the scales. The scores were approximately normally distributed, and group means for these measures were compared using t -tests. Items that were observed only at a single time point showed skewed distributions, and comparisons were conducted using Mann-Whitney U tests. For frequency-data, chi-square tests were conducted (except with low expected frequencies when Fisher's exact test was used). Sample A total of 49 men ages 45 to 90 ( M = 56,08, SD = 9.46) participated. The median household income before taxes was in the $50,000 to $60,000 bracket, and ranged from less than $5,000 to more than $70,000. Six (12.2%) reported having a family history of prostate cancer. About half (51%) indicated that they had ever had a PSA test, and of those, 28.6% indicated that they had a PSA test in the past 12 months. More than half (69%) indicated that they had ever had a DRE, and of those, 38.8% indicated that they had a DRE within the past 12 months. Participant characteristics are summarized in Table 1 . Hypothesis Testing Table 2 provides the means and the standard deviations of the pre- and post-measures of informed decision making for the non-spiritual and the spiritual groups. Table 3 summarizes the comparisons of pre-post differences and post-only outcomes between the study groups. Table 4 presents the comparisons of the categorical outcomes between the study groups. Study group differences were not significant for any of the study outcomes. Knowledge Scores for the subscales for knowledge for both groups increased significantly from pre- to post-test except for the non-spiritual group, whose scores for knowledge of the screening controversy did not increase from pre- to post-assessment. The spiritual group's scores did increase significantly. Beliefs Prostate cancer beliefs did not increase from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group, and they increased only marginally in the spiritual group. Self-efficacy Scores on the screening self-efficacy scale increased significantly from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group only. Self-efficacy for informed decision making (for both PSA and DRE) increased significantly from pre- to post-test only in the spiritually based group. Perceived barriers to screening Perceived barriers were low in both groups at the pre-test measure and did not decrease significantly from pre- to post-test. Stage of decision making With regard to the stage of decision making, most ( n = 13, 26.5%) reported at baseline that they had already made a screening decision and were unlikely to change their mind, and this was also the case after the session ( n = 18, 36.7%). Most did not change their stage of decision making from pre- to post-test (see Table 4 ). Acceptability Both groups liked the intervention and found it to be acceptable and appropriate (non-spiritual, M = 4.89, SD = 0.32, spiritual, M = 4.97, SD = 0.18). Both groups felt that the intervention helped them prepare to make an informed decision about prostate cancer screening (non-spiritual, M = 47.15, SD = 7.03; spiritual, M = 46.15, SD = 10.03). Those in the spiritually based group reported reading significantly more of their print materials during the session, with 80.6% reporting that they had read the entire booklet compared to 44.4% in the non-spiritual group ( p < 0.01). Participant Reactions to the Intervention In addition to the closed-ended survey items, participants were asked a number of open-ended questions regarding the program. When asked how the educational session was different from information they would usually find in a doctor's office, participants indicated: “had time to ask more questions,” “up close with people I know,” and “someone you know you can now talk to about it.” When asked what they learned from the session, participants indicated: “that I need to be checked even if there are no symptoms,” “Black men are at high risk,” and “talking about it helps.”  Sample A total of 49 men ages 45 to 90 ( M = 56,08, SD = 9.46) participated. The median household income before taxes was in the $50,000 to $60,000 bracket, and ranged from less than $5,000 to more than $70,000. Six (12.2%) reported having a family history of prostate cancer. About half (51%) indicated that they had ever had a PSA test, and of those, 28.6% indicated that they had a PSA test in the past 12 months. More than half (69%) indicated that they had ever had a DRE, and of those, 38.8% indicated that they had a DRE within the past 12 months. Participant characteristics are summarized in Table 1 .  Sample A total of 49 men ages 45 to 90 ( M = 56,08, SD = 9.46) participated. The median household income before taxes was in the $50,000 to $60,000 bracket, and ranged from less than $5,000 to more than $70,000. Six (12.2%) reported having a family history of prostate cancer. About half (51%) indicated that they had ever had a PSA test, and of those, 28.6% indicated that they had a PSA test in the past 12 months. More than half (69%) indicated that they had ever had a DRE, and of those, 38.8% indicated that they had a DRE within the past 12 months. Participant characteristics are summarized in Table 1 .  Hypothesis Testing Table 2 provides the means and the standard deviations of the pre- and post-measures of informed decision making for the non-spiritual and the spiritual groups. Table 3 summarizes the comparisons of pre-post differences and post-only outcomes between the study groups. Table 4 presents the comparisons of the categorical outcomes between the study groups. Study group differences were not significant for any of the study outcomes. Knowledge Scores for the subscales for knowledge for both groups increased significantly from pre- to post-test except for the non-spiritual group, whose scores for knowledge of the screening controversy did not increase from pre- to post-assessment. The spiritual group's scores did increase significantly. Beliefs Prostate cancer beliefs did not increase from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group, and they increased only marginally in the spiritual group. Self-efficacy Scores on the screening self-efficacy scale increased significantly from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group only. Self-efficacy for informed decision making (for both PSA and DRE) increased significantly from pre- to post-test only in the spiritually based group. Perceived barriers to screening Perceived barriers were low in both groups at the pre-test measure and did not decrease significantly from pre- to post-test. Stage of decision making With regard to the stage of decision making, most ( n = 13, 26.5%) reported at baseline that they had already made a screening decision and were unlikely to change their mind, and this was also the case after the session ( n = 18, 36.7%). Most did not change their stage of decision making from pre- to post-test (see Table 4 ). Acceptability Both groups liked the intervention and found it to be acceptable and appropriate (non-spiritual, M = 4.89, SD = 0.32, spiritual, M = 4.97, SD = 0.18). Both groups felt that the intervention helped them prepare to make an informed decision about prostate cancer screening (non-spiritual, M = 47.15, SD = 7.03; spiritual, M = 46.15, SD = 10.03). Those in the spiritually based group reported reading significantly more of their print materials during the session, with 80.6% reporting that they had read the entire booklet compared to 44.4% in the non-spiritual group ( p < 0.01).  Hypothesis Testing Table 2 provides the means and the standard deviations of the pre- and post-measures of informed decision making for the non-spiritual and the spiritual groups. Table 3 summarizes the comparisons of pre-post differences and post-only outcomes between the study groups. Table 4 presents the comparisons of the categorical outcomes between the study groups. Study group differences were not significant for any of the study outcomes. Knowledge Scores for the subscales for knowledge for both groups increased significantly from pre- to post-test except for the non-spiritual group, whose scores for knowledge of the screening controversy did not increase from pre- to post-assessment. The spiritual group's scores did increase significantly. Beliefs Prostate cancer beliefs did not increase from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group, and they increased only marginally in the spiritual group. Self-efficacy Scores on the screening self-efficacy scale increased significantly from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group only. Self-efficacy for informed decision making (for both PSA and DRE) increased significantly from pre- to post-test only in the spiritually based group. Perceived barriers to screening Perceived barriers were low in both groups at the pre-test measure and did not decrease significantly from pre- to post-test. Stage of decision making With regard to the stage of decision making, most ( n = 13, 26.5%) reported at baseline that they had already made a screening decision and were unlikely to change their mind, and this was also the case after the session ( n = 18, 36.7%). Most did not change their stage of decision making from pre- to post-test (see Table 4 ). Acceptability Both groups liked the intervention and found it to be acceptable and appropriate (non-spiritual, M = 4.89, SD = 0.32, spiritual, M = 4.97, SD = 0.18). Both groups felt that the intervention helped them prepare to make an informed decision about prostate cancer screening (non-spiritual, M = 47.15, SD = 7.03; spiritual, M = 46.15, SD = 10.03). Those in the spiritually based group reported reading significantly more of their print materials during the session, with 80.6% reporting that they had read the entire booklet compared to 44.4% in the non-spiritual group ( p < 0.01).  Knowledge Scores for the subscales for knowledge for both groups increased significantly from pre- to post-test except for the non-spiritual group, whose scores for knowledge of the screening controversy did not increase from pre- to post-assessment. The spiritual group's scores did increase significantly.  Knowledge Scores for the subscales for knowledge for both groups increased significantly from pre- to post-test except for the non-spiritual group, whose scores for knowledge of the screening controversy did not increase from pre- to post-assessment. The spiritual group's scores did increase significantly.  Beliefs Prostate cancer beliefs did not increase from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group, and they increased only marginally in the spiritual group.  Beliefs Prostate cancer beliefs did not increase from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group, and they increased only marginally in the spiritual group.  Self-efficacy Scores on the screening self-efficacy scale increased significantly from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group only. Self-efficacy for informed decision making (for both PSA and DRE) increased significantly from pre- to post-test only in the spiritually based group.  Self-efficacy Scores on the screening self-efficacy scale increased significantly from pre- to post-test in the non-spiritual group only. Self-efficacy for informed decision making (for both PSA and DRE) increased significantly from pre- to post-test only in the spiritually based group.  Perceived barriers to screening Perceived barriers were low in both groups at the pre-test measure and did not decrease significantly from pre- to post-test.  Perceived barriers to screening Perceived barriers were low in both groups at the pre-test measure and did not decrease significantly from pre- to post-test.  Stage of decision making With regard to the stage of decision making, most ( n = 13, 26.5%) reported at baseline that they had already made a screening decision and were unlikely to change their mind, and this was also the case after the session ( n = 18, 36.7%). Most did not change their stage of decision making from pre- to post-test (see Table 4 ).  Stage of decision making With regard to the stage of decision making, most ( n = 13, 26.5%) reported at baseline that they had already made a screening decision and were unlikely to change their mind, and this was also the case after the session ( n = 18, 36.7%). Most did not change their stage of decision making from pre- to post-test (see Table 4 ).  Acceptability Both groups liked the intervention and found it to be acceptable and appropriate (non-spiritual, M = 4.89, SD = 0.32, spiritual, M = 4.97, SD = 0.18). Both groups felt that the intervention helped them prepare to make an informed decision about prostate cancer screening (non-spiritual, M = 47.15, SD = 7.03; spiritual, M = 46.15, SD = 10.03). Those in the spiritually based group reported reading significantly more of their print materials during the session, with 80.6% reporting that they had read the entire booklet compared to 44.4% in the non-spiritual group ( p < 0.01).  Acceptability Both groups liked the intervention and found it to be acceptable and appropriate (non-spiritual, M = 4.89, SD = 0.32, spiritual, M = 4.97, SD = 0.18). Both groups felt that the intervention helped them prepare to make an informed decision about prostate cancer screening (non-spiritual, M = 47.15, SD = 7.03; spiritual, M = 46.15, SD = 10.03). Those in the spiritually based group reported reading significantly more of their print materials during the session, with 80.6% reporting that they had read the entire booklet compared to 44.4% in the non-spiritual group ( p < 0.01).  Participant Reactions to the Intervention In addition to the closed-ended survey items, participants were asked a number of open-ended questions regarding the program. When asked how the educational session was different from information they would usually find in a doctor's office, participants indicated: “had time to ask more questions,” “up close with people I know,” and “someone you know you can now talk to about it.” When asked what they learned from the session, participants indicated: “that I need to be checked even if there are no symptoms,” “Black men are at high risk,” and “talking about it helps.”  Participant Reactions to the Intervention In addition to the closed-ended survey items, participants were asked a number of open-ended questions regarding the program. When asked how the educational session was different from information they would usually find in a doctor's office, participants indicated: “had time to ask more questions,” “up close with people I know,” and “someone you know you can now talk to about it.” When asked what they learned from the session, participants indicated: “that I need to be checked even if there are no symptoms,” “Black men are at high risk,” and “talking about it helps.”  Discussion In summary, both church-based educational programs on informed decision making for prostate cancer screening were very well received by participants. This is a testimony to the impact and importance of working closely with the community through all stages of intervention planning, development, and implementation. There was some suggestion in the trend of the data that the spiritually based intervention may have a differential impact in some areas; however, due to the small sample size, these effects need to be verified with greater statistical power. Further, the hypothesis that the spiritually based content alone would improve efficacy of the informed decision making program is a difficult one to confirm because both interventions were of high quality, community-based, targeted, and theory-based. Thus, it may be expected that both interventions would have a significant impact upon study outcomes. The question of whether a spiritually based intervention has more impact than a non-spiritual intervention appears to merit further study. Men who attended the spiritually based session reported reading significantly more of the printed educational materials than those who attended the non-spiritual session. This is consistent with the idea that the spiritually based approach would be more personally relevant for this population and would catch their attention to a greater degree than a non-spiritual program. Although this increased reading may have resulted in increases in pre-post knowledge relative to the non-spiritual group, it did not result in significant group differences in the measures of informed decision making, stage of decision making, or preparation for decision making. It is possible that a more in-depth intervention would be needed to assess impact on these outcomes or that these are outcomes that might be expected to appear in a longer-term follow up. The program increased self-efficacy from baseline to follow up for screening among the non-spiritual group only. It influenced the ability of participants to make an informed choice about having a screening among the spiritual group only. This, along with suggestions of patterns of increased knowledge and changes in beliefs among the spiritual group, speaks to the potential of this approach to impact informed decision making in future, more extensive trials. The present findings are comparable to another project in which awareness about prostate cancer was increased through the use of African-American health educators ( Wilkinson et al., 2003 ).  Discussion In summary, both church-based educational programs on informed decision making for prostate cancer screening were very well received by participants. This is a testimony to the impact and importance of working closely with the community through all stages of intervention planning, development, and implementation. There was some suggestion in the trend of the data that the spiritually based intervention may have a differential impact in some areas; however, due to the small sample size, these effects need to be verified with greater statistical power. Further, the hypothesis that the spiritually based content alone would improve efficacy of the informed decision making program is a difficult one to confirm because both interventions were of high quality, community-based, targeted, and theory-based. Thus, it may be expected that both interventions would have a significant impact upon study outcomes. The question of whether a spiritually based intervention has more impact than a non-spiritual intervention appears to merit further study. Men who attended the spiritually based session reported reading significantly more of the printed educational materials than those who attended the non-spiritual session. This is consistent with the idea that the spiritually based approach would be more personally relevant for this population and would catch their attention to a greater degree than a non-spiritual program. Although this increased reading may have resulted in increases in pre-post knowledge relative to the non-spiritual group, it did not result in significant group differences in the measures of informed decision making, stage of decision making, or preparation for decision making. It is possible that a more in-depth intervention would be needed to assess impact on these outcomes or that these are outcomes that might be expected to appear in a longer-term follow up. The program increased self-efficacy from baseline to follow up for screening among the non-spiritual group only. It influenced the ability of participants to make an informed choice about having a screening among the spiritual group only. This, along with suggestions of patterns of increased knowledge and changes in beliefs among the spiritual group, speaks to the potential of this approach to impact informed decision making in future, more extensive trials. The present findings are comparable to another project in which awareness about prostate cancer was increased through the use of African-American health educators ( Wilkinson et al., 2003 ).  Limitations The present findings should be considered preliminary and within the context of several limitations. The sample size was relatively small and resulted in modest statistical power for the examination of between-group differences. For this reason, an examination of trends across means and frequencies/percentages may be more informative than p -values in the present context. While it is possible that the pre-test/post-test differences observed could have been due to a testing effect only, a testing effect would not be expected to account for differential trends between groups. The findings may not be generalizable to non-church settings, to other geographic areas of the country, or to men of other race/ethnicities. Similarly, while the strength of the targeted approach is that it allows for an intervention developed specifically for this particular population ( Kreuter & Wray, 2003 ), it would have to be modified for use with other populations. For example, denominational variation in health behaviors and outcomes is an important consideration when developing church-based health interventions, and it needs to be assessed carefully and accurately ( Matthews, 1999 ). There are other aspects of African-American culture, such as racial pride and collectivism ( Lukwago, Kreuter, Bucholtz, Holt, & Clark, 2001 ) that were not addressed in the present intervention. The focus of this project was on the spiritual/religious aspects, being that they are central to African-American culture ( Lincoln & Mamiya, 1990 ) and associated with health behaviors and outcomes ( Koenig, McCullough, & Larson, 2001 ). Finally, some instruments used to assess study outcomes were limited in their internal consistency. The current figures may be viewed as appropriate since the instruments are relatively brief and would be expected given their varied content ( Helms et al., 2006 ; Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994 ). However, the modest internal reliability of the study outcomes may also be viewed as a limitation of the current investigation in terms of uncertainty of where the intervention actually had its effects (such as knowledge and beliefs).  Limitations The present findings should be considered preliminary and within the context of several limitations. The sample size was relatively small and resulted in modest statistical power for the examination of between-group differences. For this reason, an examination of trends across means and frequencies/percentages may be more informative than p -values in the present context. While it is possible that the pre-test/post-test differences observed could have been due to a testing effect only, a testing effect would not be expected to account for differential trends between groups. The findings may not be generalizable to non-church settings, to other geographic areas of the country, or to men of other race/ethnicities. Similarly, while the strength of the targeted approach is that it allows for an intervention developed specifically for this particular population ( Kreuter & Wray, 2003 ), it would have to be modified for use with other populations. For example, denominational variation in health behaviors and outcomes is an important consideration when developing church-based health interventions, and it needs to be assessed carefully and accurately ( Matthews, 1999 ). There are other aspects of African-American culture, such as racial pride and collectivism ( Lukwago, Kreuter, Bucholtz, Holt, & Clark, 2001 ) that were not addressed in the present intervention. The focus of this project was on the spiritual/religious aspects, being that they are central to African-American culture ( Lincoln & Mamiya, 1990 ) and associated with health behaviors and outcomes ( Koenig, McCullough, & Larson, 2001 ). Finally, some instruments used to assess study outcomes were limited in their internal consistency. The current figures may be viewed as appropriate since the instruments are relatively brief and would be expected given their varied content ( Helms et al., 2006 ; Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994 ). However, the modest internal reliability of the study outcomes may also be viewed as a limitation of the current investigation in terms of uncertainty of where the intervention actually had its effects (such as knowledge and beliefs).  Implications The present findings suggest that a spiritually based approach may be promising for use in promoting awareness of prostate cancer among church-attending African-American men. Nursing Practice With regard to practice in clinical settings, it may behoove nursing practitioners to be aware of the role of religious/spiritual beliefs among the populations they serve. Such beliefs may be particularly relevant for African-American populations. Religious/spiritual beliefs may play a role in health decision-making, behaviors, and coping with serious illness. Future Research Future studies should examine the long-term efficacy of the CHA-led spiritually based program on informed decision making for prostate cancer screening. A trial with more statistical power, a more intensive intervention, and longer-term follow up could provide more conclusive evidence of whether the spiritually based approach is effective for health promotion in this population.  Nursing Practice With regard to practice in clinical settings, it may behoove nursing practitioners to be aware of the role of religious/spiritual beliefs among the populations they serve. Such beliefs may be particularly relevant for African-American populations. Religious/spiritual beliefs may play a role in health decision-making, behaviors, and coping with serious illness.  Future Research Future studies should examine the long-term efficacy of the CHA-led spiritually based program on informed decision making for prostate cancer screening. A trial with more statistical power, a more intensive intervention, and longer-term follow up could provide more conclusive evidence of whether the spiritually based approach is effective for health promotion in this population.  Conclusions In summary, the findings of this pilot project suggest that further study of spiritually based approaches to health education and promotion may be indicated for use with African-American populations in faith-based settings.  Figures and Tables Figure 1 Community Health Advisor Training Curriculum *Covered in spiritually based group only. Figure 2 Simplified Measure of Gobbledygook Readability Formula Developed by Harold C. McGraw, Office of Educational Research, Baltimore County School, Towson, MD Table 1 Demographic Characteristics of Participants (<italic>N</italic> = 49) Characteristic n % Relationship Status ?Single 5 10.2 ?Married 38 77.5 ?Living with partner 1 2.0 ?Separated/divorced 2 4.1 ?Widowed 1 2.0 ?No answer 2 4.1 Education ?Less than high school 3 6.0 ?High school/GED 15 30.6 ?Some college or tech school 16 32.6 ?College graduate 13 26.5 ?No answer 2 4.1 Employment ?Not employed 2 4.1 ?Receiving disability 5 10.2 ?Part-time or retired 4 8.2 ?Full-time 28 57.1 ?No answer 10 20.4 Health Insurance * ?Medicaid 6 12.2 ?Medicare 7 14.3 ?Private 34 69.5 ?Other 4 8.2 ?No answer 2 4.1 * Exceeds 100% because participants marked all that apply. Table 2 Means and Standard Deviations for the Pre- and Post-Test Measures of informed Decision Making for Non-Spiritual and Spiritual Intervention Groups Measure Non-Spiritual Spiritual Pre-Test Post-Test Pre-Test Post-Test M SD n M SD n M SD n M SD n Knowledge of prostate cancer 6.50 2.22 16 8.85 0.38 13 6.41 2.01 29 8.39 1.07 28 Knowledge of relationship of screening and mortality 0.07 0.26 15 0.24 0.44 17 0.10 0.30 31 0.07 0.25 30 Knowledge of screening controversy 1.93 1.22 15 2.00 1.17 17 1.36 0.78 28 2.14 0.89 28 Beliefs regarding screening 3.54 1.17 13 4.24 1.44 17 4.03 1.24 29 4.48 0.83 29 Self-efficacy for informed decision making for screening 17.21 4.17 14 18.07 3.63 15 16.90 4.54 30 18.72 3.34 29 Self-efficacy for informed decision making for PSA 4.19 1.11 16 4.41 1.33 17 4.16 1.21 31 4.76 0.64 29 Self-efficacy for informed decision making for DRE 4.13 1.09 16 4.59 1.00 17 4.17 1.21 30 4.76 0.62 29 Barriers to screening 0.00 0.00 12 0.25 0.78 16 0.31 0.60 29 0.35 0.69 26 Table 3 Comparisons of Pre- and Post-Test Differences and Post-Test-Only Outcomes Between the Study Groups Pre/Post-Test Change Scores Non-Spiritual Spiritual t df M SD M SD Knowledge of prostate cancer 1.82 * 1.08 2.15 * 1.75 -0.58 36 Knowledge of relationship of screening and mortality 0.14? Knowledge of screening controversy 0.36 1.08 0.76 * 1.05 -1.14 37 Beliefs regarding screening 0.83 1.75 0.50 $ 1.53 0.61 38 Self-efficacy for screening 2.00 * 2.97 1.29 4.13 0.56 39 Self-efficacy informed decision making regarding PSA 0.44 1.46 0.55 * 1.18 -0.29 43 Self-efficacy informed decision making regarding DRE 0.50 1.37 0.59 * 1.12 -0.23 43 Barriers to screening 0.33 0.89 0.04 0.61 1.18 35 Post-Only Scores MDN n 25th Percentile 75th Percentile p @ How much liked 5 48 5 5 0.29 Acceptable 7 44 7 7 0.69 Appropriate 7 43 6 7 0.51 Preparation for decision making 50 40 47.25 50 0.91 Notes: * pre-post increase was significant at p < 0.05, $ p < 0.10 ? knowledge item with different response scale analyzed separately with chi-square, @ by Mann-Whitney U test. Table 4 Comparisons of Categorical Outcomes Between Study Groups Non-Spiritual ( n = 18) Spiritual ( n = 31) n p ˆ Stage of Decision Making -1 0/11 0 9/11 1 2/11 2 0/11 4 0/11 -1 2/17 0 12/17 1 1/17 2 1/17 4 1/17 28 0.70 How Much Read All 8/18 Most 6/18 Some 4/18 None 0/18 All 25/30 Most 2/30 Some 2/30 None 1/30 48 0.0088 Liked Compared to Other information from Doctor's Office More 11/15 Same 4/15 Less # 0/15 More 24/26 Same 2/26 Less # 0/27 41 0.11 Notes: ˆ by Fisher's exact test because low expected cell frequencies occurred; # 0 respondents indicated they liked the materials less than other information; thus, this category was excluded from analysis. Values in the cells represent frequencies/N. 