A Novel Murine Model for Localized Radiation Necrosis and its Characterization using Advanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging Introduction Magnetic resonance (MR) images following external beam radiotherapy for brain tumors often display signal changes characteristic of either tumor progression and/or radiation injury. No non-invasive diagnostic biomarkers have been identified that clearly distinguish between these two disease processes. This study’s objective was to develop a murine model of radiation necrosis using fractionated, sub-total cranial irradiation and to investigate the imaging signature of radiation-induced tissue damage using advanced MR imaging techniques. Methods Twenty four mice each received 60 Gy of hemispheric (left) irradiation in ten equal fractions. MR images at 4.7 T were subsequently collected using T1-, T2- and diffusion-sequences at selected time points following irradiation or implantation. Following imaging, animals were euthanized and their brains were fixed for correlative histology. Results Contrast-enhanced T1- and T2-weighted MR images at months 2, 3, and 4 showed changes consistent with progressive radiation necrosis. Quantitatively, mean diffusivity was significantly higher (mean = 0.86, 1.13, and 1.24 ?m2/ms at 2, 3, and 4 months, respectively) in radiated brain, compared with contralateral untreated brain tissue (mean = 0.78, 0.82, and 0.83 ?m2/ms) (p<0.0001). Histology reflected changes typically seen in radiation necrosis. Conclusions This murine model of radiation necrosis will facilitate investigation of imaging biomarkers that distinguish between radiation necrosis and tumor recurrence. In addition, this preclinical study supports clinical data suggesting that DWI may be helpful in answering this diagnostic question in clinical settings.  Results A total of 24 mice were irradiated with 60 Gy of irradiation each, fractionated over 2 weeks, followed by serial MR imaging. The radiation plan is shown in Figure 1 as a color map overlaid onto a representative MR image of mouse brain. It is clear from this plan that the irradiation is limited effectively to the left hemisphere of the brain, with the highest dose delivered at the brain’s surface. Three cohorts of eight mice each were imaged at 2, 3, and 4 months following completion of hemispheric irradiation. After the completion of each month’s MR experiments, a subset of these mice was euthanized for histological analysis. Both contrast-enhanced gradient-echo and spin-echo sequences showed changes consistent with tissue damage and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier. Figure 2 shows this contrast enhancement and T2-weighted image hyper-intensity, with progressive signal and heterogeneity, for representative animals at 2, 3, and 4 months post irradiation. Mice consistently showed left hemispheric anatomic signal changes consistent with those seen in human patients with post-treatment radiation necrosis. Histology also reflected changes typically observed in radiation necrosis ( Figure 3 ), with fibrinoid vascular necrosis, coagulative parenchymal necrosis with macrophage infiltration, and vascular telangiectasia seen increasingly over the three-month time course of the study. Other features included cerebral edema, tissue rarefaction with decreased cellularity, and reactive astrocytosis. Significant changes in diffusion signal were also seen in the left hemisphere of irradiated mice. Figure 4 shows ADC maps for representative mice at 2, 3, and 4 months post irradiation. Qualitatively, one can identify asymmetry and increased diffusivity in the left hemisphere, particularly in the third and fourth months following irradiation. From our ROI analysis, mean diffusivity was significantly higher (mean = 0.86, 1.13, and 1.24 ?m2/ms at 2, 3, and 4 months) in radiated brain, compared with contralateral, untreated brain tissue (mean = 0.78, 0.82, and 0.83 ?m2/ms) (p<0.0001). The mean, median, and range of diffusion data from all voxels in regions of interest in each radiated animal are shown graphically in box-and-whisker plots in Figure 5 . Note that if small ROIs are drawn around the most hyperintense regions in the anatomic images of the irradiated hemisphere, mean diffusivities at 3 and 4 months postirradiation are approximately 10% higher than the values reported above. These data clearly demonstrate the time progression of the diffusion signal following irradiation and allow direct comparison with data for brain tissue in the untreated, contralateral hemisphere.  Results A total of 24 mice were irradiated with 60 Gy of irradiation each, fractionated over 2 weeks, followed by serial MR imaging. The radiation plan is shown in Figure 1 as a color map overlaid onto a representative MR image of mouse brain. It is clear from this plan that the irradiation is limited effectively to the left hemisphere of the brain, with the highest dose delivered at the brain’s surface. Three cohorts of eight mice each were imaged at 2, 3, and 4 months following completion of hemispheric irradiation. After the completion of each month’s MR experiments, a subset of these mice was euthanized for histological analysis. Both contrast-enhanced gradient-echo and spin-echo sequences showed changes consistent with tissue damage and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier. Figure 2 shows this contrast enhancement and T2-weighted image hyper-intensity, with progressive signal and heterogeneity, for representative animals at 2, 3, and 4 months post irradiation. Mice consistently showed left hemispheric anatomic signal changes consistent with those seen in human patients with post-treatment radiation necrosis. Histology also reflected changes typically observed in radiation necrosis ( Figure 3 ), with fibrinoid vascular necrosis, coagulative parenchymal necrosis with macrophage infiltration, and vascular telangiectasia seen increasingly over the three-month time course of the study. Other features included cerebral edema, tissue rarefaction with decreased cellularity, and reactive astrocytosis. Significant changes in diffusion signal were also seen in the left hemisphere of irradiated mice. Figure 4 shows ADC maps for representative mice at 2, 3, and 4 months post irradiation. Qualitatively, one can identify asymmetry and increased diffusivity in the left hemisphere, particularly in the third and fourth months following irradiation. From our ROI analysis, mean diffusivity was significantly higher (mean = 0.86, 1.13, and 1.24 ?m2/ms at 2, 3, and 4 months) in radiated brain, compared with contralateral, untreated brain tissue (mean = 0.78, 0.82, and 0.83 ?m2/ms) (p<0.0001). The mean, median, and range of diffusion data from all voxels in regions of interest in each radiated animal are shown graphically in box-and-whisker plots in Figure 5 . Note that if small ROIs are drawn around the most hyperintense regions in the anatomic images of the irradiated hemisphere, mean diffusivities at 3 and 4 months postirradiation are approximately 10% higher than the values reported above. These data clearly demonstrate the time progression of the diffusion signal following irradiation and allow direct comparison with data for brain tissue in the untreated, contralateral hemisphere.  Discussion Serial/longitudinal MR imaging in small-animal models of tumor and/or radiation necrosis provides a significant opportunity to investigate novel imaging methods for distinguishing radiation necrosis from growing tumor, with imaging findings directly supported by correlative histology. This allows positive results to be readily translated to clinical research investigations. Small-animal models of brain tumors have been extensively reported in the literature { Fomchenko, 2006 #36}. These models cover a wide range of paradigms for tumor development, including direct implantation of orthotopic tumor cell lines { Jost SC, 2007 #32}, genetic models of spontaneous tumor development { McConville P, 2007 #38}, implantation of human tumor cell lines (such as the U87 cell line) into nude mice { Goldhoff P, 2008 #37; Kiehl EL, 2008 #21}, and generation of tumors from stem cell lines. Characterization of the imaging signature using advanced imaging biomarkers is ongoing in our laboratory and other laboratories worldwide. The lack of animal models for radiation necrosis has significantly limited the development of methods for distinguishing necrosis from tumor re-growth. Until recently, irradiation of small animals, particularly mice, was performed by irradiating a large portion of the animal’s body rather than directing radiation doses to focal targets. Prior pre-clinical brain irradiations have been predominated by non-targeted dose delivery produced by single, high dose, full-body radiation fields with selective shielding to allow whole brain irradiation { Akiyama K, 2001 #26; Mizumatsu S, 2003 #2; Monje ML, 2003 #1; Panagiotakos G, 2007 #29; Yuan H, 2007 #3}. Without shielding, the normal tissue effects of radiation limit the dose of radiation that can be given to a small animal. Even with shielding, traditional approaches limit the ability to specifically target a small focal region of the brain. Researchers have, however, shown histological evidence of tissue damage with whole brain irradiation. More recently, the advance of stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has prompted researchers to consider SRS as a method for inducing damage to normal tissue { Jirak, 2007 #39}. Studies have separately considered both the imaging and histological characteristics of focal tissue damage in this setting { Ishikawa S, 1999 #28; Jirak, 2007 #39; Rabinov JD, 2006 #30} as well as in select hypofractionated settings { Ernst-Stecken A, 2007 #27; Sun X, 2004 #31}. To date, however, investigations have not thoroughly characterized tissue changes resulting from focal fractionated radiation at clinically relevant doses with advanced small-animal imaging methods such as diffusion, perfusion, molecular imaging, or spectroscopy. Combining conformal irradiation of a single hemisphere of the brain with advanced MR sequences and correlative histology creates a system well-suited for prospective studies comparing the tissue effects of fractionated radiation with small animal models of tumor growth. This study demonstrates a novel, mouse model of radiation necrosis, characterized with anatomic MR imaging, DWI, and histology. To consistently induce radiation necrosis and simplify the model, an aggressive radiation dose fractionation (6 Gy × 10) and schedule (2 weeks) were selected. While the resulting dose is substantially higher than a clinical-dose schedule, this schedule was chosen because Phase I studies of dose escalation have consistently shown a relatively low risk of radiation necrosis, even with high doses of conventionally fractionated radiation (66–84 Gy) { Tsien, 2009 #41}. The resulting radiation necrosis was histologically similar to that induced in patients ( Figure 3 ), suggesting that this model of necrosis may be translatable. Administration of 60 Gy of fractionated hemispheric conformal irradiation reliably induces damage to the brain parenchyma which is progressive, visible on MR imaging, and shows histologically the classic tissue changes associated with radiation necrosis, including tissue edema, necrosis, decreased cellularity, extravasation of blood around telangiectatic blood vessels, and fibrinoid vascular necrosis. Anatomic MR images show signal changes within radiated tissue that are similar to those seen in growing tumors (e.g., uptake of gadolinium contrast and T2-weighted image hyperintensity). Previous human studies have failed to identify an imaging paradigm with the sensitivity and specificity to consistently distinguish between recurrent tumor and radiation necrosis. The heterogeneity of different tumor types, the co-existence of tumor within the setting of radiation change, and the lack of confirmatory histology combine to create confounding factors that make these human studies particularly challenging. This small-animal model of radiation necrosis will provide a platform for the development of non-invasive imaging methods for distinguishing radiation change from growing tumor. Particularly challenging is the characterization of brain that contains both regions of radiation necrosis and tumors as is often the case in glioma patients biopsied post-therapy. Our murine model of necrosis provides an excellent paradigm for probing this heterogeneous condition, which can be created by orthotopic implantation of tumor cells into radiation-induced necrotic tissue. While data in this work were analyzed on a region-of-interest basis, MRI’s high resolution allows pixel-by-pixel analysis of images and parametric ADC maps to be performed. Such analysis is a key to the detailed correlation of imaging data, radiation dose, and histology needed to develop a robust strategy for distinguishing necrosis and tumor. Experiments to probe heterogeneous, ‘mixed-case’ tumor/necrosis conditions in animals and to develop pixel-by-pixel analysis strategies are ongoing in our laboratory. It is anticipated that, once properly validated, this imaging methodology will translate readily to humans, providing an important tool in the diagnosis and treatment of brain-tumor patients.  Discussion Serial/longitudinal MR imaging in small-animal models of tumor and/or radiation necrosis provides a significant opportunity to investigate novel imaging methods for distinguishing radiation necrosis from growing tumor, with imaging findings directly supported by correlative histology. This allows positive results to be readily translated to clinical research investigations. Small-animal models of brain tumors have been extensively reported in the literature { Fomchenko, 2006 #36}. These models cover a wide range of paradigms for tumor development, including direct implantation of orthotopic tumor cell lines { Jost SC, 2007 #32}, genetic models of spontaneous tumor development { McConville P, 2007 #38}, implantation of human tumor cell lines (such as the U87 cell line) into nude mice { Goldhoff P, 2008 #37; Kiehl EL, 2008 #21}, and generation of tumors from stem cell lines. Characterization of the imaging signature using advanced imaging biomarkers is ongoing in our laboratory and other laboratories worldwide. The lack of animal models for radiation necrosis has significantly limited the development of methods for distinguishing necrosis from tumor re-growth. Until recently, irradiation of small animals, particularly mice, was performed by irradiating a large portion of the animal’s body rather than directing radiation doses to focal targets. Prior pre-clinical brain irradiations have been predominated by non-targeted dose delivery produced by single, high dose, full-body radiation fields with selective shielding to allow whole brain irradiation { Akiyama K, 2001 #26; Mizumatsu S, 2003 #2; Monje ML, 2003 #1; Panagiotakos G, 2007 #29; Yuan H, 2007 #3}. Without shielding, the normal tissue effects of radiation limit the dose of radiation that can be given to a small animal. Even with shielding, traditional approaches limit the ability to specifically target a small focal region of the brain. Researchers have, however, shown histological evidence of tissue damage with whole brain irradiation. More recently, the advance of stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) has prompted researchers to consider SRS as a method for inducing damage to normal tissue { Jirak, 2007 #39}. Studies have separately considered both the imaging and histological characteristics of focal tissue damage in this setting { Ishikawa S, 1999 #28; Jirak, 2007 #39; Rabinov JD, 2006 #30} as well as in select hypofractionated settings { Ernst-Stecken A, 2007 #27; Sun X, 2004 #31}. To date, however, investigations have not thoroughly characterized tissue changes resulting from focal fractionated radiation at clinically relevant doses with advanced small-animal imaging methods such as diffusion, perfusion, molecular imaging, or spectroscopy. Combining conformal irradiation of a single hemisphere of the brain with advanced MR sequences and correlative histology creates a system well-suited for prospective studies comparing the tissue effects of fractionated radiation with small animal models of tumor growth. This study demonstrates a novel, mouse model of radiation necrosis, characterized with anatomic MR imaging, DWI, and histology. To consistently induce radiation necrosis and simplify the model, an aggressive radiation dose fractionation (6 Gy × 10) and schedule (2 weeks) were selected. While the resulting dose is substantially higher than a clinical-dose schedule, this schedule was chosen because Phase I studies of dose escalation have consistently shown a relatively low risk of radiation necrosis, even with high doses of conventionally fractionated radiation (66–84 Gy) { Tsien, 2009 #41}. The resulting radiation necrosis was histologically similar to that induced in patients ( Figure 3 ), suggesting that this model of necrosis may be translatable. Administration of 60 Gy of fractionated hemispheric conformal irradiation reliably induces damage to the brain parenchyma which is progressive, visible on MR imaging, and shows histologically the classic tissue changes associated with radiation necrosis, including tissue edema, necrosis, decreased cellularity, extravasation of blood around telangiectatic blood vessels, and fibrinoid vascular necrosis. Anatomic MR images show signal changes within radiated tissue that are similar to those seen in growing tumors (e.g., uptake of gadolinium contrast and T2-weighted image hyperintensity). Previous human studies have failed to identify an imaging paradigm with the sensitivity and specificity to consistently distinguish between recurrent tumor and radiation necrosis. The heterogeneity of different tumor types, the co-existence of tumor within the setting of radiation change, and the lack of confirmatory histology combine to create confounding factors that make these human studies particularly challenging. This small-animal model of radiation necrosis will provide a platform for the development of non-invasive imaging methods for distinguishing radiation change from growing tumor. Particularly challenging is the characterization of brain that contains both regions of radiation necrosis and tumors as is often the case in glioma patients biopsied post-therapy. Our murine model of necrosis provides an excellent paradigm for probing this heterogeneous condition, which can be created by orthotopic implantation of tumor cells into radiation-induced necrotic tissue. While data in this work were analyzed on a region-of-interest basis, MRI’s high resolution allows pixel-by-pixel analysis of images and parametric ADC maps to be performed. Such analysis is a key to the detailed correlation of imaging data, radiation dose, and histology needed to develop a robust strategy for distinguishing necrosis and tumor. Experiments to probe heterogeneous, ‘mixed-case’ tumor/necrosis conditions in animals and to develop pixel-by-pixel analysis strategies are ongoing in our laboratory. It is anticipated that, once properly validated, this imaging methodology will translate readily to humans, providing an important tool in the diagnosis and treatment of brain-tumor patients. 