A tumor suppressive activity of Drosophila Polycomb genes mediated by JAK/STAT signaling A prevailing paradigm posits that Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins maintain stem cell identity by repressing differentiation genes, and abundant evidence points to an oncogenic role for PcG in human cancer 1 , 2 . Here we demonstrate using Drosophila that a conventional PcG complex can also have a potent tumor suppressive activity. Mutations in all core PRC1 components cause dramatic hyperproliferation of eye imaginal tissue, accompanied by deregulation of epithelial architecture. The mitogenic JAK/STAT pathway is strongly and specifically activated in mutant tissue; activation is driven by transcriptional upregulation of Unpaired (Upd) family ligands. We show that upd genes are direct targets of PcG-mediated repression in imaginal discs. Ectopic JAK/STAT activity is sufficient to induce overproliferation, while reduction of JAK/STAT activity suppresses the PRC1 mutant tumor phenotype. These findings show that PcG proteins can restrict growth directly by silencing mitogenic signaling pathways, shedding light onto an epigenetic mechanism underlying tumor suppression.  Materials and Methods Genetics The P3C allele was generated on a FRT42D chromosome by using EMS mutagenesis; Psc-Su(z)2 discs in the text were created using this allele. The strong or null mutants used in this study are: Pc [XT109]; Su(z)2 [1b8]; Su(z)2 [1b7];; ph [505]; Sce[1]; E(z) [731]; Su(z)12 [4]; trx [E2]; Stat92E [85c9]; Upd [YM55]; os [1A]; scrib[1]. Mosaic imaginal discs were generated as described 52 using eyflp or hsflp to induce recombination. Discs consisting predominantly of mutant cells (referred to in the text as mutant discs) were generated using the FLP/cell-lethal system as described 6 utilizing eyflp for eye and ubxflp for wing discs. Other fly strains are: unpairedLacZ (PD); E(spl)m ?-LacZ; exLacZ (ex[e1]); 10x STAT GFP; UAS Upd; UAS Hop[TumL]; upd GAL4, UAS GFP (E132); MS1096 GAL4; UAS Dome ? Cyt; UAS SOCS36E; act>CD2>GAL4, UAS GFP . Wild type controls were outcrosses to white or isogenized FRT42 and FRT82 chromosomes. Crosses were reared at 22째C. Detailed genotypes are listed in Supplementary Table 1 . Genetic interaction tests Larvae were raised at 50 animals per vial from 4 hour-staged collections at 25째C. Tumors for size analysis were dissected 96 hours or 120 hours after hatching, stained with phalloidin and scored in double-blind tests. A Student T-test was used to calculate P-values. Adult escapers were counted at eclosion. Adult fly heads were imaged using a Z16 APO microscope (Leica) fitted with a DFC300 FX camera. UpdLacZ eye color modification was scored in double-blind tests on male flies 24 hours after eclosion. Immunohistochemistry Imaginal disc tissues were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and stained under standard conditions with TRITC-phalloidin (SIGMA) and TOPRO-3 (Invitrogen) and primary antibodies against the following antigens: Notch (NECD), Elav, DEcad, Arm, Wg (all obtained from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), ?-Gal (Capell), Capicua (kindly provided I. Hariharan), Fibrillarin (MCA-38F3, EnCor Biotech.) and Phospho-SMAD (kindly provided by T. Tabata). Secondary antibodies were obtained from Invitrogen. Mutant and wild-type discs were processed in the same tubes, and confocal settings were adjusted to maintain a linear intensity range for signals in different genotypes. Images are single confocal cross sections collected on a Leica TCS microscope. All scalebars are 100?m. Quantitative Real-time PCR cDNA libraries of FLP/cell-lethal eye imaginal discs were generated using standard procedures. Real-time PCR was carried out using SYBR GreenER qPCR Supermix for ABI PRISM (Invitrogen) on a StepOnePlus ABI machine. The standard curve and ??Ct method was used and expression levels were normalized to at least two endogenous cDNA controls (CG12703 and GAPDH). Fold induction relative to WT expression levels are shown for one representative biological replicate. Primer sequences are listed in Supplemental Table 2 . Detailed protocols are available on request. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation ChIP was carried out as previously described 53 on imaginal tissue from 50 third-instar larvae for H3K27me3 ChIP and 200 third-instar larvae for Pc ChIP. Fixed and sheared chromatin was precipitated using an anti-Histone3 trimethylK27 mouse mAb (Lake Placid, # AM-0174) or Polycomb rabbit Ab (kindly provided by V. Pirrotta) and ProteinA-coupled Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Chromatin precipitated in Polycomb ChIP was preamplified using PCR as previously described 54 . A negative control lacking Ab yielded less than 0.2% of specific pull-down observed with Ab, ChIP carried out with non-specific mouse IgG failed to enrich for sequences tested. Quantification was carried out using real-time PCR on a StepOnePlus ABI machine. Primer sequences and amplified regions are listed in Supplemental Table 2 . Detailed protocols are available on request.  Genetics The P3C allele was generated on a FRT42D chromosome by using EMS mutagenesis; Psc-Su(z)2 discs in the text were created using this allele. The strong or null mutants used in this study are: Pc [XT109]; Su(z)2 [1b8]; Su(z)2 [1b7];; ph [505]; Sce[1]; E(z) [731]; Su(z)12 [4]; trx [E2]; Stat92E [85c9]; Upd [YM55]; os [1A]; scrib[1]. Mosaic imaginal discs were generated as described 52 using eyflp or hsflp to induce recombination. Discs consisting predominantly of mutant cells (referred to in the text as mutant discs) were generated using the FLP/cell-lethal system as described 6 utilizing eyflp for eye and ubxflp for wing discs. Other fly strains are: unpairedLacZ (PD); E(spl)m ?-LacZ; exLacZ (ex[e1]); 10x STAT GFP; UAS Upd; UAS Hop[TumL]; upd GAL4, UAS GFP (E132); MS1096 GAL4; UAS Dome ? Cyt; UAS SOCS36E; act>CD2>GAL4, UAS GFP . Wild type controls were outcrosses to white or isogenized FRT42 and FRT82 chromosomes. Crosses were reared at 22째C. Detailed genotypes are listed in Supplementary Table 1 .  Genetic interaction tests Larvae were raised at 50 animals per vial from 4 hour-staged collections at 25째C. Tumors for size analysis were dissected 96 hours or 120 hours after hatching, stained with phalloidin and scored in double-blind tests. A Student T-test was used to calculate P-values. Adult escapers were counted at eclosion. Adult fly heads were imaged using a Z16 APO microscope (Leica) fitted with a DFC300 FX camera. UpdLacZ eye color modification was scored in double-blind tests on male flies 24 hours after eclosion.  Immunohistochemistry Imaginal disc tissues were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and stained under standard conditions with TRITC-phalloidin (SIGMA) and TOPRO-3 (Invitrogen) and primary antibodies against the following antigens: Notch (NECD), Elav, DEcad, Arm, Wg (all obtained from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), ?-Gal (Capell), Capicua (kindly provided I. Hariharan), Fibrillarin (MCA-38F3, EnCor Biotech.) and Phospho-SMAD (kindly provided by T. Tabata). Secondary antibodies were obtained from Invitrogen. Mutant and wild-type discs were processed in the same tubes, and confocal settings were adjusted to maintain a linear intensity range for signals in different genotypes. Images are single confocal cross sections collected on a Leica TCS microscope. All scalebars are 100?m.  Quantitative Real-time PCR cDNA libraries of FLP/cell-lethal eye imaginal discs were generated using standard procedures. Real-time PCR was carried out using SYBR GreenER qPCR Supermix for ABI PRISM (Invitrogen) on a StepOnePlus ABI machine. The standard curve and ??Ct method was used and expression levels were normalized to at least two endogenous cDNA controls (CG12703 and GAPDH). Fold induction relative to WT expression levels are shown for one representative biological replicate. Primer sequences are listed in Supplemental Table 2 . Detailed protocols are available on request.  Chromatin Immunoprecipitation ChIP was carried out as previously described 53 on imaginal tissue from 50 third-instar larvae for H3K27me3 ChIP and 200 third-instar larvae for Pc ChIP. Fixed and sheared chromatin was precipitated using an anti-Histone3 trimethylK27 mouse mAb (Lake Placid, # AM-0174) or Polycomb rabbit Ab (kindly provided by V. Pirrotta) and ProteinA-coupled Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Chromatin precipitated in Polycomb ChIP was preamplified using PCR as previously described 54 . A negative control lacking Ab yielded less than 0.2% of specific pull-down observed with Ab, ChIP carried out with non-specific mouse IgG failed to enrich for sequences tested. Quantification was carried out using real-time PCR on a StepOnePlus ABI machine. Primer sequences and amplified regions are listed in Supplemental Table 2 . Detailed protocols are available on request.  Supplementary Material 1 