A luminal epithelial stem cell that is a cell of origin for prostate cancer In epithelial tissues, the lineage relationship between normal progenitor cells and cell type(s) of origin for cancer has been poorly understood. Here we show that a known regulator of prostate epithelial differentiation, the homeobox gene Nkx3.1 , marks a stem cell population that functions during prostate regeneration. Genetic lineage-marking demonstrates that rare luminal cells which express Nkx3.1 in the absence of testicular androgens (castration-resistant Nkx3.1-expressing cells, CARNs) are bipotential and can self-renew in vivo , while single-cell transplantation assays show that CARNs can reconstitute prostate ducts in renal grafts. Functional assays of Nkx3.1 mutant mice in serial prostate regeneration assays suggest that Nkx3.1 is required for stem cell maintenance. Finally, targeted deletion of the Pten tumor suppressor gene in CARNs results in rapid formation of carcinoma following androgen-mediated regeneration. These observations indicate that CARNs represent a novel luminal stem cell population that is an efficient target for oncogenic transformation in prostate cancer.  METHODS Gene targeting and genotyping The Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+ allele was generated by gene targeting using standard techniques 46 . The targeting vector was generated using a 5' arm corresponding to a 3.5 kb PCR fragment from a Nkx3.1 genomic clone 21 up to the translation initiation site of Nkx3.1, and a 3' arm corresponding to a 4.0 kb PCR fragment of genomic sequence ( Supp. Fig. 2a ). The positive selection cassette corresponded to the self-excising ACE-Cre/PolII-neo selection cassette from the pACN vector 47 , while negative selection was provided by the PGK-tk cassette from the pPNT vector 48 . Primers for generating the 5' arm were: 5'-ACC GGA ATT CTC CGC TGC GCG CCG CTT TTG C-3' and 5'-ACC CAA GCT TCA TGC CTG CAG GTC GGA GGC C-3'. Primers to amplify the 3' arm were: 5'-CTA GTC TAG AGC GGC TCA CCT CCT TCC TCA-3' and 5'-CTA GTC TAG AGG ATG GCA GGA GAG GTC ACT GC-3'. The gap between the 5' and 3' arms is approximately 80 bp, such that the 3' arm contains the majority of exon 1 together with intron 1, exon 2, and 200 bp of genomic sequence 3' of the transcription termination site. The pGS-CreERT2 vector 28 was generously provided by Pierre Chambon, and was modified by insertion of a 65 bp intron from ACE-Cre 47 between the Psh AI and Cla I sites of the CreERT2 sequence. Culture and transfection of mouse ES cells followed standard protocols 46 . Homologous recombinants in TC1 ES cells 49 were selected by positive-negative selection followed by Southern blot screening. 1/260 clones analyzed was properly targeted, and this clone was used to generate germline chimeras. Mouse genotyping Genotyping for the Nkx3.1 CreRT2 allele was performed by Southern blotting or by PCR using tail genomic DNA. Primers for PCR genotyping were as follows: for the Nkx3.1 wild-type allele, 5'-CTC CGC TAC CCT AAG CAT CC-3' and 5'-GAC ACT GTC ATA TTA CTT GGA CC-3', which amplifies a region deleted in the targeting vector; and for the Nkx3.1 CreERT2 allele, 5'-CAG ATG GCG CGG CAA CAC C -3' and 5'-GCG CGG TCT GGC AGT AAA AAC -3'. The primers for genotyping Nkx3.1 mutant mice were: 5'-GCC AAC CTG CCT CAA TCA CTA AGG-3' (wild-type Nkx3.1 forward), 5'-TTC CAC ATA CAC TTC ATT CTC AGT-3' (mutated forward), and 5'-GCC AAC CTG CCT CAA TCA CTA AGG-3' (wild-type and mutated reverse). The primers for genotyping the R26R-lacZ Cre-reporter were: 5’-CCG CGC TGT ACT GGA GGC TGA AG -3’ (forward) and 5’-ATA CTG CAC CGG GCG GGA AGG AT -3’ (reverse). Primers for genotyping the Pten conditional ( Pten flox ) allele were: 5'-ACT CAA GGC AGG GAT GAG C-3' (forward) and 5'-GTC ATC TTC ACT TAG CCA TTG G-3' (reverse). Primers for genotyping the R26R-YFP mice were: 5'-GCG AAG AGT TTG TCC TCA ACC-3' (mutated forward), 5'-GGA GCG GGA GAA ATG GAT ATG-3' (wild-type forward) and 5'-AAA GTC GCT CTG AGT TGT TAT-3' (wild-type and mutated reverse). Mouse procedures Castration of adult male mice was performed using standard techniques 50 . Following castration at 8 weeks of age, mice were allowed to regress for four weeks to reach the fully involuted state. For tamoxifen induction of Cre activity in mice containing the Nkx3.1 CreERT2 allele, mice were administered 9 mg/40 g tamoxifen (Sigma) suspended in corn oil, or vehicle alone for negative controls, by i.p. injection or oral gavage once daily for 4 consecutive days, followed by a chase period of 14 days. For prostate regeneration, testosterone (Sigma) was dissolved at 25 mg/ml in 100% ethanol and diluted in PEG-400 to a final concentration of 7.5 mg/ml. Testosterone was administered for four weeks at a rate of 1.875 µg per hour delivered by subcutaneous implantation of mini-osmotic pumps (Alzet); this regimen yields physiological levels of serum testosterone 45 . When included, BrdU (100 mg/kg) (Sigma) was also administered by i.p. injection once daily during the first three days of regeneration to label proliferating cells. After regeneration of the prostate, mice could be euthanized for analysis, or deprived of androgens by pump removal, returning to the regressed state after four additional weeks. At this point, mice were either euthanized for analysis, or osmotic pumps could be reimplanted for additional rounds of serial regression/regeneration. For tissue recombination and renal grafting, prostate tissues (corresponding to the combined anterior, dorsolateral, and ventral lobes) were dissected and minced to small clumps, followed by enzymatic dissociation with 0.2% collagenase I (Invitrogen) in DMEM media with 10% fetal bovine serum for 90 min. Dissociated tissue was passed sequentially through 21, 23 and 26 gauge needles followed by a 40 µm cell strainer to obtain single-cell suspensions. The resulting cells were assessed for viability by trypan blue exclusion and counted. For grafts containing large numbers of epithelial cells, as in Supp. Fig. 4 , 2.5 × 105 dissociated prostate cells obtained from castrated and tamoxifen-induced Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ mice were mixed with 2.5 × 105 dissociated urogenital sinus mesenchyme (UGM) cells from E18.0 rat embryos. UGM cells were obtained from dissected urogenital sinus that was treated for 30 min in 1% trypsin, followed by mechanical dissociation and treatment with 0.1% collagenase B (Roche) for 30 min at 37°, and washing in PBS. Pelleted cell mixtures were resuspended in 10 µl of 1:5 collagen:setting buffer (10x Earle’s Balanced Salt Solution (Life Technologies), 0.2 M NaHCO3, 50 mM NaOH), and gelatinized in 37°C for 20 minutes. Tissue recombinants were cultured in DMEM media with 10% fetal bovine serum supplemented with 10?7 M dihydrotestosterone (DHT) overnight, followed by transplantation under the kidney capsules of nude mice. Grafts were harvested after 4–8 weeks of growth for analysis. For single-cell grafts, as in Fig. 3 , a single YFP+ (or YFP? cell as a control) was isolated from the dissociated cell suspension from castrated and tamoxifen-induced Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ prostates by mouth-pipetting under epifluorescence illumination on an Olympus IX51 inverted microscope with DP71 camera. This single cell was then recombined with 2.5 × 105 dissociated urogenital sinus mesenchyme cells obtained from E18.0 rat embryos, and cultured and grafted as above. Grafts were harvested after 10–12 weeks of growth for analysis, and imaged under epifluorescence on an Olympus SZX16 stereomicroscope with DP71 camera. The resulting graft tissue was analyzed for YFP and other marker expression as described below, and counterstained with DAPI for visualization of nuclear morphology at high-power to distinguish mouse from rat nuclei 31 . Grafts recovered from transplantation of a single lineage-marked YFP+ cell (n=16/43, 37%) were confirmed to be of mouse origin by YFP expression and nuclear morphology ( Supp. Fig. 6 ), while the single graft (n=1/31, 3%) arising from a YFP? cell was confirmed to be of mouse origin by nuclear morphology. Generation of prostatic ducts by a YFP? cell might result from a CARN that was not lineage-marked by tamoxifen-induction, which is inefficient, or alternatively from a distinct stem cell type in the prostate epithelium. We note that a significant percentage (n=13/74, 18%) of the grafts contained ducts of rat origin, which are not included in Fig. 3j . These rat ducts likely arise from rat urogenital epithelial cells that are difficult to completely dissociate from the urogenital mesenchyme used in the graft, and can populate the graft under conditions in which the epithelial contribution is limiting. For histological and immunofluorescence analysis, individual prostate lobes or renal grafts were dissected, and then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for subsequent cryoembedding in OCT compound (Sakura), or fixed in 10% formalin followed by paraffin embedding. Volume of dissected anterior prostate lobes was determined by physical displacement of known volumes of PBS solution in 0.5 ml centrifuge tubes. Histology and immunostaining Hematoxylin-eosin staining was performed using standard protocols on 6 µm paraffin sections. ?-galactosidase staining was performed using 12 micron cryosections, which were incubated in staining solution (0.1 M PBS, 1.3 mM MgCl2, 1 mg/ml X-gal , 0.02% Nonidet P–40, 5 mM K4Fe(CN)6, 5 mM K3Fe(CN)6, and 0.01% Na-deoxycholate) for 3 hours or overnight, followed by fixation in 10% formalin for 2 to 5 hours. Direct visualization of YFP was performed after washing 10 µm cryosections in PBST (PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100) 3 times, incubation with TOPRO3 (1:1000 diluted in PBST) (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) for 30 min, and mounting with VECTASHIELD mounting medium (Vector Labs), which contains DAPI. For immunohistochemical staining, 6 µm paraffin sections were deparaffinized in xylene, followed by antigen retrieval through boiling in antigen unmasking solution (Vector Labs). Slides were blocked in 10% normal serum or with blocking reagents provided in the M.O.M. kit (Vector Labs) for mouse primary antibodies, then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C or room temperature. Primary antibodies and dilutions utilized are listed in Supp. Table 5 . Secondary antibodies were obtained from Vectastain ABC kits (Vector Labs) and diluted 1:250 or 1:500. The signal was enhanced using the Vectastain ABC system and visualized with the NovaRed Substrate Kit (Vector Labs). The slides were counterstained with Harris Modified Hematoxylin (1:4 diluted in H2O) (Fisher Scientific) and mounted with Clearmount (American Master*Tech Scientific). Immunohistochemical staining was imaged using a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope equipped with a Nikon DXM1200 digital camera. Immunofluorescence staining was performed on either 6 micron paraffin sections or 10 micron cryosections, which were incubated in 3% H2O2 and Antigen Unmasking Solution (Vector Labs). Primary antibodies and dilutions utilized are listed in Supp. Table 5 . Slides were incubated with 10% normal goat (Vector Labs) or donkey serum (Sigma) and with primary antibodies diluted in the 10% normal goat or donkey serum overnight at 4°C or room temperature. Slides then were incubated with secondary antibodies (diluted 1:500 in PBST) labeled with Alexa Fluor 488, 555, or 594 (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes). Detection of Nkx3.1, GFP, and Cre was enhanced using tyramide amplification (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) by incubation of slides with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (1:100 dilution) (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes), followed by incubation with tyramide 488 or 555 for 6 min. Sections were counterstained with TOPRO3 or TOTO3 (diluted 1:1000 in PBST) (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) to visualize nuclei, and mounted with VECTASHIELD mounting medium (Vector Labs), which contains DAPI. Immunofluorescence staining was imaged using a Leica TCS5 spectral confocal microscope. Quantitation and statistics To calculate the number of CARNs in the regressed mouse prostate, we determined that there are an average of 112,000 total cells (n=5 animals; all lobes combined), of which 59% are epithelial as determined by immunoreactivity for the pan-epithelial marker CD24 (ref. 9 ). Since 0.7% of epithelial cells in the regressed prostate are CARNs, there are approximately 460 CARNs in the total prostate. To determine the number of lineage-marked cells in the regressed prostate, we visualized 320 live YFP+ cells in dissociated prostate tissue (all lobes combined) from 5 castrated lineage-marked Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ mice, for a total of 64 YFP+ live cells/mouse. For the experiment in Supp. Fig. 4 , we performed 2 recombinations from these dissociated prostate cells, so that there were approximately 160 live YFP+ cells used in each graft. For immunostaining experiments, cell numbers were counted manually using confocal 40x and 63x photomicrographs. Statistical analyses were performed using a two-sample T-test, X 2 test, or Fisher’s Exact test as appropriate. At least three animals for each experiment or genotype were analyzed.  Gene targeting and genotyping The Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+ allele was generated by gene targeting using standard techniques 46 . The targeting vector was generated using a 5' arm corresponding to a 3.5 kb PCR fragment from a Nkx3.1 genomic clone 21 up to the translation initiation site of Nkx3.1, and a 3' arm corresponding to a 4.0 kb PCR fragment of genomic sequence ( Supp. Fig. 2a ). The positive selection cassette corresponded to the self-excising ACE-Cre/PolII-neo selection cassette from the pACN vector 47 , while negative selection was provided by the PGK-tk cassette from the pPNT vector 48 . Primers for generating the 5' arm were: 5'-ACC GGA ATT CTC CGC TGC GCG CCG CTT TTG C-3' and 5'-ACC CAA GCT TCA TGC CTG CAG GTC GGA GGC C-3'. Primers to amplify the 3' arm were: 5'-CTA GTC TAG AGC GGC TCA CCT CCT TCC TCA-3' and 5'-CTA GTC TAG AGG ATG GCA GGA GAG GTC ACT GC-3'. The gap between the 5' and 3' arms is approximately 80 bp, such that the 3' arm contains the majority of exon 1 together with intron 1, exon 2, and 200 bp of genomic sequence 3' of the transcription termination site. The pGS-CreERT2 vector 28 was generously provided by Pierre Chambon, and was modified by insertion of a 65 bp intron from ACE-Cre 47 between the Psh AI and Cla I sites of the CreERT2 sequence. Culture and transfection of mouse ES cells followed standard protocols 46 . Homologous recombinants in TC1 ES cells 49 were selected by positive-negative selection followed by Southern blot screening. 1/260 clones analyzed was properly targeted, and this clone was used to generate germline chimeras.  Mouse genotyping Genotyping for the Nkx3.1 CreRT2 allele was performed by Southern blotting or by PCR using tail genomic DNA. Primers for PCR genotyping were as follows: for the Nkx3.1 wild-type allele, 5'-CTC CGC TAC CCT AAG CAT CC-3' and 5'-GAC ACT GTC ATA TTA CTT GGA CC-3', which amplifies a region deleted in the targeting vector; and for the Nkx3.1 CreERT2 allele, 5'-CAG ATG GCG CGG CAA CAC C -3' and 5'-GCG CGG TCT GGC AGT AAA AAC -3'. The primers for genotyping Nkx3.1 mutant mice were: 5'-GCC AAC CTG CCT CAA TCA CTA AGG-3' (wild-type Nkx3.1 forward), 5'-TTC CAC ATA CAC TTC ATT CTC AGT-3' (mutated forward), and 5'-GCC AAC CTG CCT CAA TCA CTA AGG-3' (wild-type and mutated reverse). The primers for genotyping the R26R-lacZ Cre-reporter were: 5’-CCG CGC TGT ACT GGA GGC TGA AG -3’ (forward) and 5’-ATA CTG CAC CGG GCG GGA AGG AT -3’ (reverse). Primers for genotyping the Pten conditional ( Pten flox ) allele were: 5'-ACT CAA GGC AGG GAT GAG C-3' (forward) and 5'-GTC ATC TTC ACT TAG CCA TTG G-3' (reverse). Primers for genotyping the R26R-YFP mice were: 5'-GCG AAG AGT TTG TCC TCA ACC-3' (mutated forward), 5'-GGA GCG GGA GAA ATG GAT ATG-3' (wild-type forward) and 5'-AAA GTC GCT CTG AGT TGT TAT-3' (wild-type and mutated reverse).  Mouse procedures Castration of adult male mice was performed using standard techniques 50 . Following castration at 8 weeks of age, mice were allowed to regress for four weeks to reach the fully involuted state. For tamoxifen induction of Cre activity in mice containing the Nkx3.1 CreERT2 allele, mice were administered 9 mg/40 g tamoxifen (Sigma) suspended in corn oil, or vehicle alone for negative controls, by i.p. injection or oral gavage once daily for 4 consecutive days, followed by a chase period of 14 days. For prostate regeneration, testosterone (Sigma) was dissolved at 25 mg/ml in 100% ethanol and diluted in PEG-400 to a final concentration of 7.5 mg/ml. Testosterone was administered for four weeks at a rate of 1.875 µg per hour delivered by subcutaneous implantation of mini-osmotic pumps (Alzet); this regimen yields physiological levels of serum testosterone 45 . When included, BrdU (100 mg/kg) (Sigma) was also administered by i.p. injection once daily during the first three days of regeneration to label proliferating cells. After regeneration of the prostate, mice could be euthanized for analysis, or deprived of androgens by pump removal, returning to the regressed state after four additional weeks. At this point, mice were either euthanized for analysis, or osmotic pumps could be reimplanted for additional rounds of serial regression/regeneration. For tissue recombination and renal grafting, prostate tissues (corresponding to the combined anterior, dorsolateral, and ventral lobes) were dissected and minced to small clumps, followed by enzymatic dissociation with 0.2% collagenase I (Invitrogen) in DMEM media with 10% fetal bovine serum for 90 min. Dissociated tissue was passed sequentially through 21, 23 and 26 gauge needles followed by a 40 µm cell strainer to obtain single-cell suspensions. The resulting cells were assessed for viability by trypan blue exclusion and counted. For grafts containing large numbers of epithelial cells, as in Supp. Fig. 4 , 2.5 × 105 dissociated prostate cells obtained from castrated and tamoxifen-induced Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ mice were mixed with 2.5 × 105 dissociated urogenital sinus mesenchyme (UGM) cells from E18.0 rat embryos. UGM cells were obtained from dissected urogenital sinus that was treated for 30 min in 1% trypsin, followed by mechanical dissociation and treatment with 0.1% collagenase B (Roche) for 30 min at 37°, and washing in PBS. Pelleted cell mixtures were resuspended in 10 µl of 1:5 collagen:setting buffer (10x Earle’s Balanced Salt Solution (Life Technologies), 0.2 M NaHCO3, 50 mM NaOH), and gelatinized in 37°C for 20 minutes. Tissue recombinants were cultured in DMEM media with 10% fetal bovine serum supplemented with 10?7 M dihydrotestosterone (DHT) overnight, followed by transplantation under the kidney capsules of nude mice. Grafts were harvested after 4–8 weeks of growth for analysis. For single-cell grafts, as in Fig. 3 , a single YFP+ (or YFP? cell as a control) was isolated from the dissociated cell suspension from castrated and tamoxifen-induced Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ prostates by mouth-pipetting under epifluorescence illumination on an Olympus IX51 inverted microscope with DP71 camera. This single cell was then recombined with 2.5 × 105 dissociated urogenital sinus mesenchyme cells obtained from E18.0 rat embryos, and cultured and grafted as above. Grafts were harvested after 10–12 weeks of growth for analysis, and imaged under epifluorescence on an Olympus SZX16 stereomicroscope with DP71 camera. The resulting graft tissue was analyzed for YFP and other marker expression as described below, and counterstained with DAPI for visualization of nuclear morphology at high-power to distinguish mouse from rat nuclei 31 . Grafts recovered from transplantation of a single lineage-marked YFP+ cell (n=16/43, 37%) were confirmed to be of mouse origin by YFP expression and nuclear morphology ( Supp. Fig. 6 ), while the single graft (n=1/31, 3%) arising from a YFP? cell was confirmed to be of mouse origin by nuclear morphology. Generation of prostatic ducts by a YFP? cell might result from a CARN that was not lineage-marked by tamoxifen-induction, which is inefficient, or alternatively from a distinct stem cell type in the prostate epithelium. We note that a significant percentage (n=13/74, 18%) of the grafts contained ducts of rat origin, which are not included in Fig. 3j . These rat ducts likely arise from rat urogenital epithelial cells that are difficult to completely dissociate from the urogenital mesenchyme used in the graft, and can populate the graft under conditions in which the epithelial contribution is limiting. For histological and immunofluorescence analysis, individual prostate lobes or renal grafts were dissected, and then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for subsequent cryoembedding in OCT compound (Sakura), or fixed in 10% formalin followed by paraffin embedding. Volume of dissected anterior prostate lobes was determined by physical displacement of known volumes of PBS solution in 0.5 ml centrifuge tubes.  Histology and immunostaining Hematoxylin-eosin staining was performed using standard protocols on 6 µm paraffin sections. ?-galactosidase staining was performed using 12 micron cryosections, which were incubated in staining solution (0.1 M PBS, 1.3 mM MgCl2, 1 mg/ml X-gal , 0.02% Nonidet P–40, 5 mM K4Fe(CN)6, 5 mM K3Fe(CN)6, and 0.01% Na-deoxycholate) for 3 hours or overnight, followed by fixation in 10% formalin for 2 to 5 hours. Direct visualization of YFP was performed after washing 10 µm cryosections in PBST (PBS with 0.1% Triton X-100) 3 times, incubation with TOPRO3 (1:1000 diluted in PBST) (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) for 30 min, and mounting with VECTASHIELD mounting medium (Vector Labs), which contains DAPI. For immunohistochemical staining, 6 µm paraffin sections were deparaffinized in xylene, followed by antigen retrieval through boiling in antigen unmasking solution (Vector Labs). Slides were blocked in 10% normal serum or with blocking reagents provided in the M.O.M. kit (Vector Labs) for mouse primary antibodies, then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C or room temperature. Primary antibodies and dilutions utilized are listed in Supp. Table 5 . Secondary antibodies were obtained from Vectastain ABC kits (Vector Labs) and diluted 1:250 or 1:500. The signal was enhanced using the Vectastain ABC system and visualized with the NovaRed Substrate Kit (Vector Labs). The slides were counterstained with Harris Modified Hematoxylin (1:4 diluted in H2O) (Fisher Scientific) and mounted with Clearmount (American Master*Tech Scientific). Immunohistochemical staining was imaged using a Nikon Eclipse E800 microscope equipped with a Nikon DXM1200 digital camera. Immunofluorescence staining was performed on either 6 micron paraffin sections or 10 micron cryosections, which were incubated in 3% H2O2 and Antigen Unmasking Solution (Vector Labs). Primary antibodies and dilutions utilized are listed in Supp. Table 5 . Slides were incubated with 10% normal goat (Vector Labs) or donkey serum (Sigma) and with primary antibodies diluted in the 10% normal goat or donkey serum overnight at 4°C or room temperature. Slides then were incubated with secondary antibodies (diluted 1:500 in PBST) labeled with Alexa Fluor 488, 555, or 594 (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes). Detection of Nkx3.1, GFP, and Cre was enhanced using tyramide amplification (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) by incubation of slides with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (1:100 dilution) (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes), followed by incubation with tyramide 488 or 555 for 6 min. Sections were counterstained with TOPRO3 or TOTO3 (diluted 1:1000 in PBST) (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes) to visualize nuclei, and mounted with VECTASHIELD mounting medium (Vector Labs), which contains DAPI. Immunofluorescence staining was imaged using a Leica TCS5 spectral confocal microscope.  Quantitation and statistics To calculate the number of CARNs in the regressed mouse prostate, we determined that there are an average of 112,000 total cells (n=5 animals; all lobes combined), of which 59% are epithelial as determined by immunoreactivity for the pan-epithelial marker CD24 (ref. 9 ). Since 0.7% of epithelial cells in the regressed prostate are CARNs, there are approximately 460 CARNs in the total prostate. To determine the number of lineage-marked cells in the regressed prostate, we visualized 320 live YFP+ cells in dissociated prostate tissue (all lobes combined) from 5 castrated lineage-marked Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ mice, for a total of 64 YFP+ live cells/mouse. For the experiment in Supp. Fig. 4 , we performed 2 recombinations from these dissociated prostate cells, so that there were approximately 160 live YFP+ cells used in each graft. For immunostaining experiments, cell numbers were counted manually using confocal 40x and 63x photomicrographs. Statistical analyses were performed using a two-sample T-test, X 2 test, or Fisher’s Exact test as appropriate. At least three animals for each experiment or genotype were analyzed.  Supplementary Material 1  Discussion In context with previous studies describing basal stem cells 9 , 10 , 13 , our identification of CARNs as luminal stem cells indicates the existence of distinct non-overlapping stem cell populations in the prostate epithelium. Consequently, we can propose two general models for the lineage relationship between CARNs and a basal stem cell population. One possibility is that basal and luminal cell types may possess independent progenitors that have partially redundant stem cell activities ( Fig. 6a ). A second possibility is that CARNs represent facultative or “potential” stem cells corresponding to transit-amplifying cells that acquire stem cell properties during regeneration/wound healing responses, as have been described in the mammalian testis and pancreas 36 – 38 ( Fig. 6b ). In this model, the facultative stem cells that drive prostate regeneration could be independent from the stem cells for prostate organogenesis, and might co-exist in the adult gland; such a dual progenitor system functions during Drosophila tracheal remodeling 39 . In addition, the observed defect in stem cell maintenance in Nkx3.1 mutants suggests a functional role for Nkx3.1 expression in CARNs. Thus, Nkx3.1 inactivation might result in increased differentiation of CARNs and expansion of a proliferative transit-amplifying population ( Supp. Fig. 9 ). This interpretation is consistent with the finding that the duration of epithelial proliferation during prostate regeneration is prolonged in Nkx3.1 mutants relative to wild-type 40 . The function of Nkx3.1 in stem cell maintenance may be direct, consistent with its feedback loop with androgen receptor and role in prostate epithelial differentiation 20 , 41 , or may be indirect, for example due to increased oxidative damage with aging 42 . Finally, the importance of the stem cell compartment as a target of oncogenic transformation has been highlighted by studies showing that stem cell populations in lung and colon are efficient cells of origin for cancer 43 , 44 . In the case of prostate cancer, the identification of a castration-resistant stem cell population as a cell of origin also has implications for the onset of hormone-refractory disease. Thus, if oncogenic transformation of CARNs can result in the formation of a putative cancer stem cell, the eventual emergence of hormone-refractory disease may be pre-figured through an initiating event during prostate carcinogenesis.  Discussion In context with previous studies describing basal stem cells 9 , 10 , 13 , our identification of CARNs as luminal stem cells indicates the existence of distinct non-overlapping stem cell populations in the prostate epithelium. Consequently, we can propose two general models for the lineage relationship between CARNs and a basal stem cell population. One possibility is that basal and luminal cell types may possess independent progenitors that have partially redundant stem cell activities ( Fig. 6a ). A second possibility is that CARNs represent facultative or “potential” stem cells corresponding to transit-amplifying cells that acquire stem cell properties during regeneration/wound healing responses, as have been described in the mammalian testis and pancreas 36 – 38 ( Fig. 6b ). In this model, the facultative stem cells that drive prostate regeneration could be independent from the stem cells for prostate organogenesis, and might co-exist in the adult gland; such a dual progenitor system functions during Drosophila tracheal remodeling 39 . In addition, the observed defect in stem cell maintenance in Nkx3.1 mutants suggests a functional role for Nkx3.1 expression in CARNs. Thus, Nkx3.1 inactivation might result in increased differentiation of CARNs and expansion of a proliferative transit-amplifying population ( Supp. Fig. 9 ). This interpretation is consistent with the finding that the duration of epithelial proliferation during prostate regeneration is prolonged in Nkx3.1 mutants relative to wild-type 40 . The function of Nkx3.1 in stem cell maintenance may be direct, consistent with its feedback loop with androgen receptor and role in prostate epithelial differentiation 20 , 41 , or may be indirect, for example due to increased oxidative damage with aging 42 . Finally, the importance of the stem cell compartment as a target of oncogenic transformation has been highlighted by studies showing that stem cell populations in lung and colon are efficient cells of origin for cancer 43 , 44 . In the case of prostate cancer, the identification of a castration-resistant stem cell population as a cell of origin also has implications for the onset of hormone-refractory disease. Thus, if oncogenic transformation of CARNs can result in the formation of a putative cancer stem cell, the eventual emergence of hormone-refractory disease may be pre-figured through an initiating event during prostate carcinogenesis.  METHODS SUMMARY The Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+ allele was generated by gene targeting using standard techniques; the Nkx3.1 null mutant mice have been previously described 21 . R26R-lacZ and Pten conditional mutant mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory Induced Mutant Resource; the R26R-YFP mice were provided by Dr. Frank Costantini. All lines were maintained on a hybrid C57BL/6-129/Sv strain background. Castration of adult male mice was performed using standard techniques. For tamoxifen induction of Cre activity in mice containing Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+ , mice were administered 9 mg/40 g tamoxifen for 4 consecutive days. For prostate regeneration, physiological levels of testosterone (1.875 µg/hr) were administered for four weeks by subcutaneous implantation of mini-osmotic pumps (Alzet) 45 . When included, BrdU (100 mg/kg) was administered once daily during the first three days of regeneration. For single-cell transplantation, single YFP+ cells were isolated by mouth-pipetting under epifluorescence illumination from a dissociated prostate cell suspension obtained from castrated and tamoxifen-induced Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ mice. A single YFP+ cell (or YFP? cell as a control) was recombined with 2.5 × 105 rat urogenital sinus mesenchyme cells in a 10 µl collagen pad, followed by transplantation under the kidney capsule of nude mice and harvesting after 10–12 weeks. Cryosections were stained with primary antibodies as listed in Supp. Table 5 , and counterstained with TOPRO3 or DAPI (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes). Secondary antibodies were labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 , 555, or 594 (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes). Immunofluorescence staining was imaged using a Leica TCS5 spectral confocal microscope. Cell counting was performed manually using confocal photomicrographs with at least three animals for each experiment or genotype analyzed.  METHODS SUMMARY The Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+ allele was generated by gene targeting using standard techniques; the Nkx3.1 null mutant mice have been previously described 21 . R26R-lacZ and Pten conditional mutant mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory Induced Mutant Resource; the R26R-YFP mice were provided by Dr. Frank Costantini. All lines were maintained on a hybrid C57BL/6-129/Sv strain background. Castration of adult male mice was performed using standard techniques. For tamoxifen induction of Cre activity in mice containing Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+ , mice were administered 9 mg/40 g tamoxifen for 4 consecutive days. For prostate regeneration, physiological levels of testosterone (1.875 µg/hr) were administered for four weeks by subcutaneous implantation of mini-osmotic pumps (Alzet) 45 . When included, BrdU (100 mg/kg) was administered once daily during the first three days of regeneration. For single-cell transplantation, single YFP+ cells were isolated by mouth-pipetting under epifluorescence illumination from a dissociated prostate cell suspension obtained from castrated and tamoxifen-induced Nkx3.1 CreERT2/+; R26R-YFP/+ mice. A single YFP+ cell (or YFP? cell as a control) was recombined with 2.5 × 105 rat urogenital sinus mesenchyme cells in a 10 µl collagen pad, followed by transplantation under the kidney capsule of nude mice and harvesting after 10–12 weeks. Cryosections were stained with primary antibodies as listed in Supp. Table 5 , and counterstained with TOPRO3 or DAPI (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes). Secondary antibodies were labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 , 555, or 594 (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes). Immunofluorescence staining was imaged using a Leica TCS5 spectral confocal microscope. Cell counting was performed manually using confocal photomicrographs with at least three animals for each experiment or genotype analyzed. 