18F-FDG PET/CT for Image-Guided and Intensity-Modulated Radiotherapy * Advances in technology have allowed extremely precise control of radiation dose delivery and localization within a patient. The ability to confidently delineate target tumor boundaries, however, has lagged behind. 18F-FDG PET/CT, with its ability to distinguish metabolically active disease from normal tissue, may provide a partial solution to this problem. Here we review the current applications of 18F-FDG PET/CT in a variety of disease sites, including non–small cell lung cancer, head and neck cancer, and pancreatic adenocarcinoma. This review focuses on the use of 18F-FDG PET/CT to aid in planning radiotherapy and the associated benefits and challenges. We also briefly consider novel radiopharmaceuticals that are beginning to be used in the context of radiotherapy planning.  Conclusion Radiotherapy planning has traditionally relied heavily on CT. Increasingly, 18F-FDG PET/CT is also being incorporated into the treatment-planning process and promises to improve the ability to confidently identify regions of disease. Though there are numerous technical and biologic challenges to deploying 18F-FDG PET for these purposes, it is in fairly common use at least for most of the disease sites discussed in this article. As radiation oncology moves toward hypofractionated stereotactic body radiotherapy for many sites, the role of 18F-FDG PET will continue to evolve and provide additional benefit. It should also be recognized that although it appears obvious that the superior tumor detection capability of PET and its superior specificity for excluding tumor should translate into better patient outcomes, we lack comparative randomized trials in which PET is used, or not used, in the planning process. Such studies, though difficult, would be of great interest as the use of PET/CT expands into more applications based on its superb diagnostic performance.  Figures FIGURE 1 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma delineated on CT alone by radiation oncologist (yellow) and on 18F-FDG PET/ CT by nuclear medicine physician (blue). Images are from coronal cut of patient with CT (A) and 18F-FDG PET/CT image fusion (B). Tick marks are 1 cm. FIGURE 2 CT (A) and 18F-FDG PET (B) transverse slices for patient with base-of-tongue cancer, and profile plot of 18F-FDG signal along horizontal line (C). Example 18F-FDG signal threshold levels (red lines, C) demonstrate that cutoff levels of 40% and 70% of maximum would result in very different tumor volumes. FIGURE 3 Size of GTV vs. threshold level of 18F-FDG PET signal chosen for automatic contouring. Volumes are plotted as percentage relative to CT-based volume. Data are shown for 8 patients with head and neck cancer. FIGURE 4 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma delineated on CT alone by radiation oncologist (yellow) and on 18F-FDG PET/ CT by nuclear medicine physician (blue). Images are from coronal cut of patient with CT (A) and 18F-FDG PET/CT image fusion (B). Tick marks are 1 cm. 