Is there a role for complementary therapy in the management of leukemia? Patients with leukemia often seek additional treatments not prescribed by their oncologist in an effort to improve their cancer treatment outcome or to manage symptoms. Complementary therapies are used in conjunction with traditional cancer treatments to decrease symptoms and side effects associated with cancer or cancer treatment, and to improve patients’ overall quality of life. Complementary therapies are distinct from so-called ‘alternative’ therapies, which are unproven, ineffective and may postpone or interfere with mainstream cancer treatment. Complementary therapies are pleasant, inexpensive, nonpharmacologic and effective. For patients with leukemia, the complementary therapies that are always appropriate include mind–body interventions, such as self-hypnosis, meditation, guided imagery and breath awareness. Massage and reflexology (foot massage) decrease symptoms with effects lasting at least 2 days following treatment. Acupuncture is very beneficial for symptom management without adverse consequences. Physical fitness with regular exercise and healthy dietary habits can significantly decrease side effects of cancer treatments and may prolong survival. Botanical extracts and vitamin supplements may interfere with active cancer treatments, and should be discussed with the oncologist or pharmacist before use.  Expert commentary The complementary therapies are of great value for decreasing leukemia-related symptoms and these therapies are safe to use concurrent to cancer treatment. Complementary therapies have been investigated regarding symptom control; however, we do not always have optimal dosing determined for these therapies. For example, is it better to administer acupuncture on a weekly basis for chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy, or will twice-weekly treatments be more effective? How many sessions are required before we determine the intervention as effective or ineffective? Is there a difference between specific meditation techniques versus self-hypnosis in pain management? Are all physical fitness interventions equal for decreasing cancer-related symptoms? How many minutes should a person exercise at one setting in order to derive the maximum benefit from the intervention? Are three 60-min sessions weekly the same regarding symptom management as six 30-min sessions? Do we need to cycle our physical exercise with small bursts of physical activity alternating with periods of rest, or can we exercise continuously and derive the same benefits from, for example, immune system enhancement and increased natural killer cell activity? These areas will be addressed in future research to further refine our recommendations to patients and the general population. What is confused by the general public and ignored by the nutritional supplement marketers is that there is a difference between primary cancer prevention and cancer treatment. While antioxidants are beneficial for protecting cells from oxidative damage and for primary cancer prevention, this does not necessarily translate into directly benefiting all cancer patients. The antioxidant fruit juice marketing for noni, gogi, açai and mangosteen, for example, imply that the antioxidants will protect only the healthy cells and not the cancer cells, which is not necessarily what occurs. There are no adequate human studies examining these claims for the fruit juices. The studies that have examined high doses of antioxidants in conjunction with chemotherapy or radiation therapy have either not shown benefit or have shown harm. In patients who are at increased risk for cancer, high dose antioxidants have also been demonstrated benefit, such as the ?-carotene lung cancer prevention studies in male smokers, where the group receiving the ?-carotene had an 18% increased incidence of lung cancer compared with the placebo group. Regarding botanical supplements and cancer prevention and/or treatment, additional research is urgently needed to determine the efficacy and toxicity of these agents. The purity and consistency of these products is not guaranteed, unless the botanical source is grown and harvested through controlled conditions, which is not always the case. All research should incorporate stability testing and exert quality control to ensure that the product used has batch-to-batch standardization in order to replicate the research results in a clinical setting. Plant source verification is also important. The issue of bioavailability is a key component for all botanical research. Simply following serum levels of a botanical compound may also not be indicative of the mechanism of action or of the botanical’s bioavailability, as the pharmacodynamics may depend on a mechanism other than serum transport. The medicinal mushrooms hold great promise for immune modulation; however, their use must be closely monitored. It may not always be in a patients’ best interest to broadly stimulate the immune system, especially for patients with leukemia. Altering one aspect of the immune system has a cascade effect, which can produce unexpected results. A botanical supplement may have very different immunomodulatory effects with different doses and serum concentrations, and the maximum tolerated dose may not necessarily provide the optimal desired effect [ 66 ]. Translating in vitro experimental results into animal models and human clinical results requires careful interpretation of the experimental data. Unlike pharmaceutical drugs, which consist of one chemical structure, the botanical extracts can contain hundreds if not thousands of chemical constituents. The botanical agents may have unpredictable clinical results based on factors not necessarily related to their proposed mechanism of action or chemical constituents. One such example is the EGCG and vitamin C inactivation of bortezomib; although the mechanism of action of bortezomib does not use an antioxidant mechanism, these two supplements do block bortezomib activity.  Five-year view Over the next 5 years, research will continue regarding the importance of nutrition not only not only in cancer treatment, but also in primary and secondary cancer prevention. Public health safety issues, such as establishing adequate and optimal serum levels of various nutritional compounds, will be increasingly addressed. While ensuring nutritional adequacy is important, avoiding toxicity is also of paramount interest, especially with widespread food fortification. Folate supplementation is one such example, while supplementation has decreased neural tube defects, excessive inadvertent consumption of folate is possible through overeating fortified products. Avoiding the potential for overdose and subsequent adverse health outcomes is of vital importance. Increased regulation of the marketing and advertising of nutritional supplements will also be important issues. Simply because a product is available over the counter without a prescription, does not ensure its safety for use in all persons. The adverse effects of high-dose multivitamin supplementation will probably be increasingly encountered, as the prevalence of multivitamin and multimineral use is very high. It is possible that an increase in the adverse effects of the antioxidant supplements will result in increased cancers and other chronic diseases. The potential role of folate, calcium, vitamin D and other nutritional ingredients in cancer prevention and altering modifiable risk factors for decreasing cancer recurrence are gaining increasing attention from the scientific community, as well as the general public. The importance of lifestyle modification for increasing physical fitness and mind–body therapies for stress reduction will also be more widely emphasized in the next few years. As we have additional scientific data regarding the cost–effectiveness of regular physical fitness, mind–body, acupuncture and massage therapies, the healthcare system will probably expand insurance coverage for these therapies. Self-hypnosis is increasingly covered through health insurance, as this intervention has been shown to be cost effective, as well as effective for decreasing patient symptoms. The opportunity for reimbursement for these services will increase patient access and improve care for patients with leukemia. Key issues Complementary therapies provide symptom relief during the active leukemia treatment and improve quality of life for cancer patients. The so called ‘alternative’ therapies are not effective and have great potential to interfere with traditional cancer treatments. Achieving adequate nutritional intake through foods and not through the use of supplements is very important for decreasing side effects of treatment and improving overall survival for cancer patients. Routine physical fitness plays an important role in maintaining physical strength and decreasing side effects from the leukemia treatments. Maintaining healthy lifestyle habits through good nutrition and regular physical fitness can reverse many of the leukemia treatment-related side effects and can decrease the risk of cardiovascular complications from the leukemia treatments. Mind–body practices, acupuncture and massage are very beneficial for decreasing side effects of cancer treatments. Botanical and nutritional supplements have the potential to interfere with cancer treatments and are to be used only with the supervision of the oncologist.  Key issues Complementary therapies provide symptom relief during the active leukemia treatment and improve quality of life for cancer patients. The so called ‘alternative’ therapies are not effective and have great potential to interfere with traditional cancer treatments. Achieving adequate nutritional intake through foods and not through the use of supplements is very important for decreasing side effects of treatment and improving overall survival for cancer patients. Routine physical fitness plays an important role in maintaining physical strength and decreasing side effects from the leukemia treatments. Maintaining healthy lifestyle habits through good nutrition and regular physical fitness can reverse many of the leukemia treatment-related side effects and can decrease the risk of cardiovascular complications from the leukemia treatments. Mind–body practices, acupuncture and massage are very beneficial for decreasing side effects of cancer treatments. Botanical and nutritional supplements have the potential to interfere with cancer treatments and are to be used only with the supervision of the oncologist. 