In Vivo RNAi Screening Identifies Regulators of Actin Dynamics as Key Determinants of Lymphoma Progression Mouse models have dramatically improved our understanding of cancer development and tumor biology. However, these models have shown limited efficacy as tractable systems for unbiased genetic experimentation. Here, we report the adaptation of loss of function screening to mouse models of cancer. Specifically, we have been able to introduce a library of shRNAs into individual mice using transplantable E?-myc lymphoma cells. This approach has allowed us to screen nearly 1000 genetic alterations in the context of a single tumor-bearing mouse. Results from these experiments have identified a central role for regulators of actin dynamics and cell motility in lymphoma cell homeostasis in vivo , and validation experiments confirmed that these proteins represent bona fide lymphoma drug targets. Additionally, suppression of two of these targets, Rac2 and Twinfilin, potentiated the action of the front-line chemotherapeutic vincristine, suggesting a critical relationship between cell motility and tumor relapse in hematopoietic malignancies.  Methods Cell culture and chemicals E?-Myc;Arf -/- mouse B-cell lymphomas were cultured in B cell medium (45% DMEM/45% IMDM/10% FBS, supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine and 5?M ?-mercaptoethanol). ?-irradiated NIH 3T3 cells were used as feeder cells. Vincristine, doxorubicin, and the Rac inhibitor NSC23766 were purchased from Calbiochem. For in vivo studies, drugs were dissolved in a 0.9% NaCl solution prior to IP injection. RNAi screen Lymphoma cells were infected with an shRNA library targeting the cancer 1000 gene set (?2250 hairpins) to a final infection of ?20%. 48 hours after infection, lymphoma cells were GFP sorted. Immediately after sorting, 2×106 lymphoma cells/mouse were injected into three syngeneic recipient mice by tail vein injection. Disease progression was monitored by lymph node palpation. Following the appearance of palpable lymphomas, approximately 14 days after tail-vein injection, lymphoma cells were harvested from the axillary, brachial, and cervical lymph nodes. For in vitro samples, infected lymphoma cells were plated in triplicate and maintained for two weeks. shRNAs were amplified from genomic DNA using primers that include adaptors for 454 sequencing ( Supplementary Table 2 ). Following PCR amplification of hairpins, 454 sequencing was used to identify constituent shRNAs in each sample 32 . Fold change in hairpin representation after proliferation in vitro or in vivo was determined by comparing shRNA representation in each sample to that in a control cell population collected immediately after cell sorting. Hairpins that depleted 10-fold in all three in vitro or in vivo samples, and hairpins that enriched 5-fold in two out of three samples, based on a normalized read numbers, were considered candidate hits. Genes were not scored as candidate hits if multiple cognate hairpins showed opposing effects. All of the raw data from this screen has been deposited in the GEO database, accession number GSE16090. shRNA constructs shRNA constructs were designed and cloned as previously described 9 . Sequences targeted by shRNAs are provided in Supplementary Table 2 . Western blotting and RT-qPCR For western blotting and RT-qPCR, protein or total RNA was isolated after retroviral infection and puromycin selection. Primers used for qPCR are available upon request. For western blotting, cell lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholine, 0.1% SDS, 1% triton-X, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 140 mM NaCl) for 10 minutes. Lysates were cleared for 15 minutes at 14,000 rpm and mixed with 5× SDS sample buffer. Proteins were then run on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to PVDF (Millipore) and detected with the following antibodies: anti-Rac2 (Proteintech Group, 1:200) and anti-tubulin (ECM Biosciences, 1:5000). Competition and survival assays For competition assays, lymphoma cells were partially infected with the indicated retroviruses and 4×106 cells were tail-vein injected into syngeneic recipient mice. Following the appearance of palpable lymphomas, lymphoma cells were harvested from the lymph nodes and the percentage of GFP+ cells was analyzed on a Becton Dickinson FACScan flow cytometer. In parallel, lymphoma cells were maintained in culture for two weeks to assess the effect of the indicated shRNA on lymphoma cell proliferation in vitro . Dead cells were detected by propidium iodide incorporation (0.05 mg/mL) and were excluded from GFP analysis. For survival assays, cells were GFP sorted and 1 × 106 cells/mouse were injected by tail-vein injection. Mice were treated with the Rac inhibitor NSC23766 every 12 hours (2.5 mg/kg) starting 9 days after tail vein injection. Mice were treated with a single dose of vincristine (1.5 mg/kg) 11 days after tail vein injection. Tumor free survival was monitored by palpation and overall survival was based on body condition score. For short-term engraftment assays, cells were GFP or dsCherry sorted, mixed at an even ratio, and 1×106 cells/mouse were injected by tail-vein injection. Migration assays Recombinant murine SDF-1? (Peprotech) was used for migration assays. Lymphoma cells were serum starved in B cell media containing 2.5% FBS for 2 hours. 250,000 lymphoma cells resuspended in low serum B cell media were added to the upper chamber of 24-well transwell inserts (5 ?m pore size, Millipore) and the indicated concentration of SDF was added to the lower chamber. The number of lymphoma cells that migrated to the lower chamber was quantified after 5 hours and is displayed as the fold change in cell number relative to control wells. For live imaging of lymphoma cell migration, glass bottom dishes (MatTek) were coated with fibronectin (Calbiochem). Lymphoma cells were resusupended in low serum B cell media at 2×106 cells/mL, plated on fibronectin-coated dishes, and allowed to adhere for 2 hours. Non-adherent cells were then removed by gentle washing and cells were imaged after stimulation with SDF (100 ng/mL). Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism4 software. Two-tailed Student's t-tests, one sample t-tests, and one-way ANOVA were used, as indicated. For comparison of survival curves, a Mantel-Haenszel test was used. Error bars represent standard deviation.  Cell culture and chemicals E?-Myc;Arf -/- mouse B-cell lymphomas were cultured in B cell medium (45% DMEM/45% IMDM/10% FBS, supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine and 5?M ?-mercaptoethanol). ?-irradiated NIH 3T3 cells were used as feeder cells. Vincristine, doxorubicin, and the Rac inhibitor NSC23766 were purchased from Calbiochem. For in vivo studies, drugs were dissolved in a 0.9% NaCl solution prior to IP injection.  RNAi screen Lymphoma cells were infected with an shRNA library targeting the cancer 1000 gene set (?2250 hairpins) to a final infection of ?20%. 48 hours after infection, lymphoma cells were GFP sorted. Immediately after sorting, 2×106 lymphoma cells/mouse were injected into three syngeneic recipient mice by tail vein injection. Disease progression was monitored by lymph node palpation. Following the appearance of palpable lymphomas, approximately 14 days after tail-vein injection, lymphoma cells were harvested from the axillary, brachial, and cervical lymph nodes. For in vitro samples, infected lymphoma cells were plated in triplicate and maintained for two weeks. shRNAs were amplified from genomic DNA using primers that include adaptors for 454 sequencing ( Supplementary Table 2 ). Following PCR amplification of hairpins, 454 sequencing was used to identify constituent shRNAs in each sample 32 . Fold change in hairpin representation after proliferation in vitro or in vivo was determined by comparing shRNA representation in each sample to that in a control cell population collected immediately after cell sorting. Hairpins that depleted 10-fold in all three in vitro or in vivo samples, and hairpins that enriched 5-fold in two out of three samples, based on a normalized read numbers, were considered candidate hits. Genes were not scored as candidate hits if multiple cognate hairpins showed opposing effects. All of the raw data from this screen has been deposited in the GEO database, accession number GSE16090.  shRNA constructs shRNA constructs were designed and cloned as previously described 9 . Sequences targeted by shRNAs are provided in Supplementary Table 2 .  Western blotting and RT-qPCR For western blotting and RT-qPCR, protein or total RNA was isolated after retroviral infection and puromycin selection. Primers used for qPCR are available upon request. For western blotting, cell lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholine, 0.1% SDS, 1% triton-X, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 140 mM NaCl) for 10 minutes. Lysates were cleared for 15 minutes at 14,000 rpm and mixed with 5× SDS sample buffer. Proteins were then run on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel, transferred to PVDF (Millipore) and detected with the following antibodies: anti-Rac2 (Proteintech Group, 1:200) and anti-tubulin (ECM Biosciences, 1:5000).  Competition and survival assays For competition assays, lymphoma cells were partially infected with the indicated retroviruses and 4×106 cells were tail-vein injected into syngeneic recipient mice. Following the appearance of palpable lymphomas, lymphoma cells were harvested from the lymph nodes and the percentage of GFP+ cells was analyzed on a Becton Dickinson FACScan flow cytometer. In parallel, lymphoma cells were maintained in culture for two weeks to assess the effect of the indicated shRNA on lymphoma cell proliferation in vitro . Dead cells were detected by propidium iodide incorporation (0.05 mg/mL) and were excluded from GFP analysis. For survival assays, cells were GFP sorted and 1 × 106 cells/mouse were injected by tail-vein injection. Mice were treated with the Rac inhibitor NSC23766 every 12 hours (2.5 mg/kg) starting 9 days after tail vein injection. Mice were treated with a single dose of vincristine (1.5 mg/kg) 11 days after tail vein injection. Tumor free survival was monitored by palpation and overall survival was based on body condition score. For short-term engraftment assays, cells were GFP or dsCherry sorted, mixed at an even ratio, and 1×106 cells/mouse were injected by tail-vein injection.  Migration assays Recombinant murine SDF-1? (Peprotech) was used for migration assays. Lymphoma cells were serum starved in B cell media containing 2.5% FBS for 2 hours. 250,000 lymphoma cells resuspended in low serum B cell media were added to the upper chamber of 24-well transwell inserts (5 ?m pore size, Millipore) and the indicated concentration of SDF was added to the lower chamber. The number of lymphoma cells that migrated to the lower chamber was quantified after 5 hours and is displayed as the fold change in cell number relative to control wells. For live imaging of lymphoma cell migration, glass bottom dishes (MatTek) were coated with fibronectin (Calbiochem). Lymphoma cells were resusupended in low serum B cell media at 2×106 cells/mL, plated on fibronectin-coated dishes, and allowed to adhere for 2 hours. Non-adherent cells were then removed by gentle washing and cells were imaged after stimulation with SDF (100 ng/mL).  Statistical analysis Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism4 software. Two-tailed Student's t-tests, one sample t-tests, and one-way ANOVA were used, as indicated. For comparison of survival curves, a Mantel-Haenszel test was used. Error bars represent standard deviation.  Supplementary Material 1 