Emerging roles of E2Fs in cancer: an exit from cell cycle control Mutations of the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor gene ( RB1 ) or components regulating the RB pathway have been identified in almost every human malignancy. The E2F transcription factors function in cell cycle control and are intimately regulated by RB. Studies of model organisms have revealed conserved functions for E2Fs during development, suggesting that the cancer-related proliferative roles of E2F family members represent a recent evolutionary adaptation. However, given that some human tumours have concurrent RB1 inactivation and E2F amplification and overexpression, we propose that there are alternative tumour-promoting activities for the E2F family, which are independent of cell cycle regulation.  Conclusions and future perspectives The prevailing view is that E2F repressors and activators cooperate to orchestrate proper cell cycle progression and that disruption of this carefully coordinated network contributes to cancer. However, recent clinical and mouse studies have begun to challenge this view. We suggest that the simple paradigm of proliferation control by E2F repressors and activators does not correlate with the complexity of E2F function observed during development and tumorigenesis. As factors that control the cell cycle, apoptosis, differentiation and stress responses, the E2F family of transcription factors has earned the status of master regulators of cell proliferation. We have learned that many signals can regulate the activity of E2F family members and that E2Fs can in turn regulate many different targets that affect a wide range of biological processes that are intertwined with the control of cell proliferation. Given that E2Fs have the capacity to determine whether cells proliferate or not, what more could be learnt about E2Fs other than the finer details of their work ethic in specific contexts and cell types? Quite a bit we think, and we could begin by asking whether E2Fs are necessary for the proliferation of all cell types in mammals and other organisms. If not, then identifying the crucial accomplices that function in concert with E2Fs, and how their activities are coordinated to commit cells to proliferation, would be important. It might be that E2F functions are not required in some cell types. Second, are the biological roles of E2Fs strictly dependent on their activation or repression functions and when are such activities relevant during the developmental life of a cell? We should further address why different levels of E2F-dependent activation and repression induce such complex outcomes in mammalian cells. The combined use of new genetic mouse models and molecular techniques such as ChIP–sequencing, gene expression arrays and proteomics could help us map and elucidate the mechanism of E2F action in intact tissues. From a pessimistic standpoint, the complexity of E2F activities might simply represent an imperfect evolutionary adaptation to perform the vital task of cell proliferation in multicellular organisms. Once these normal functions of E2Fs have been fully understood, we could then ask whether the classic cell proliferation functions long ascribed to E2Fs are relevant to the development of cancer. If so, for which cancers and at what point in their malignant evolution might they be especially crucial? If not, then what additional pro-oncogenic or anti-oncogenic roles might they have? So, despite xs~3,500 scientific publications focusing on E2Fs since the first family member was discovered two decades ago, we know embarrassingly little about what E2Fs do in vivo or how they do it. We have certainly garnered volumes of data relating to how E2F activities can be controlled and which targets and biological processes E2Fs can in turn potentially regulate. But from this bulk of information, we have yet to identify a single physiological circumstance in which a defined signal elicits the E2F programme to exert its powers on a specific biological outcome. Perhaps by studying these factors in whole animals, we may finally have the opportunity to discover the extent to which E2Fs function in specific capacities or as versatile modulators poised at biological crossroads that can be commandeered to execute diverse processes in health and disease.  Supplementary Material ncr2696-s1 