STATs in cancer inflammation and immunity: a leading role for STAT3 Commensurate with their roles in regulating cytokine-dependent inflammation and immunity, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are central in determining whether immune responses in the tumour microenvironment promote or inhibit cancer. Persistently activated STAT3 and, to some extent, STAT5 increase tumour cell proliferation, survival and invasion while suppressing anti-tumour immunity. The persistent activation of STAT3 also mediates tumour-promoting inflammation. STAT3 has this dual role in tumour inflammation and immunity by promoting pro-oncogenic inflammatory pathways, including nuclear factor-?B (NF-?B) and interleukin-6 (IL-6)–GP130–Janus kinase (JAK) pathways, and by opposing STAT1- and NF-?B-mediated T helper 1 anti-tumour immune responses. Consequently, STAT3 is a promising target to redirect inflammation for cancer therapy.  Conclusions From the earliest pathology studies dating back to the 1800s, cancer has been known to be associated with inflammation. Indeed, many human cancers arise and progress in the setting of chronic inflammatory states. Conversely, there are numerous examples in which induced inflammation and immunity can inhibit tumour growth or even eliminate established tumours. It has become clear that distinct types of inflammation can either promote or inhibit cancer induction and growth. STATs represent central regulators of cancer-associated inflammation and influence interactions between tumour cells and their immune microenvironment that determine whether the inflammation promotes or inhibits cancer. This regulation is accomplished largely through the induction or suppression of specific cytokines and growth factors, as well as through signalling by their cognate receptors. Together with NF-?B, STAT3 is a major mediator of pro-carcinogenic inflammation, and it also opposes NF-?B and STAT1-dependent immune responses that promote anti-tumour immunity. Because of its pivotal role in determining the nature of cancer-associated inflammation, STAT3 represents a promising therapeutic target for converting cancer-promoting inflammation to anti-tumour immunity. 